@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Jerry Lambert
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
Paul Seligson and Clive Oxenden 
are the original co-authors of 
English File 1 and English File 2
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 
Beginner
Teacher’s Guide

@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2019
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2019 
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored  
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without  
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly  
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate  
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside  
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford  
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for  
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials  
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked  
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers  
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach.  
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this  
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403109 7 
Teacher’s Guide
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world whose feedback 
has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both in Oxford 
and around the world) and the design team who have contributed their skills and 
ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and from Christina to 
Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina would also like to thank her children 
Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their constant inspiration.
We would also like to thank the following for permission to reproduce the following photographs: 
Alamy pp.139 (teen at desk/wonderlandstock), 140 (newspaper/Geoffrey Kidd), 
144 (7/Blend Images, 10/ONOKY/Photononstop), 151 (5/Glow Wellness), 153 (Manor 
Photography), 171 (2/ITAR-TASS News Agency, 10/WENN Ltd), 187 (guitarist/Primo 
Dul Ravel), 188 (Jennifer Lawrence/MediaPunch Inc., Taylor Swift/Everett Collection 
Inc., Lupita Nyong’o/Newscom), 218 (1/Greg Balfour Evans, 4/Mim Friday, 5/Alistair 
Heap, 7/Yadid Levy), 221 (7/Keenretail); Getty Images pp.144 (9, 11), 148 (2), 151 (3, 8/
Jupiterimages, 10/Ed Bock, 11), 171 (6/Michal Fludra, 12/Dia Dipasupil), 186 (reading), 
224 (baseball uniform); Oxford University Press pp.137 (Michael Fassbender, 
Cate Blanchett), 139 (women, call centre), 140 (coat, keys, chairs, family photo, 
umbrella, pens, paper, watches, dictionaries/Coverbank, camera, wallet), 144 (1, 2, 
3, 4, 6), 148 (1, 3), 151 (1, 2, 6, 7, 9), 171 (1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9), 177 (all), 181 (1, 3, 4, 5–11), 
187 (remote control, woman), 188 (Will Smith, Rihanna, Adele, Leonardo di Caprio, 
Benedict Cumberbatch, Katy Perry), 209, 211 (1, 2, 4, 7), 212 (both), 215 (3, 4, 6, 7, 
9, 10), 216 (1–23), 218 (2, 3, 6), 221 (1–5, 6/couple and tv, 8–17); Rex/Shutterstock 
p.171 (11/IBO/SIPA), 188 (Jackie Chan/Imaginechina, Kanye West/Billy Farrell 
Agency), 221 (6/show on screen/Fox-TV/Kobal); Shutterstock pp.137 (paella/Siim79, 
guacamole/Margouillat Photo), 140 (rucksacks/design56, phones/fkdkondmi), 
144 (5/LightField Studios, 8/wavebreakmedia, 12/Basileus), 151 (4/Pavel_D, 12/
Pavel Ilyukhin), 171 (7/Tinseltown), 181 (2/Africa Studio, 12/Robyn Mackenzie), 
186 (tourists/Minerva Studio), 188 (Eddie Redmayne/Tinseltown), 211 (3/Peter 
Gudella, 5/naytoong, 6/Julia Kuznetsova, 8/rvlsoft, 9/arka38, 10/Jose Ignacio Soto, 
11/photastic, 12/aon168, 13/Chatchawan, 14/Anan Kaewkhammul), 215 (1/Elnur, 2/
Lotus Images, 5/Valentina_G, 8/Maks Narodenko), 216 (24/Nitr), 218 (8/ESB Basic, 9/
Robert Kneschke, 10/Natalia Lebedinskaia), 224 (woman in jumper/Eva Marchenko, 
man in jeans/Patricia_studioX, woman in dress/Street Style Photo, couple in suits/
ESB Professional).
Illustrations by: Paul Boston/Meiklejohn pp.145, 219; Mark Duffin pp.154 (icons), 175, 
176, 189, 198, 213; John Haslam pp.146, 178, 179, 220, 222, 223; Anna Hymas/New 
Division p.138; Adam Larkum/Illustration Ltd pp.152, 196, 200; Jerome Mirault/
Colagene Creative Clinic pp.136, 154 (hotel room), 156, 214; Roger Penwill pp.142, 
147, 150, 157, 180, 184, 210; Gavin Reece p.158; Colin Shelbourn pp.141, 143, 155, 
190, 192, 199.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Beginner students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–B 
Practical English Episode 1
p.25
File 2 A–B 
1&2 Revise and Check
p.35
File 3 A–B 
Practical English Episode 2
p.45
File 4 A–B 
3&4 Revise and Check
p.54
File 5 A–B 
Practical English Episode 3
p.65
File 6 A–B 
5&6 Revise and Check
p.75
File 7 A–B 
Practical English Episode 4
p.87
File 8 A–B 
7&8 Revise and Check
p.97
File 9 A–B 
Practical English Episode 5
p.108
File 10 A–B 
9&10 Revise and Check
p.117
File 11 A–B 
Practical English Episode 6
p.128
File 12 A–B 
11&12 Revise and Check
p.133
Photocopiable activities
p.133
Introduction
p.134
Grammar activity answers
p.136
Grammar activity masters
p.160
Communicative activity instructions
p.170
Communicative activity masters
p.202
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.208
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A A cappuccino, please
verb be (singular): I and you 
numbers 0–10, days of the 
week, saying goodbye
/h/, /aɪ/, and /iː/
8
B World music
verb be (singular): he, she, it 
countries
/ɪ/, /əʊ/, /s/, and /ʃ/
10
Practical English Episode 1 
checking into a hotel, booking a table  V the classroom  P the alphabet
2
12
A Are you on holiday?
verb be (plural): we, you, 
they
nationalities
/dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /ʃ/
14
B That’s my bus!
Wh- and How questions 
with be
phone numbers, numbers 
11–100
understanding numbers
16
Revise and Check 1&2
3
18
A Where are my keys?
singular and plural nouns, 
a / an
small things
/z/ and /s/, plural endings
20
B Souvenirs
this / that / these / those 
souvenirs
/ð/, sentence rhythm
22
Practical English Episode 2 
understanding prices, buying lunch  P /ʊə/, /s/, and /k/
4
24
A Meet the family
possessive adjectives, 
possessive ’s 
people and family 
/ʌ/, /æ/, and /ə/
26
B The perfect car
adjectives 
colours and common 
adjectives 
/ɑː/ and /ɔː/, linking
28
Revise and Check 3&4
5
30
A A big breakfast
present simple + and – : I, 
you, we, they 
food and drink 
/ʤ/ and /g/
32
B A very long flight
present simple ? : I, you, 
we, they
common verb phrases 1
/w/ and /v/, sentence 
rhythm and linking
34
Practical English Episode 3 
telling the time  V the time, saying how you feel  P /ɒ/, silent consonants
6
36
A A school reunion
present simple: he, she, it
jobs and places of work
third person -es, sentence 
rhythm
38
B Good morning, 
goodnight
adverbs of frequency 
a typical day 
/j/ and /juː/, sentence 
rhythm
40
Revise and Check 5&6
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
introducing yourself; meeting people
people introducing themselves
talking about where people and things 
are from
distinguishing between he and she
talking about nationalities
understanding short conversations
people meeting for the first time
giving personal information
understanding numbers
asking for and giving personal 
information
things in your bag
understanding short conversations
role-play buying and selling souvenirs
At a souvenir stand
talking about your family and friends
understanding a conversation
talking about cars; discussing 
preferences
understanding a conversation
talking about meals and food
people talking about their
favourite meal
Breakfast around the world
talking about habits
understanding a longer conversation
On the plane
talking about jobs and work
understanding a longer conversation
English at work?
Are you a morning person?; a typical 
evening
an interview 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
7
42
A Have a nice weekend!
word order in questions: be 
and present simple
common verb phrases 2: 
free time
/w/, /h/, /eə/, and /aʊ/
44
B Lights, camera, action!
imperatives, object 
pronouns: me, him, etc. 
kinds of films
sentence rhythm
46
Practical English Episode 4 
saying the date, talking on the phone  V months, ordinal numbers  P /θ/
8
48
A Can I park here?
can / can’t 
more verb phrases
can / can’t, /ə/, /æ/, and /ɑː/, 
sentence rhythm
50
B I  cooking
like / love / hate + verb + 
-ing 
activities
/ʊ/, /uː/, and /ŋ/, sentence rhythm
52
Revise and Check 7&8
9
54
A Everything’s fine!
present continuous
common verb phrases 2: 
travelling
sentence rhythm
56
B Working undercover
present continuous or 
present simple?
clothes
/ɜː/, other vowel sounds
58
Practical English Episode 5 
inviting and offering  P sentence rhythm
10
60
A A room with a view
there’s a… / there are 
some…
hotels, in, on, under
/ɪə/ and /eə/
62
B Where were you?
past simple: be 
in, on, at
was and were, sentence rhythm
64
Revise and Check 9&10
11
66
A A new life in the USA
past simple: regular verbs
regular verbs
regular past simple endings
68
B How was your day?
past simple irregular verbs: 
get, go, have, do 
verb phrases with get, go, 
have, do
sentence rhythm
70
Practical English Episode 6 
asking for and giving directions  V prepositions of place  P sentence rhythm 
 
 
and polite intonation
12
72
A Strangers on a train
past simple: regular and 
irregular verbs
regular and irregular verbs
irregular verbs
74
B Revise the past
past simple revision
revision of past verb forms
revision of vowel sounds
76
Revise and Check 11&12
78
Communication
86 Writing
88 Listening
92 Grammar Bank
116
Vocabulary Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
your weekend
an interview
a short newspaper article
talking about films
understanding a conversation; people 
talking about films
talking about what you can and can’t 
do in a town
taking a driving test
What do you like doing?
tweets about what people like doing 
alone or with friends
talking about what people are doing
understanding a short conversation
text messages
talking about clothes
an interview
Undercover Boss
describing rooms
hotel facilities
Scotland and Loch Ness
Where were you yesterday?
a police interview
talking about past activities
and events
We followed our dream
We followed our dream
talking about yesterday
understanding a conversation
Life in a day
re-telling a story
Strangers on a train
Strangers on a train
oral revision of the past simple
131
Words and phrases to learn
133 Regular and irregular verbs
134 Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 8@@
8
  
Course overview
Vocabulary
• A focus on high-frequency words and phrases.
• Opportunities to personalize new vocabulary.
• Accessible reference material.
Every lesson focuses on high-frequency vocabulary and 
common lexical areas, but keeps the load realistic. All new 
vocabulary is given with the phonemic script alongside, to 
help students with the pronunciation of new words.
Many lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which 
help present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an 
audio model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
• Intensive practice of the English vowel and consonant 
sounds.
• Awareness of rules and patterns in sound-spelling 
relationships.
• Systematic practice of other aspects of pronunciation, e.g. 
stress and sentence rhythm.
Beginner learners want to speak clearly but are often 
frustrated by English pronunciation, particularly the sound-
spelling relationships, silent letters, and weak forms.
The Sound Bank on pages 134–135 helps students to see the 
many clear sound-spelling patterns that do exist in English 
and gives common examples of them.
Throughout English File Beginner we emphasize improving 
pronunciation by focusing on important sounds, on 
word stress, and on sentence rhythm. Every lesson has an 
integrated pronunciation focus on one of the above aspects. 
Online Practice contains the Sound Bank videos which show 
students the mouth positions to make English vowels and 
consonants. They can also review the pronunciation from 
the lesson at their own speed.  There is more practice of 
pronunciation in the Workbook, with audio, which can be 
found on Online Practice.
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A and B Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
• videos that can be used in class in every File: Practical 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
• Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, and an End-of-course Test
• photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities for 
every A and B lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank.
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Beginner 
students need? 
The aim of every level of English File fourth edition  is to get 
students talking and Beginner is no exception. To achieve 
this, beginners need two things above all else: motivation 
and support.
Beginners’ language level is low, but they need interesting 
topics and texts just as much as Intermediate or Advanced 
students.
Grammar
• Clear and memorable presentations of basic structures.
• Regular and varied practice in useful and natural contexts.
• Student-friendly reference material.
We have tried to provide contexts for new language that 
will engage students, using real-life stories and situations, 
humour, and suspense. The Grammar Banks give students 
a single, easy-to-access grammar reference section, with 
example sentences with audio, clear rules, and common 
errors. There are at least two practice exercises for each 
grammar point. Students can look again at the grammar 
presented in the lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook 
provides a variety of practice exercises and the opportunity 
for students to use the new grammar to express their  
own ideas.
When explaining grammar rules to students, and sometimes 
when setting up complicated activities, teachers who know 
their students’ mother tongue may wish to use it. Although 
you should try to keep it to a minimum, we believe that a 
very judicious use of students’ L1 can save time and help 
build good teacher–class rapport. Contrasting how English 
grammar works with the rules in students’ L1 can also help 
students to assimilate the rules more easily.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 9@@
9
websites) and have been chosen for their intrinsic interest 
and ability to generate discussion. All reading texts here are 
available with audio, which helps build reading fluency and 
confidence.
Writing
• Clear models
• The ‘nuts and bolts’ of writing on a word and 
sentence level
The growth of the internet and social media means that 
people worldwide are writing in English more than ever 
before both for business and personal communication. 
English File Beginner provides guided writing tasks covering a 
range of writing types from a formal email to a social media 
post. Students can use Online Practice to develop their 
writing skills further. The Discussion board also provides 
opportunities for informal written interaction.
Practical English
• Practice in using functional phrases in simple roleplays.
• Knowing what to say in common situations, e.g. buying a 
coffee.
The Practical English lessons introduce and practise the 
key language for situations such as checking into a hotel or 
ordering food and drink. The storyline introduces the main 
characters of the English File fourth edition Practical English 
lessons, Jenny (from New York) and Rob (from London). The 
lessons also highlight other useful everyday phrases such as 
Can I help you? How much is it? Don’t worry. See you there. On 
Online Practice, students can use the interactive video to 
record themselves and hear their own voice in the complete 
conversation. They can also listen and record the Social 
English phrases. The Workbook provides practice of all the 
language from the Practical English lessons.
Revision
• Regular recycling of grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation.
• Motivating reference and practice material.
• A sense of progress.
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a 
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page revises 
the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of each File. 
The right-hand page provides a series of skills-based 
challenges, including street interviews, and helps students 
to measure their progress in terms of competence. These 
pages are designed to be used flexibly according to the 
needs of your students. On Online Practice, for each File, 
there are three Check your progress activities. The first is a 
multiple choice activity for students to test themselves on 
the Grammar and Vocabulary from the File. The second is a 
dictation related to the topic and the language of the File 
for students to practise the new language in context. Finally, 
there is a Challenge activity, which involves a mini-research 
project based on a topic from the File. Every two Files, the 
Workbook contains a Can you remember...? page, which 
provides a cumulative review of language students have 
covered in the Student’s Book.
Speaking
• Regular opportunities to use new language orally.
• Topics that will arouse their interest and prompt them to 
describe their experiences and express their ideas.
• Realistic and achievable tasks.
English File motivates students to speak by providing varied 
and achievable tasks, and the language that they need 
in order to communicate with confidence. In addition to 
the Speaking stage, students are encouraged to speak all 
through each lesson, responding to texts and listenings, 
and practising grammar and vocabulary orally. Every 
two Files, students can use Online Practice to record 
themselves doing a short task.
Listening
• A reason to listen.
• Exposure to as much aural English as possible.
• Confidence-boosting by listening to short accessible 
texts and conversations with achievable tasks.
• Get the gist of what is being said by focusing on the key 
words in an utterance.
The listenings in English File are based on a variety of 
entertaining and realistic situations. The tasks focus on 
helping students to get the gist on the first listen and 
then being able to understand more the second time. On 
Online Practice, for each File students can find further 
listening practice related to the topic. They can also access 
the listening activities from every lesson, to practise in their 
own time, and to read the script to check anything that they 
have found difficult.
Reading
• Engaging topics and stimulating texts.
• Manageable tasks that help students to read.
• Deal with unknown words in a text.
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to give them motivating 
but accessible material and tasks they can do. In English 
File Beginner reading texts are staged so that they progress 
from one-line sentences to short articles adapted from a 
variety of real sources (the British press, magazines, news 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 10@@
10
  
Course overview
Workbook 
   
For language practice after class.
• All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Practical English
• Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
• Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
• Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 12 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A and B lessons
Each File contains two two-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the B lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Practical English
Every two Files (starting from File 1), there is a two-page lesson with  
integral video which teaches high-frequency, everyday English (e.g. 
language for spelling your name, booking a table, or telling the time) 
and social English (useful phrases like That’s right and I’m really sorry). 
The video is in the form of a drama, featuring the two main characters, 
Rob and Jenny. The lessons have a storyline which runs through the level.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or 
catch up on a class they have missed.
• Look again: students can review the language from  
every lesson.
• Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, 
Writing, Listening, and Speaking practice.
• Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main 
language from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an 
extra challenge.
• Interactive video to practise the language from the Practical  
English lessons.
• Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
• Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, 
dyslexia-friendly texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
• Individual sounds
• Sounds in key words
• Speak and record  
functionality
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, Listening, 
Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and  
Sound Bank. 
The Student’s Book is also available as  
an eBook.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
• an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
• Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
• Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
• Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 60 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 134 – 159
• An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp. 160 – 201
• Extra speaking practice for every A and B lesson
Vocabulary
see pp. 202– 225
• An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 133 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
• All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
• Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
• Answer keys
• All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
• All the Workbook audio files and scripts
• Tests and assessment material, including: Progress Tests; 
an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every File; and 
complete test for every File. There are A and B versions of 
all the main tests and audio files for all the Listening tests
• CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
• The complete Student’s Book
• Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
• All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
• Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
• Dyslexia-friendly texts
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
• Short documentary, drama, or 
animation for students at the 
end of even-numbered  
B lessons (2B, 4B, 6B, etc.)
Practical English
• A unique series of videos that 
goes with the Practical English 
lessons in the Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
• Street interviews filmed in 
London, New York, and Oxford 
to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook,  
and the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 12@@
1A
12
 1A A cappuccino, please
 G  verb be (singular): I and you
 V  numbers 0–10, days of the week, saying goodbye
 P  /h/, /aɪ/, and /iː/
Lesson plan
In this first lesson, Sts learn to introduce themselves and 
give basic greetings, and to use the I and you forms of the 
verb be in positive and negative sentences, questions, and 
short answers. The context is a coffee shop where people are 
asked their names, which are then written on their cups, and 
where two people meet for the first time. The lesson starts 
with a dialogue, which leads into the grammar presentation. 
Sts then learn numbers 0–10, and in Pronunciation, they are 
introduced to the English File system of teaching the sounds 
of English with three sounds: /h/, /aɪ/, and /iː/. The language 
is brought together in a Speaking activity which also gives 
Sts the opportunity to introduce themselves to other sts and 
to learn their names. The lesson finishes with a focus on the 
days of the week and ways of saying goodbye.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar verb be (singular): I and you p.136 
Communicative Are you…? p.170 (instructions p.160) 
Vocabulary Numbers 0−10 and days p.208 
(instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook 1A
Online Practice 1A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Introduce yourself to the class. Say Hello. I’m (…) twice. 
Repeat your name and write it on the board.
Then look at one student and say Hello. I’m (…). Encourage 
him / her to respond Hello. I’m (…). At this stage, do not 
correct anything they say. If the student fails to respond, 
move on to another student until you get the correct 
response. 
Repeat this process with other Sts round the class. With a 
good class, you may also want to teach the phrase Nice to 
meet you at this point.
This activity will break the ice with your class on the first day.
1 LISTENING & SPEAKING
a e 1.2 Books open. Demonstrate this by opening your 
own book and saying Open your books. Say the page 
number and write it on the board. Focus on the photos 
and the conversations by pointing at your book and 
saying Look at the photo. Then tell Sts to read and listen. 
Demonstrate this by putting your hand to your ear, 
pointing to the audio player, and saying Listen. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time. 
e 1.2 
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.6
 Go through the conversations, making sure the meaning 
is clear to Sts. Some teachers may want to do this in L1. 
(See Introduction on p.8 for comments on use of mother 
tongue.) You might also want to tell Sts that  
the word barista is originally Italian and is a person who 
works in a coffee bar. Point out that the response to Nice 
to meet you is Nice to meet you (Nice to meet you, too is also 
taught later). 
b e 1.3 Play conversation 1 on the audio and get Sts to 
repeat each phrase in chorus. Encourage Sts to copy the 
rhythm. Model the phrase yourself if Sts are not copying 
the rhythm correctly. Get individual Sts to say the phrases 
after you. 
 Play the audio again for Sts to repeat in chorus, allowing 
time for them to repeat. 
e 1.3
Same as script 1.2 with repeat pauses
!  If you find the repeat pauses aren’t long enough, pause 
the audio yourself. Encourage Sts to try to copy the rhythm. 
Getting the rhythm correct is one of the most important 
aspects of good pronunciation.
 Depending on the size of your class, get all or some Sts to 
repeat individually.
 If you know your Sts’  L1, you may want to point out that 
hello and hi mean the same, although hi is more informal. 
 Repeat with the other three conversations.
c Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Demonstrate the activity with a 
good pair. A takes the roles of Helen and Barista 1 in the 
last conversation, and B takes all the other roles.
 Now ask Sts to practise the conversations. When they have 
finished, tell them to swap roles. Listen out for general 
pronunciation mistakes and write them on the board, 
then model and drill them with choral and individual 
repetition. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  With a weaker class, you could work on 
each conversation one by one, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation and then practising in pairs, before moving 
on to the next conversation.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in groups of four and give each student 
a role (Helen, Barista 1, Barista 2, and Tom). They can then 
swap roles.
2 GRAMMAR verb be (singular): I and you
a Focus on the instructions and get Sts to complete the two 
sentences in the speech bubbles.
 Check answers. 
1 I   2 You
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 13@@
1A
13
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.92. You could 
write the page number on the board to help Sts. Show Sts 
that all the grammar rules and exercises are in this section 
of the book.
Grammar notes
The Grammar notes in this Teacher’s Book aim to add 
more, or expanded, information to the notes and rules on 
the Grammar Bank pages in the Student’s Book. 
verb be (singular): I and you
In English we always use a name or pronoun with the verb.
I is always written with a capital letter.
There is only one form of you – i.e. there is no formal and 
informal form, unlike in many other languages.
Native and fluent speakers of English nearly always use 
contractions in conversation.
When you make questions with be, the subject and verb 
change position.
You can answer a question with a short answer in English 
instead of answering just yes or no. Emphasize that you are 
in the positive short answer is not contracted.
The you form of the verb be has two possible negative 
contractions: you aren’t and you’re not. Both forms are 
common, but we recommend you teach only you aren’t so 
as not to confuse Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you have a monolingual class, don’t be 
afraid of using your Sts’ L1 to talk about the grammar rules. 
At this level it is unrealistic to expect Sts to fully understand 
grammar rules in English.
 Focus on the example sentences and teach Sts the words 
+ = positive, – = negative, and ? = question.
 Play both audio e 1.4 and e 1.5 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class. 
 Focus on the two information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 1A on p.93 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 Hi. I’m Tony.
2 Hello. I’m your teacher. You’re in my class.
3 I’m in class 4.
4 You’re in room 3.
b
1 You aren’t in class 5. You’re in class 4.
2 You aren’t in room 6. You’re in room 7.
3 I’m not Marina. I’m Marisa.
c
1 Am I in room 4?  2 Are you Silvia?  3 Am I in class 3?
d
1 A Am I in room 8?
 
B No, you aren’t. You’re in room 6.
2 A Are you in class 4?
 
B No, I’m not. I’m in class 5.
3 A Are you Henry?
 
B Yes, I am. Nice to meet you!
4 A Am I in your class?
 
B Yes, you are. I’m your teacher.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c e 1.6 Tell Sts that they are going to practise saying 
contractions. Focus on the example. Remind Sts that 
I’m is the contraction of two words. Establish a gesture 
to remind Sts to contract verb forms, e.g. a scissor or 
concertina gesture. Highlight and drill the pronunciation 
of I’m /aɪm/.
 Play the audio and get Sts to listen and say the 
contractions.
e 1.6
1 I am (pause) I’m 
2 You are (pause) You’re
3 I am not (pause) I’m not
4 You are not (pause) You aren’t
 Then repeat the activity, getting individual Sts to repeat 
the contractions.
3 VOCABULARY numbers 0–10
a e 1.7 Some Sts may already know some numbers in 
English, but real beginners probably won’t know the 
correct pronunciation or spelling of all the numbers 0–10. 
 Focus on the photos and elicit, if possible, what Sts can 
see, i.e. two cappuccinos, one cappuccino and two 
teas, etc.
 Tell Sts to listen to the conversation and tick the correct 
photo.
 Get Sts to compare and then play the audio again if 
necessary.
 Check the answer.
2
e 1.7
A A cappuccino, please.
B A tea for me.
C And a tea for me, too.
Assistant What’s your name?
A Maria.
B I’m Andrew.
C I’m Sally.
Assistant Two teas and one cappuccino.
 Write the numbers 1, 2, 3 on the board and elicit the 
numbers from Sts.
 Try to elicit the numbers four to ten and zero onto the 
board. For 0, teach zero /ˈzɪərəʊ/. If Sts don’t know any 
numbers, don’t worry, as they will be looking at numbers 
in the next exercise in the Vocabulary Bank.
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Numbers on p.116. 
Write the page number on the board. Highlight that these 
pages (Vocabulary Banks) are the vocabulary section, 
where Sts will first do all the exercises, and will then have 
the pages for reference to help them remember the 
words. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 14@@
1A
14
d e 1.10 Focus on the instructions and example. 
Demonstrate by saying two numbers yourself and 
eliciting the next one from the class.
 Play the audio and pause after the first pair of numbers. 
Ask Sts what the next number is (nine). Make sure Sts are 
clear what they have to do before continuing.
 Play the rest of the audio and give Sts time to say the next 
number. Get a whole class response.
e 1.10
one, two (pause) three
seven, eight (pause) nine
three, four (pause) five
five, six (pause) seven
four, five (pause) six
two, three (pause) four
six, seven (pause) eight
zero, one (pause) two
eight, nine (pause) ten
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA IDEA  Give Sts more practice by doing simple sums 
with them on the board, e.g. What’s four and two? 
4 PRONUNCIATION /h/, /aɪ/, and /iː/
Pronunciation notes
You may want to highlight to Sts the following sound–
spelling patterns. Use Sts’ L1 to do this if you know it.
• /h/ H at the beginning of a word is pronounced /h/, e.g. 
hello. (There are a few exceptions, but apart from hour, 
the others are not relevant for Sts at this level.)
• /aɪ/ This is actually a diphthong (literally ‘two sounds’). 
It is often spelled i before a single consonant followed 
by silent e, as in the example word bike.
• /iː/ Two of the most common spellings of this sound 
are double e, as in meet, and ea, as in repeat.
See also Pronunciation in the Introduction, p.8.
a e 1.11 Focus on the three sound pictures house, bike, 
and tree. Tell Sts that they are example words to help them 
to remember English sounds.
 Explain that the phonetic symbol in the picture represents 
the sound. Phonetic symbols are used in dictionaries to 
help learners pronounce words correctly.
 Focus on the chart and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts just to listen.
e 1.11
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.7
 Focus on the sound picture house. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and the sound (pause after the 
sound).
 Now focus on the words after house. Explain that the pink 
letters are the /h/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for bike /aɪ/ and tree /iː/. Try 
to exaggerate the /iː/ so that Sts realize that it is a long 
sound.
Vocabulary notes
In the Vocabulary Bank, the phonetic transcription is 
given for all new words. Explain this to Sts and tell them 
that they will be learning the phonetic symbols gradually 
throughout the course, but not to worry about them for 
the time being.
 !  0 can be said in different ways in English, e.g. zero 
(the most general), oh (in phone numbers), nought (in 
mathematics), etc. We teach just zero here, but point out 
the use of oh in phone numbers, as Sts may want to use 
it as an alternative in 2B, where they learn to say phone 
numbers.
 e 1.8 Look at 1 0–10 and focus on a. Play the audio 
for Sts to listen and repeat the numbers in chorus. Pause 
the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and 
the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses. 
e 1.8
See 0–10 in Student’s Book on p.116
 Focus on the Word stress box and go through it with the 
class, demonstrating (or explaining in L1) that in English, 
one syllable is always pronounced more strongly than the 
other(s) in multi-syllable words. Throughout English File, 
word stress is marked by underlining the stressed syllable.
 Focus on b. Get Sts to cover the words and say the 
numbers. Sts can do this individually or with a partner. 
Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems they are having.  
 Point to the numbers you wrote on the board earlier and 
model and drill the ones that Sts find difficult.
 Finally, focus on Activation. Individually or in pairs, Sts 
count from zero to ten, and then down from ten to zero. 
EXTRA IDEA  Count round the class from zero to ten. Point 
to Sts at random, and encourage them to count a little bit 
faster each time you start from zero. Then count backwards 
from ten to zero.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to count up and down in twos, 
i.e. two, four, six, etc.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
c e 1.9 Focus on the squares and the example (7 in the 
first square). Demonstrate / Explain the activity by playing 
the first number on the audio.
 Then play the rest of the audio and get Sts to write down 
the numbers in digits in each square. Pause the audio if 
Sts need more time to think and write.
 Check answers by drawing the ten squares on the board 
and completing them with the numbers as digits.
3   0   8   9   1   4   5   6   2   10
e 1.9
seven, three, zero, eight, nine, one, four, five, six, two, ten
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to write the numbers as words. 
Then check answers and add them to the board yourself.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 15@@
1A
15
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the days in chorus. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Make sure Sts know what 
the words are in their L1. Give further practice as necessary, 
modelling and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using 
the audio, and getting choral and individual responses.
 Highlight the silent d in Wednesday /ˈwenzdeɪ/, the 
pronunciation of Tuesday /ˈtjuːzdeɪ/ and Thursday  
/ˈθɜːzdeɪ/, which Sts usually find tricky.
e 1.13
See days of the week in Student’s Book on p.7
 Focus on the Capital letters box and go through it with 
the class, explaining that in English, unlike some other 
languages, days of the week begin with capital letters.
b Explain the words today and tomorrow by writing the 
actual date (not the day of the week) on the board. Point 
to it and say today. Then write the next day’s date and 
say tomorrow. Ask Sts What day is today? Elicit the day of 
the week. Then ask What day is tomorrow? and elicit the 
response. See if any Sts know what the weekend is, and elicit 
the days.
 Drill the pronunciation of today, tomorrow, and the 
weekend. Make sure Sts don’t pronounce the double r in 
tomorrow too strongly.
 Get Sts to complete the exercise with the correct days. 
Make sure they start with a capital letter.
c Get Sts to cover a, or to close their books, and say the days of 
the week first together, and then individually round the class.
 Finally, elicit which days Sts have English classes.
EXTRA IDEA  For further practice, you could say one day and 
then get the class or individual Sts to say the next day, e.g.  
T Tuesday  Sts Wednesday
d e 1.14 Focus on the photo and elicit who the two 
people are (Helen and Tom). Now focus on the phrases 
for saying goodbye. Demonstrate by pretending that you 
are leaving for the day. Walk towards the door and say, for 
example, Goodbye! See you tomorrow / on Wednesday, etc.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 1.14
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.7
 Now play it again for Sts to listen and repeat. Highlight 
that goodbye has the stress on the second syllable. Show / 
Explain that bye is a shorter form of goodbye and it is more 
informal.
e Get Sts to practise by saying Goodbye to the person next 
to them. Demonstrate / Explain that we often combine 
bye or goodbye with another phrase such as See you + day.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 1.15 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 1A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice if these sounds are a problem for your Sts.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 1.12 Focus on the sentences and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 1.12
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.7
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
 Get Sts to practise saying the sentences in pairs. Monitor 
and help with any pronunciation problems.
5 SPEAKING
 Focus on the flow chart. Demonstrate the conversation on 
the left side with a student whose name you remember. 
Do the same with two other Sts. 
 Demonstrate the right side of the conversation with a 
student whose name you pretend to have forgotten. Do 
the same with two other Sts.
 Model and drill both conversations, getting Sts to 
repeat them after you. Then see if Sts can remember the 
conversations without looking at their books.
 Tell Sts to move around the class and practise the 
conversations from memory with other Sts.
 This activity, as well as consolidating the new language, 
will help Sts remember each other’s names. 
 Monitor and help, dealing with any general pronunciation 
problems at the end.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Tell Sts to close their books. Elicit the two 
conversations onto the board. They can refer to this during 
the activity if they can’t remember the phrases.
EXTRA IDEA  Before Sts start, you could put music on. Tell Sts 
to move around the room. When the music stops, Sts should 
do their role-play with the person nearest them.
6 VOCABULARY days of the week, saying  
 goodbye
Vocabulary notes
Highlight the use of capital letters for days of the week, as 
in many languages this is not the case. You may need to 
point out that in the UK (and many parts of the world), the 
weekend is Saturday and Sunday – there are some parts 
of the world, e.g. the Middle East, where it is Friday and 
Saturday.
a e 1.13 Focus on the task and tell Sts those are the seven 
days of the week. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 16@@
16
1B
 1B World music
e 1.16
(Extracts of the following:)
1 Spanish flamenco music
2 US country music
3 Chinese music
4 Turkish music
5 English folk
b e 1.17 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers. Ask how many Sts were able to guess all 
of the countries.
e 1.17
1 Spain
2 the United States
3 China
4 Turkey
5 England
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Countries and 
nationalities on p.117. Write the page number on the 
board. 
Vocabulary notes
As Sts are beginners, we have restricted the number of 
countries taught in the Vocabulary Bank to 15, and 
these same countries are then recycled and revised in 
subsequent lessons. Teachers will probably also want to 
teach Sts their own and neighbouring countries if these 
do not appear in the Vocabulary Bank.
Countries
The UK (the United Kingdom) = England, Scotland, Wales, 
and Northern Ireland. Great Britain is also often used, 
and technically refers to the island including England, 
Scotland, and Wales, but not Northern Ireland. 
Explain that the United States is the shortened form of the 
United States of America. You could also point out that 
Americans usually say the USA, but both are possible.
 e 1.18 Look at 1 Countries and focus on a. Play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat the countries in chorus. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 1.18
See Countries in Student’s Book on p.117
 Focus on the Capital letters box and go through it with 
the class, explaining that in English countries always begin 
with capital letters.
 Focus on b. Teach Sts the name of their country if it is not 
in the list and you didn’t do the Optional lead-in. Write 
it on the board and model and drill the word. Tell Sts to 
write it in the gap.
 G  verb be (singular): he, she, it
 V  countries
 P  /ɪ/, /əʊ/, /s/, and /ʃ/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is world music, which provides 
the context for learning the names of countries, and the 
grammar: the he, she, and it form of the verb be.
The vocabulary is first introduced through music, and Sts 
then learn more country words in the Vocabulary Bank, 
and practise asking where people are from and where places 
are. He is, she is, and it is are then presented in Grammar 
through a conversation about where different musicians 
are from. This is followed by Pronunciation, where Sts are 
introduced to four new sounds: /ɪ/, /əʊ/, /s/, and /ʃ/. Finally, 
in the last activity, Sts first practise distinguishing between 
the pronunciation of he and she, and then they identify the 
nationality of different people and things connected to 
music.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar verb be (singular): he, she, it p.137 
Communicative Where are they from? p.171  
(instructions p.160) 
Vocabulary Countries p.209 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook 1B
Online Practice 1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Pin a world map to the wall, or project one onto the board. 
Point to Sts’ country / countries and elicit the name(s). Write 
it / them on the board. Model and drill the pronunciation.
Point to England and elicit the name. Write it on the board. 
Model and drill the pronunciation.
Finally, if you are from a different country, point to it on the 
map and elicit the name. Write it on the board. Model and 
drill the pronunciation.
1 VOCABULARY countries
a e 1.16 Books open. Focus on the five countries and use a 
map or Sts’ L1 to elicit what the countries are. Tell Sts that 
they are going to hear a short piece of music from each 
of the countries in the list. They have to guess where each 
one is from. Tell them to write the number of their guess 
in the box.
 Play the first piece of music on the audio and pause. Point 
out the answer (1) in the box next to Spain.
 When you are sure that Sts understand the task, play the 
rest of the audio. Pause as needed for Sts to write their 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 17@@
17
1B
 Demonstrate by asking Sts about different cities that are 
not in the exercise, but are in countries they know how to 
say, e.g. Where’s Geneva? 
 Now get Sts to sit face to face if possible, and get Sts A to 
start by asking their questions. Tell Sts not to worry about 
the pronunciation of the city names. Either get Sts A to 
ask all their questions and then swap, or you could get Sts 
to ask alternate questions. When Sts have finished, find 
out who got most of the answers correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If Sts are having trouble understanding the 
name of the places their partner is saying, tell them to write 
the name on a piece of paper.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
2 GRAMMAR verb be (singular): he, she, it
a e 1.20 Focus on the poster and the conversation. You 
could ask Sts if they know any of the people on the poster. 
 Then tell Sts to read and listen to the conversation and 
complete each gap with a country.
 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and complete the 
conversation.
 Play the audio again, as necessary.
 Check answers. You could tell Sts that Caetano Veloso is 
a Brazilian singer-songwriter, musician, and writer, and 
Lila Downs is a Mexican-American singer-songwriter and 
actress.
1 Brazil  2 Brazil  3 Mexico
e 1.20
A Wow! Caetano Veloso!
B Where’s he from?
A He’s from Brazil.
B Is Lila Downs from Brazil, too?
A No, she isn’t. She’s from Mexico.
B Is she good?
A Yes, she is. Very good. 
b e 1.21 Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Try to get Sts to pronounce the s in Where’s and 
he’s as /z/ and the letters sh in she as /ʃ/. 
e 1.21
Same as script 1.20 with repeat pauses
c Put Sts in pairs. Focus on the instructions and get a good 
pair to demonstrate the activity.
 Now ask Sts to practise the conversation.
 Make sure they swap roles. Monitor and help.
 Write any pronunciation mistakes on the board and 
correct them afterwards. 
d Focus on the photos. Ask He, she, or it? for each photo. Tell 
Sts to match each word to a photo.
 Check answers. Make sure Sts understand that he is used 
for a male person, she for a female person, and it for 
places, things, etc.
1 he  2 she  3 it
 Now do Activation. Get Sts to cover the words in a, 
look at the photos, and say the countries. Sts can do this 
individually or with a partner. Monitor and help. Listen 
for any general pronunciation mistakes. Write the words 
on the board, and model and drill them with choral and 
individual repetition. 
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d e 1.19 Sts have already seen that one syllable in a multi-
syllabic word is pronounced more strongly than others  
(= word stress). Here they see that certain words (the ones 
which carry the important information in a sentence) 
are pronounced more strongly than others (= sentence 
rhythm), e.g. in Where are you from?, where and from are 
pronounced more strongly than are and you. Where and 
from are important to understand the question.  
In the answer I’m from Toledo, Toledo is stressed, as it is 
important to understand the answer.
 Focus on the instructions and the conversation. 
Demonstrate / Explain to Sts, in their L1 if you know it, 
that the bold words in the conversation are stressed more 
strongly than the others.
 Then play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen.
e 1.19
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.8
 Elicit / Explain / Demonstrate the meaning of each phrase. 
Make sure Sts know that Toledo is a city in Spain.
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Encourage them to get the rhythm 
correct. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  Get Sts on one side of the classroom to 
repeat the questions in chorus. Then have Sts on the other 
side repeat the answers. Finally, repeat, swapping roles.
e Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Focus on the instructions 
and demonstrate that they are going to practise the 
conversation using their own countries and cities. Get a 
good pair to demonstrate the activity. 
 Get Sts to practise with their partner, inserting their own 
town / city and country.
 Now ask Sts to get up and practise the conversation with 
other Sts.
EXTRA IDEA  If your Sts all come from the same place, you 
could ask them to choose a different country from the 
Vocabulary Bank and choose a city, e.g. the capital.
f Tell Sts that they are going to ask each other where certain 
places are. 
 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Where is it?, A on p.78 and B on p.82.
 Go over the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Focus on the question in the 
speech bubble and the three possible answers. Stress that 
they must answer each question using one of the three 
options in the speech bubbles, depending on whether 
they know the answer. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 18@@
18
1B
4 A Is Ivan from Poland?
 
B No, he isn’t. He’s from Russia.
5 A Is Strasbourg in Germany?
 
B No, it isn’t. It’s in France.
c
1 A Where’s Bergamo? Is it in Italy?
 
B Yes, it is. 
2 A Where’s Alex from? Is he from Mexico?
 
B No, he isn’t. He’s from the USA.
3 A Where are you from?
 
B I’m from Cambridge.
4 A What’s your name?
 
B My name’s Ana. I’m from Chicago.
 
A You’re from Chicago! I’m from Chicago, too! It’s a great city.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3 PRONUNCIATION /ɪ/, /əʊ/, /s/, and /ʃ/
Pronunciation notes
You may want to highlight some or all of the following 
sound–spelling rules.
• /ɪ/ The letter i between consonants is usually 
pronounced /ɪ/, e.g. fish. NB England (the e = /ɪ/) is 
irregular.
• /əʊ/ In English, the sound of the letter o in phone is a 
diphthong (literally ‘two sounds’), i.e. a combination 
of the two sounds /ə/ + /ʊ/. It is usually spelled by the 
letter o or o + consonant + e.
• /s/ The letter s at the beginning of a word is nearly 
always pronounced /s/, e.g. sit, stand.
• The letter c is pronounced /s/ before i and e, e.g. 
cinema, city, centre, but /k/ before a, o, u, and before 
consonants, e.g. cat, cot, cut, close, etc.
• /ʃ/ The consonants sh are always pronounced /ʃ/,  
e.g. she. The letters ti also produce this sound in words 
that include the syllable -tion, e.g. nationality. NB Russia 
(the letters ss = /ʃ/) is an exception.
 !  Make sure Sts make a /ʃ/ sound and not an /s/ sound 
for /ʃ/. It might help to tell Sts that /ʃ/ is the sound of 
silence by putting your finger to your mouth and saying 
shh. 
a e 1.25 Focus on the four sound pictures fish, phone, 
snake, and shower. Remind Sts that they are example 
words to help them to remember English sounds, and 
that the phonetic symbol in the picture represents the 
sound. 
 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts just to listen.
e 1.25
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.9
 Focus on the sound picture fish. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after fish. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ɪ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat. 
e Here Sts see where the new forms of the verb be, which 
they have just learned, fit into the chart along with the 
forms they already know (I and you). Focus on the chart 
and make sure Sts understand singular. Point out the 
positive and negative columns, and give Sts time to 
complete the gaps.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
+
he’s
−
he isn’t
she’s
she isn’t
it’s
it isn’t
f Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.92. 
Grammar notes 
verb be (singular): he, she, it
In English, he is used for a male person and she for a 
female person. Things in English don’t have a gender as 
they do in many languages. It is used for everything which 
is not a man or a woman, e.g. things, countries, places, 
buildings, etc. Animals are often it, but can also be he or 
she if they are yours and you know the sex.
Remind Sts that in conversations, it is more common to 
use contractions than full forms. 
Point out that is is contracted in conversation after 
question words, e.g. What’s your name? Where’s he from?, 
but are isn’t contracted in Where are you from?
The he / she / it form of the verb be has two possible 
negative contractions: he / she / it isn’t and he’s / she’s / it’s 
not. Both forms are common, but we recommend you 
teach only he / she / it isn’t so as not to confuse Sts. Only 
point out the alternative form if Sts ask about it.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 1.22, 
e 1.23, and e 1.24 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the two information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 1B on p.93 and get Sts 
to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read out the full sentences.
a
1 She’s from Germany. 
2 It’s in Turkey. 
3 He’s from Brazil. 
4 It’s in Russia. 
5 He’s from England. 
6 She’s from Switzerland. 
7 It’s in Spain. 
8 He’s from Mexico.
b
1 A Where’s Osaka? Is it in Japan?
 
B Yes, it is.
2 A Is Mark from the USA?
 
B No, he’s from England.
3 A Where’s she from?
 
B She’s from Rio.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 19@@
19
1B
e 1.29
1 He’s from Egypt.
2 She’s from Germany.
3 She isn’t from Japan.
4 Is he from Turkey?
5 He isn’t from England.
6 Is she from Brazil?
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each item for Sts 
to listen and write. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit the 
answers onto the board.
See script 1.29
e Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
artist and instrument mean. 
 Now focus on the photos and the example speech 
bubbles. Remind Sts of the difference between he, she, 
and it (you could do stick drawings on the board).
 Remind Sts of the three possible ways of answering the 
questions (see Communication in 1f):
 He / She / It’s from…
 I think he / she / it’s from…
 I don’t know. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write the options on the board for 
reference.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions. 
Get a strong pair to demonstrate the activity first.
f e 1.30 When Sts have finished, play the audio for them 
to listen and check. Don’t write the answers on the board, 
as Sts will be testing each other in the next exercise.
e 1.30
1 He’s from the USA.
2 It’s from China.
3 He’s from Germany.
4 She’s from Egypt.
5 He’s from France.
6 It’s from Spain.
7 She’s from Japan.
8 He’s from Mexico.
9 It’s from Russia.
 10 He’s from Italy.
 11 It’s from Switzerland.
 12 She’s from the UK.
g This exercise practises yes / no questions and short 
answers. Focus on the instructions and the example 
speech bubbles.
 In the same pairs (or in new pairs), Sts now test their 
partner.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 1.31 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 1B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Repeat the same process for phone /əʊ/, snake /s/, and 
shower /ʃ/.
 Now play the audio again from the beginning, pausing 
after each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat. 
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts. Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 1.26 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 1.26
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.9
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
 Finally, tell Sts to practise saying the sentences in pairs. 
Monitor and help with any pronunciation problems.
4 LISTENING & SPEAKING
a e 1.27 This section gives Sts practice in distinguishing 
aurally between he and she and then trying to make the 
distinction themselves. Depending on your Sts’ nationality, 
many Sts will find this quite tricky.
 Focus on the sentences. Play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts to try to hear the difference between 
the sentences.
e 1.27
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.9
EXTRA SUPPORT  Say the sentences to the class, 
exaggerating slightly the differences in pronunciation.
b Focus on the sentences in a and put Sts in pairs.
 Get Sts to practise saying them.
c e 1.28 Focus on the sentences in a again. Explain that 
Sts are going to hear only one of the sentences for each 
number and they have to tick the one they hear. 
 Play the audio, pausing for Sts to tick the sentences.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
1 b  2 a  3 a  4 b  5 a
e 1.28
1 Is she from Egypt?
2 He’s from Turkey.
3 Where’s he from?
4 She’s nice.
5 Where is he?
d e 1.29 Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences or 
questions and they must write them down. Point out that 
the first one (He’s from Egypt.) has been done for them.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 20@@
20
PE1
1 THE ALPHABET
a e 1.32 Books open. Choose a student with a short name 
and ask What’s your name? Show that you want to write 
their name on the board, and pretend that you don’t 
know how to spell it. Ask How do you spell it? Let Sts try 
and tell you the letters in English (they may know one 
or two).
 Explain that it’s important to learn the English alphabet 
because you may need to spell your name (especially 
when you’re talking on the phone). Letters of the alphabet 
are also important for flight numbers, car number plates, 
email addresses, etc. 
 Focus on the English alphabet and give Sts a little time 
to look at it. Ask Sts if it is the same as, or different from, 
the alphabet in their first language, e.g. the number of 
letters, etc.
 Focus on the task and play the audio once the whole way 
through for Sts just to listen.
e 1.32
See the alphabet in Student’s Book on p.10 
 Then play the audio again, pausing after every letter for 
Sts to repeat in chorus. When you finish each group of 
letters, you may want to pause and give extra practice 
before moving on to the next group. Concentrate on 
the letters which your Sts find particularly difficult to 
pronounce.
b e 1.33 This exercise helps Sts to learn the alphabet by 
dividing letters which share the same vowel sound into 
three groups. Focus on the task. Point out the three words 
and sounds: tree /iː/, egg /e/, and train /eɪ/. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to just 
listen to the words, sounds, and letters.
e 1.33
See chart in Student’s Book on p.10
 Now play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Model the sounds yourself if necessary, showing 
Sts what position their mouths should be in. 
 Now try to elicit the whole alphabet round the class, 
writing the letters on the board to help Sts remember. 
Give further practice around the class as necessary.
c e 1.34 This activity is to help Sts distinguish between 
letters that are sometimes confused. Depending on your 
Sts’ L1, some of these pairs will be more difficult than 
others.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
just listen to the difference between the letters. Ask Can 
you hear the difference? If Sts answer ‘no’, model the letters 
yourself to help them hear the difference between the 
sounds. Play the audio again if necessary.
e 1.34
See pairs of letters in Student’s Book on p.10
Function checking into a hotel, booking a table
 V  the classroom
 P  the alphabet
Lesson plan
This is the first in a series of six Practical English lessons 
(one every other File) which teach Sts basic functional 
language to help them ‘survive’ in an English-speaking 
environment. All the content for these lessons is on video. 
There is also an audio version if you are unable to show the 
video in class.
Here Sts learn the alphabet and how to spell their names. 
In Vocabulary, they learn the words for things in the 
classroom, and useful classroom language that will help 
them communicate with the teacher and their classmates in 
English right from the start. Sts then learn how to check into 
a hotel and how to book a table in a restaurant, two contexts 
which put into practice spelling their name. The lesson ends 
with a focus on all the useful phrases Sts saw in the lesson.
The functional conversations feature two recurring 
characters: Rob Walker, a British journalist based in London, 
and Jenny Zielinski, an American living in New York, who 
works for the same company as Rob. These two characters 
reappear in subsequent levels of English File. 
You can find the video on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, and Class DVD, and an audio-
only version on the Class Audio CDs. Sts can find the video 
and extra activities in Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative Who are you? p.172 (instructions p.160) 
Vocabulary Classroom language p.210  
(instructions p.202)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 1  
Can you remember? 1
Online Practice  Practical English 1  
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write OK and USA on the board. Ask Sts how to say them. 
Then elicit the pronunciation of each letter one by one, 
and model and drill. If you know your Sts’ L1, point out that 
these are examples of how we use letters of the alphabet to 
communicate.
 1 
 Practical English How do you  
spell it?
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 21@@
21
PE1
 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Quickly elicit the 
pronunciation of numbers 1–10 and letters A–J. 
 Demonstrate the activity on the board by drawing two 
small grids and taking the part of A or B. Show how Sts 
will use letters and numbers to identify the squares in the 
grid, e.g. the square in the top left corner is A1 and the 
bottom right J10. Make sure Sts know what ship, hit, and 
nothing mean.
 Use a gesture to show a ship sinking after being 
completely hit. Say It’s sunk! and get Sts to repeat. Write it 
on the board and model and drill pronunciation.
 When Sts have finished, find out who won in each pair.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 1.
 In later classes, try to recycle the alphabet whenever 
possible, e.g. play Hangman (see Extra idea below) as 
a warmer, get Sts to spell words in vocabulary exercises, 
have spelling quizzes, etc.
EXTRA IDEA  Play Hangman to practise the alphabet. Think 
of a word Sts know, preferably of at least eight letters, e.g. 
DICTIONARY. Write a dash on the board for each letter of the 
word: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.
Sts call out letters one at a time. Encourage them to start 
with the five vowels and then move onto consonants. If  
the letter is in the word (e.g. A), fill it in each time it occurs, 
e.g. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ A _ _. Only accept correctly pronounced letters. 
If the letter is not in the word, draw the first line of this 
picture on the board: 
Write any wrongly guessed letters under the picture, so Sts 
don’t repeat them. The object of the game is to guess the 
word before the man is ‘hanged’. Sts can make guesses at 
any time, but each wrong guess is ‘punished’ by another line 
being drawn.
The student who correctly guesses the word comes to the 
board and chooses a new word.
Sts can also play on paper in pairs / groups.
2 VOCABULARY the classroom
a e 1.37 Focus on the conversation and the words in 
the list.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen. Tell them not to write at this time. 
e 1.37
S = student, T = teacher
S What’s libro in English?
T Book.
S How do you spell it?
T B-O-O-K.
d e 1.35 Now tell Sts they’re only going to hear one of the 
letters from each pair in c. Explain that they have to circle 
the letter they think they hear.
 Play the audio once for Sts to circle the letter.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner. Play the audio again if 
necessary.
 Check answers by playing the audio again, pausing after 
each letter and eliciting the answer onto the board.
e 1.35
1 A  2 E  3 W  4 I  5 B  6 V  7 J   8 K   9 N   10 C   
11 T  12 W
e e 1.36 Focus on the photos and the task. Demonstrate /  
Explain that the letters are abbreviations (you could use 
TV = television as an example).
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 1.36
1 VIP  2 CNN  3 FBI  4 BBC  5 ATM  6 USB  7 BMW  8 EU
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to work out how to say 
the abbreviations.
 Elicit how you say them one by one, using the audio to 
confirm the correct pronunciation.
See script 1.36
 To give some extra practice, you could call out numbers 
between 1 and 8 for Sts to say the abbreviation, e.g. 
 T Two  Sts CNN
EXTRA IDEA  If your Sts are interested or ask, you could tell 
them the full form of each abbreviation:
1 Very Important Person
2 Cable News Network
3 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
4 British Broadcasting Corporation
5 Automated Teller Machine
6 Universal Serial Bus
7 Bayerische Motoren Werke (in German) or Bavarian Motor 
Works (in English)
8 European Union
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could play the audio again, pausing 
after each abbreviation for Sts to listen and repeat.
f Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to go to 
Communication Hit the ships, A on p.78 and B on p.82.
 This game is an adapted version of Battleships. If the game 
exists in your Sts’ country, they will not have any problems 
seeing how this activity works. However, if they are not 
familiar with the original, you may need to use L1 to make 
it clear.
 By playing the game, Sts will practise letters and numbers. 
The object of the game is to guess where the other 
person’s ships are and to ‘hit’ them by correctly identifying 
a square where part of the ship is located.
 When all parts of the ship have been hit, then it is 
‘sunk’. The winner is the first person to ‘sink’ all the other 
person’s ships.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 22@@
22
PE1
 Look at Activation and focus attention on the speech 
bubbles. Model the activity by pointing to something in 
the classroom and asking What is it? Elicit the response  
It’s a / the (word).
 Put Sts in pairs to continue asking and answering about 
things in the classroom.
 e 1.39 Now focus on 2 Classroom language. Point 
out the two sections: phrases Sts will hear you say and 
phrases they will need to either understand or use in the 
classroom. Focus on the pictures and the phrases. Elicit 
/ Explain the meaning of any words or phrases that Sts 
don’t understand.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and repeat the phrases in chorus. Pause the audio 
as necessary. Give further practice as necessary, modelling 
and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, 
and getting choral and individual responses.
e 1.39
See Classroom language in Student’s Book on p.118
 Focus on Activation. Ask Sts to cover the phrases and 
look at the pictures. Tell them to say the phrases. They 
could do this individually or with a partner.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 1.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c Focus on conversations 1–3. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
time to read the conversations and complete the gaps. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could play the audio, pausing to give 
Sts time to write. Get Sts to compare with a partner.
d e 1.40 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
 Check answers and write them on the board.
1 Open, Go, Sorry, repeat
2 Excuse, How
3 Sorry, down
e 1.40
T = teacher, S = student
1
T Open your books, please. Go to page seven.
S Sorry, can you repeat that, please?
T Go to page seven.
2
S Excuse me. How do you spell birthday?
T B-I-R-T-H-D-A-Y.
3
S Sorry I’m late.
T That’s OK. Sit down, please.
e Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations in c.
 Make sure they swap roles. Monitor and help.
 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
f e 1.41 Tell Sts they are going to hear the instructions 
they have just learned and they have to do the actions.
 Play the audio and pause after each instruction and wait 
for all the Sts to do each action. If necessary, repeat the 
phrase yourself.
 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence, 
for Sts to listen and write.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 What  2 English  3 Book  4 spell
 Make sure Sts understand the conversation. Model and 
drill the pronunciation. You could use the audio to do this. 
Then get Sts to practise it in pairs, swapping roles.
EXTRA IDEA  You could get Sts to practise the conversation 
using words from their language which they have already 
learned in English, e.g. numbers, days of the week, etc.
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The classroom on 
p.118. Write the page number on the board. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to add to the vocabulary here, with 
any important things that are in your classroom but 
don’t appear on this list (e.g. screen, projector) and / 
or any phrases which you yourself frequently use in 
classroom instructions, or think your Sts often need to say 
themselves. 
The phrases Excuse me, Sorry, and Sorry? are easily 
confused. Write the three phrases on the board. 
Demonstrate / Elicit the meaning and use of Excuse me 
(for politely attracting someone’s attention) by giving an 
example with one student. Say Excuse me. Are you (name)? 
Then elicit the meaning and use of Sorry (to apologize) 
by knocking a student’s pen on the floor. Finally, elicit 
the meaning and use of Sorry? (to ask for repetition). Say 
What’s your name? to a student and pretend not to hear 
by putting your hand to your ear. 
NB You can also say Pardon? when you want someone to 
repeat something. If you personally, as a teacher, tend to 
say Pardon?, it might be worth teaching it here as well. If 
so, model and drill the pronunciation /ˈpɑːdn/.
  e 1.38 Look at 1 Things in the classroom and focus  
on a. Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the words 
in chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Remind Sts 
that the stressed syllable is underlined. Highlight the 
word stress and the pronunciation of the more difficult 
words, e.g. board, window, coat, and dictionary. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 1.38
See Things in the classroom in Student’s Book on p.118
 Focus on b. Ask Sts to cover the words in a and look at 
the picture. Tell them to say the words. They could do this 
individually or with a partner.
 Monitor and help as necessary, correcting any 
pronunciation errors. 
 If your Sts ask why some words are preceded by the (the 
door) and others a (a window), explain that we say a 
window because it is one of many, but we say the door 
because there is usually one door in a room. The same is 
true of the board. This difference is focused on in more 
detail in 3A. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 23@@
23
PE1
 Focus on the photo and ask Where’s Rob? and elicit that 
he’s in a hotel. 
 Tell Sts to cover the sentences and just listen to Rob 
checking in. Play the video / audio once the whole way 
through for Sts just to watch or listen.
 Now tell Sts to look at the sentences in b, and 
demonstrate / explain that they will hear the conversation 
again and this time they need to put the sentences in 
the correct order. Point out that the first one (1 Hello) and 
another (7 W-A-L-K-E-R) have been done for them.
 Play the video / audio again and give Sts time to order the 
sentences. Play again as necessary.
 Check answers by playing the video / audio again, 
pausing after each line. Elicit / Explain the meaning of any 
new words, e.g. afternoon and reservation, and model and 
drill pronunciation.
2 Good afternoon.
3 My name’s Rob Walker. I have a reservation.
4 Sorry, what’s your surname?
5 Walker.
6 How do you spell it?
8 Sorry?
9 W-A-L-K-E-R.
 10 Thank you. OK, Mr Walker. You’re in room 321.
 11 Thanks.
e 1.43
Ro = Rob, R = receptionist
Ro Hello.
R Good afternoon.
Ro My name’s Rob Walker. I have a reservation.
R Sorry, what’s your surname?
Ro Walker.
R How do you spell it?
Ro W-A-L-K-E-R.
R Sorry?
Ro W-A-L-K-E-R.
R Thank you. OK, Mr Walker. You’re in room three two one.
Ro Thanks.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  After playing the video / audio the first 
time, have Sts uncover the sentences and try to put them in 
order. Then play the video / audio again for Sts to check their 
answers and make any corrections necessary.
c e 1.44 Play the conversation again, pausing for Sts to 
listen and repeat each sentence. Give further practice as 
necessary.
e 1.44
Same as script 1.43 with repeat pauses
d Ask Sts to cover their Student Book page, and elicit the 
conversation in b and write it on the board. If necessary, 
prompt Sts’ memory by giving the first letter of a word or 
phrase.
 Underline GOOD AFTERNOON on the board and tell Sts to 
uncover the page. Focus on the Greetings box and go 
through it with the class. Explain the rules to Sts and 
highlight that these times are very approximate. Write the 
greetings on the board and elicit the stress. Model and 
drill the words morning, afternoon, and evening as well as 
the greetings.
e 1.41
1 Stand up. 
2 Close your books.
3 Sit down, please.
4 Open your books.
5 Go to page nine.
 From now on, make sure you always give these 
instructions in English.
3 r CHECKING INTO A HOTEL
a e 1.42 In this exercise, Sts meet, for the first time, a 
character who will appear in all the Practical English 
lessons.
 Focus on the photo of Rob and the task, and make sure 
Sts understand they will have to circle options a or b for 
each question.
 Now focus on sentences 1–3. Focus on the UK in 1. If 
necessary, remind Sts (using a map if you have one) 
that the UK (the United Kingdom) = England, Scotland, 
Wales, and Northern Ireland. Also make sure Sts know the 
meaning of the nouns an artist and a journalist, as well as 
the expressions on holiday and for work. 
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
 Now play it again and give Sts time to circle a or b. Play 
again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1 a  2 b  3 b
e 1.42
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
Hello. I’m Rob. I’m from London. I’m a journalist. Today I’m in Poland. 
I’m not on holiday. I’m here for work.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
b e 1.43 Focus on the Names box and go through it with 
the class. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  To make the distinction clear between 
name and surname, write your first name and your surname 
on the board (or the first name and surname of a well-
known celebrity). Elicit which is your first name and which is 
your surname. 
Highlight that you can say name (or first name), and surname 
(or last name). When asked What’s your name?, you usually 
reply with your first name in an informal situation, or your 
surname or full name in a formal situation, e.g. checking into 
a hotel.
You may want to point out that when we give our full name, 
we always say first name, then surname.
Ask a few Sts What’s your first name? and What’s your 
surname? to practise the difference between the two. Then 
get Sts to ask each other.
EXTRA IDEA  You could bring in photos of famous people 
and show them to the class and ask What’s his / her first 
name? What’s his / her surname? 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 24@@
24
PE1
Day Tuesday
Table for three people
Time 7 (o’clock)
Name Jenny Zielinski
e 1.46
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
W = waiter, J = Jenny
W Locanda Verde. Good morning. How can I help you?
J Hello. A table for tomorrow, please.
W Tomorrow…er, Tuesday?
J Yes, that’s right.
W How many people?
J Three.
W What time?
J Seven o’clock.
W What’s your name, please?
J Jenny Zielinski. That’s Z-I-E-L-I-N-S-K-I.
W Thank you, Ms, er, Zielinksi. OK. So, a table for three on Tuesday at 
seven.
J Great. Thanks. Bye.
W Goodbye. See you tomorrow.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Ask What is Ms Zielinski’s first name? to 
elicit Jenny. Ask Sts How do you spell it? Then explain that 
when a word has a double letter, like the N-N in Jenny, they 
can say either N-N or double N. Demonstrate with another 
name, e.g. Anna.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
5 r USEFUL PHRASES
 e 1.47 Focus on the phrases and go through them with 
the class to make sure they are clear about the meaning. 
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 1.47
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.11
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Finally, you could test your Sts’ memory 
of the phrases by writing just the first letters of the words on 
the board, e.g. I H___ A R_________ (= I have a reservation), and 
seeing if Sts can remember the phrase. Alternatively, you 
could use L1 translations to prompt the phrases.
!  Good afternoon and Good evening are rather formal in 
English. People often just say Hello when they greet each 
other. You may also want to teach Goodnight, which is used 
only when saying goodbye at night, e.g. before going to bed.
 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B. Give each student a role 
(Rob and the receptionist) and ask them to focus on the 
instructions for the role-play. Make sure Sts understand 
that they have to use their own names and should use 
different greetings depending on the time of day.
 Clean the board and get Sts to do the role-play.
 Make sure Sts swap roles. Monitor and help as needed.
 Have one or two pairs present their role-play to the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Leave some words from the conversation 
on the board to prompt weaker Sts in the role-play.
4 r BOOKING A TABLE
a e 1.45 Tell Sts they are now going to meet the other 
main character who will appear in all the Practical 
English lessons. Focus on the photo and tell Sts they 
are going to listen to a woman called Jenny. Focus on 
sentences 1–3 and make sure Sts know the meaning of 
birthday.
 Tell Sts to cover the sentences and just listen to Jenny.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
 Now play it again and give Sts time to circle a or b. Play 
again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 a  2 b  3 a
e 1.45
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
Hi. I’m Jenny Zielinski. I’m from New York. Tomorrow’s my birthday, 
and my favourite restaurant in New York is Locanda Verde. It’s Italian.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
b e 1.46 First, focus on the Z box and go through it with 
the class. Explain that this is the only letter of the alphabet 
that is different in American English compared with British 
English.
 Now focus on the task and the information. You might 
want to quickly revise the days of the week. If there is a 
table in the classroom, point to it. If not, draw one on the 
board. Explain / Elicit the meaning of the phrase Table 
for __ people. Point to your watch or a clock in your class 
for time.
 Tell Sts Jenny is on the phone to the restaurant. Play the 
video / audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
watch or listen.
 Now play it again and give Sts time to complete the form. 
Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Elicit Jenny’s surname onto the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 25@@
25
2A
2A 
Are you on holiday?
 G  verb be (plural): we, you, they
 V  nationalities
 P  /dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /ʃ/
Lesson plan
This lesson is centred around a dialogue where a Canadian 
couple meet a British couple in a pub garden. Sts complete 
their knowledge of the verb be, and study the positive, 
negative, and question forms for we, you, and they.
At the beginning of the lesson, Sts learn the nationality 
adjectives for the countries they learned in 1B. Then the 
pronunciation focus is on three new sounds (/dʒ/, /tʃ/, and 
/ʃ/) which come up in some of the new nationality words. 
The grammar is then presented through the context of a 
dialogue, which is continued in the Reading and Listening 
and provides consolidation of the new language and some 
useful phrases. Finally, in Speaking, Sts practise asking about 
what nationality different people and things are.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar verb be (plural): we, you, they p.138 
Communicative Match the sentences p.173  
(instructions p.161) 
Vocabulary Nationalities and languages p.211 
(instructions p.203)
For students
Workbook 2A
Online Practice 2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Give Sts a quick quiz on capital cities to revise the countries 
they already know. Tell Sts that you are going to say a capital 
city, and they have to say the country. You could make this a 
team game by dividing the class down the middle.
London (England) 
Tokyo (Japan)
Brasília (Brazil) 
Madrid (Spain)
Cairo (Egypt) 
Rome (Italy)
Beijing (China) 
Mexico City (Mexico)
Berlin (Germany) 
Bern (Switzerland)
Warsaw (Poland) 
Moscow (Russia)
Washington, DC 
Ankara (Turkey)
(the United States)
1 VOCABULARY nationalities
a Books open. Focus on the instructions and the photos. 
Then focus on the first photo and elicit what it is (a 
sweet). Point out that Turkish has been circled, as it is the 
nationality word. Make sure Sts understand what they 
have to do.
 Give Sts time to circle the other nationality words.
 Check answers.
2  American   3 Chinese   4 Swiss
EXTRA SUPPORT  Do this as a whole-class activity.
b Point to the Turkish Delight in a and ask the class Where 
is it from? to elicit (It’s from) Turkey. Point out the example. 
Give Sts time to write the other countries.
 Check answers.
2 the United States (USA)   3 China   4 Switzerland
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Countries and 
nationalities on p.117.
Vocabulary notes
Nationality endings
Point out to Sts that there are three common endings to 
make nationality adjectives from the country word, which 
are -an / -ian, e.g. German, Brazilian; -ese, e.g. Chinese; and 
-ish, e.g. English.
Word stress
Unlike the other two, the -ese ending is stressed (Chinese), 
and in other nationality words, the stress is not the same 
as on the country word, e.g. Italy, Italian. 
The UK 
The official nationality for people from the UK is British. If 
somebody is from England, they may describe themselves 
as English or British. 
 e 2.1 Look at 2 Nationalities and focus on a. Play the 
audio and get Sts to repeat the countries and nationalities. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 2.1
See Nationalities in Student’s Book on p.117
 If necessary, give more details to explain the English / 
British distinction. 
 Focus on the Word stress box and go through it with the 
class. You could tell Sts some or all of the following:
• In all multi-syllable English words, one syllable is 
stressed more than the other syllable(s).
• There aren’t any firm rules governing word stress, 
although the majority of two-syllable words are 
stressed on the first syllable. The number of syllables a 
word has is determined by the way it is pronounced, 
not by how it is written, e.g. nice = one syllable, not two, 
because the e is not pronounced.
• There are no written accents in English. A dictionary 
shows which syllable in a word is stressed, e.g. Brazilian 
/brəˈzɪliən/. The syllable after the apostrophe is the 
stressed one.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 26@@
26
2A
• Sts need to be careful with the pronunciation of words 
which are the same or similar to ones in their language, 
as the stress pattern may be different.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write BRAZIL and BRAZILIAN on the board. Ask 
Sts how many syllables there are in Brazil, to check Sts know 
the meaning of syllable (two). Then ask Sts to tell you which 
syllable is stressed in each word (the second). Underline the 
stressed syllables (BRAZIL, BRAZILIAN). 
Repeat for China and Chinese (CHINA, CHINESE) and elicit that 
the stress in the words is different.
 Now look at b. Teach Sts how to say their nationality if it is 
not in the list. Give Sts time to complete the gap.
 Focus on c and go through the Countries and 
languages box with the class. Highlight that nationality 
and language words always begin with a capital letter.
 Give Sts time to answer the question. 
 Ask individual Sts for feedback.
 Finally, focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the 
words, look at the flags, and remember and say the 
countries and nationalities. They could do this individually 
or with a partner.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems Sts are having. Write the words on the board 
and model and drill the ones that Sts find difficult.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 PRONUNCIATION /dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /ʃ/
Pronunciation notes
The sounds focused on in this lesson are all consonant 
sounds. Sts may find the symbols /dʒ/ and /tʃ/ difficult to 
remember.
You may want to highlight the following sound–spelling 
patterns.
• /dʒ/ J is always pronounced /dʒ/, e.g. juice. The letter g 
can also sometimes be /dʒ/ before e and i, e.g. German, 
region, etc.
• /tʃ/ The consonant clusters ch and tch are usually 
pronounced /tʃ/, e.g. children, watch. 
• /ʃ/ For information on this sound, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 1B.
a e 2.2 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 2.2
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.12
 Focus on the sound picture jazz. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and sound (pause after the sound). 
 Now focus on the words after jazz. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /dʒ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat. 
 Focus on the Sounds box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now repeat the same process for chess /tʃ/ and shower /ʃ/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice if these sounds are a problem for your Sts.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 2.3 Focus on the sentences and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 2.3
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.12
 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Finally, get Sts to practise the sentences individually or in 
pairs. 
c e 2.4 Focus on the instructions and the examples in the 
speech bubbles. Explain to Sts that they are going to hear 
a man or a woman saying I’m from + a country, and they 
have to say the nationality using he’s if it’s a man and she’s 
if it’s a woman. 
 Play the two examples, pausing for Sts to say He’s Chinese 
and then She’s Spanish in chorus. Make sure Sts are 
pronouncing the /ʃ/ sound in She correctly. 
 Continue with the rest of the audio, pausing as necessary. 
Make a note of any mistakes in pronunciation and correct 
them later on the board.
e 2.4
1 I’m from China. (pause) He’s Chinese.
2 I’m from Spain. (pause) She’s Spanish.
3 I’m from Japan. (pause) He’s Japanese.
4 I’m from Switzerland. (pause) She’s Swiss.
5 I’m from the USA. (pause) He’s American.
6 I’m from Italy. (pause) She’s Italian.
7 I’m from Germany. (pause) He’s German.
8 I’m from Mexico. (pause) She’s Mexican.
9 I’m from England. (pause) He’s English.
 10 I’m from Turkey. (pause) She’s Turkish.
 11 I’m from Poland. (pause) He’s Polish.
 12 I’m from Egypt. (pause) She’s Egyptian.
 13 I’m from Brazil. (pause) He’s Brazilian.
 14 I’m from France. (pause) She’s French.
 15 I’m from Russia. (pause) He’s Russian.
 16 I’m from the UK. (pause) She’s British.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3 GRAMMAR verb be (plural): we, you, they
a Focus on the picture and the conversation. Tell Sts to 
complete each gap with a word from the list. Point out 
that the first one (are) has been done for them.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b e 2.5 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers. Make sure Sts understand all the lexis, 
e.g. free.
2 sit   3 Thanks   4 I’m   5 American   6 aren’t   
7 English   8 meet
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 27@@
27
2A
a
1 We’re in room 4.
2 It’s in India. 
3 Are they in Italy?
4 Where’s she from?
5 They’re Brazilian.
6 He isn’t in the hotel.
7 You’re in class 2.
8 We’re from Oxford.
9 They’re Japanese.
b
1 We aren’t Mexican.
2 You’re / You are in class 4.
3 Are they English?
4 Are we in class 4?
5 You aren’t in class 4.
6 We’re / We are on holiday.
c
1 A Are you from the United States?
 
B No, we aren’t American. We’re English.
2 A Are they Spanish?
 
B Yes, they are. They’re from Madrid.
3 Nikolai is from Moscow. He isn’t from St Petersburg.
4 Sorry, you aren’t in room 20, you’re in room 22.
5 A Is Adidas American?
 
B No, it isn’t, it’s German.
6 A Are we late?
 
B Yes, you are. It’s 9.30!
7 I’m not Sara Smith, I’m Sara Simpson.
8 They aren’t from New York, they’re from Texas.
9 A Where’s Laura from?
 
B She’s from Recife.
 
A Is Recife in Brazil?
 
B Yes, it is.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d e 2.9 Focus on the instructions and the examples in the 
speech bubbles. Make sure Sts remember the meaning of 
late (as in Sorry I’m late). Then play the audio, pausing after 
the first sentence for Sts to say Are you Chinese? in chorus. 
Do the same for the second example.
 Play the rest of the audio, pausing if necessary after each 
sentence to give Sts time to say the question in chorus.
e 2.9
1 You’re Chinese. (pause) Are you Chinese?
2 We’re late. (pause) Are we late?
3 They’re in class two. (pause) Are they in class two?
4 You’re Italian. (pause) Are you Italian?
5 They’re English. (pause) Are they English?
6 We’re in room five. (pause) Are we in room five?
7 They’re Japanese. (pause) Are they Japanese?
 You could repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Play the audio, pausing after each 
sentence, to give Sts time to write the sentence they heard. 
Then ask them to transform it into a question. Check answers 
as you go along.
e 2.5
J = Jessica, C = Charles, Ji = Jim, R = Rachel
J Excuse me. Are they free?
C Yes, they are. Please sit down.
J Thanks. I’m Jessica. Hi.
Ji And I’m Jim.
C Are you American?
J No, we aren’t. We’re from Canada.
C Oh, OK! We’re English. I’m Charles.
R And I’m Rachel.
Ji Nice to meet you.
 Now focus on the chart and make sure Sts know what 
plural means. Point out the two columns and the example 
in each one.
 Give Sts time to complete the chart. 
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Make sure that Sts are clear what the pronouns 
we, you, and they mean. You can demonstrate this or use 
your Sts’ L1 if you know it.
be (plural)
+
–
you’re
you aren’t
they’re
they aren’t
c Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.94.
Grammar notes 
verb be (plural): we, you, they
We, you, and they are plural pronouns.
We and you can be used for men or women, or both.
The pronoun you and the verb form after it is the same in 
the singular and the plural. 
They can be used for people or things.
Remind Sts that people normally use contractions after 
pronouns in conversation, e.g. We’re from Texas.
Contractions are not used in positive short answers,  
e.g. Yes, they are. NOT Yes, they’re.
For we / you / they, there are two possible negative 
contractions – we / you / they aren’t and we’re / you’re / 
they’re not – but we recommend you teach only we / you / 
they aren’t so as not to confuse Sts.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 2.6, 
e 2.7, and e 2.8 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the two information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 2A on p.95 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 28@@
28
2A
5 SPEAKING
a In this speaking activity, Sts practise nationality adjectives 
and the third-person singular and plural of the verb be. 
Focus on the instructions and four questions. Point out 
the three possible answers for the first one. Make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. You could do the first 
one with the class.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to answer 
the questions.
 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to guess if they don’t 
know the correct answer.
 Check answers by getting one student to ask another the 
questions.
1 Yes, he is.
2 No, they aren’t. They’re Chinese.
3 Yes, it is.
4 No, she isn’t. She’s British.
b Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Is sushi Chinese?, A on p.78 and B 
on p.82.
 Go through the instructions and speech bubbles. Sts A 
start and ask their partner questions about photos 1–5. 
Then Sts swap roles and Sts B ask about photos 6–10.
 When Sts have asked and answered about all the photos, 
you could ask the whole class some of the questions to 
round up the activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts ask and answer the questions, 
put As and Bs together to complete the questions with Is or 
Are. Write the two options on the board for reference. 
EXTRA IDEA  Have Sts make up their own questions about 
people and things they know to ask their classmates.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 2.12 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 2A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
4 READING & LISTENING
a e 2.10 Focus on the five pictures and ask Sts Who are 
they? to elicit that they are the same people as in 3a 
(Jessica, Charles, Jim, and Rachel). 
 Tell Sts to read and listen at the same time. Now play the 
audio once the whole way through.
 Then focus on the instructions and give Sts time to look at 
the pictures. Make sure Sts understand all the lexis,  
e.g. here, beautiful, and dogs.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and number the 
pictures 1–5.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the conversation the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
A 5  B 1  C 3  D 2  E 4
e 2.10
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.13
b Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
questions 1–4.
 Give them time to write the four short answers.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 No, they aren’t.
2 Yes, they are.
3 Yes, it is.
4 No, she isn’t.
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words, e.g. business /ˈbɪznəs/. 
c e 2.11 Focus on the instructions and the phrases. Make 
sure Sts don’t look at the conversations.
 Give them a few minutes to see if they can remember any 
of the missing words.
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 free  2 holiday  3 business  4 that  5 day  6 too
e 2.11
1 Excuse me. Are they free?
2 Are you on holiday?
3 We’re on business.
4 What’s that?
5 Have a nice day!
6 Nice to meet you, too.
d Put Sts in groups of four and have them act out the 
conversations in 3a and 4a. If possible, set up seats in the 
classroom to mimic the seats in the pictures.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 29@@
29
2B
 2B That’s my bus!
1 READING & LISTENING
a e 2.13 Books open. Focus on the first picture, the 
student card, and the task, and elicit who Pia and who Lin 
are (They’re the women in the picture). 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time. Help Sts to understand the 
new lexis, e.g. How old is he?, good-looking.
 Now focus on the student card and elicit the meaning of 
age. Give Sts time to complete it. You could play the audio 
again.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Name: Alex Martinez
Nationality: Mexican
Age: 22
e 2.13
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.14
b e 2.14 Focus on the pictures and elicit who the people 
are (Pia, Alex, and Lin) and that it’s the next day.
 Tell Sts to cover the conversation, and play the audio once 
the whole way through for them just to listen.
e 2.14
L = Lin, P = Pia, A = Alex
L Hi, Pia. How are you?
P Hi, Lin. I’m fine, and you?
L I’m fine, too. This is Alex. He’s in my class. Alex, this is Pia.
P Hi, Alex!
A Hi. What class are you in?
***
L That’s my bus! Bye. See you tomorrow!
A Bye. Where are you from, Pia? 
P I’m from Italy. This is my bus stop. Bye, Alex. Nice to meet you.
A Nice to meet you, too, Pia. Er…what’s your phone number?
P Sorry, my bus…It’s oh seven three six five…!
 Now tell them to uncover the conversation, and give 
them time to think about what the missing words are, but 
tell them not to write the words yet.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete 
the task.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Help Sts understand the new phrases in the 
conversation. Explain that we use This is… (NOT He’s / 
She’s…) when we introduce someone to other people, 
and that How are you? is a common greeting to which 
people normally respond (I’m) fine / very well, thanks. It is 
not a genuine question about people’s health.
1 class  2 What  3 tomorrow  4 Where  5 Italy  6 phone
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill 
the pronunciation of any tricky words. You may want to 
explain the difference between this (This is Alex) and that 
(That’s my bus), which will be focused on in detail in 3B.
 G  Wh- and How questions with be
 V  phone numbers, numbers 11–100
 P  understanding numbers
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is personal information, and the 
context is students in a language school.
The lesson starts with Sts listening to two conversations 
providing the context for asking for and giving personal 
information, and learning how to introduce other people 
and to ask how people are. This is followed by a grammar 
focus on question words and word order in questions. 
In Vocabulary, Sts learn how to say phone numbers and 
numbers from 11–100. This is followed by a pronunciation 
focus on the difference between pairs of numbers that 
sound similar, e.g. 13 and 30, etc., and then a listening to 
reinforce their understanding. Then in Writing, Sts focus on 
words related to personal information, e.g. address, postcode, 
married, etc., and practise giving their own personal 
information by filling in a form. We have avoided forcing 
Sts to ask what may be sensitive questions, e.g. How old are 
you? Are you married?, but these questions are practised in 
the speaking exercise where Sts take on a role. Finally, Sts 
watch a video about a language school. If you are not able 
to watch the video in class, make sure you get Sts to watch it 
at home and do the exercises. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar Wh- and How questions with be p.139 
Communicative Remember the sentences p.174  
(instructions p.161) 
Vocabulary Numbers dictation p.212 (instructions p.203)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Meet the students
For students
Workbook 2B
Online Practice 2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Draw a picture on the board of a real or imaginary friend of 
yours. Then write some personal information in note form 
under it, e.g. phone number, address, single or married, and 
age.
Tell Sts This is my friend (name). Then ask questions such as 
What’s his / her phone number? How old is he / she?  
Is he / she married?, etc. Elicit answers by pointing to the 
relevant information on the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 30@@
30
2B
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you have a monolingual class, don’t be 
afraid of using your Sts’ L1 to talk about the grammar rules. 
At this level, it is unrealistic to expect Sts to fully understand 
grammar rules in English.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 2.18 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. Pause the audio as necessary.
 Then go through the rules with the class. 
 Focus on the Word order box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 2B on p.95 and get Sts 
to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.  
For b, elicit the contracted forms (see the answers in 
brackets).
a
1 When’s the concert?
 
Where is it?
2 What’s your name?
3 Who is she?
 
Where’s she from?
4 What’s that?
5 Who’s that?
 
How old is he?
b
1 Who is she? (Who’s she?)
2 What is your phone number? (What’s your phone number?)
3 Where is room 4? (Where’s room 4?)
4 Is Marta married?
5 When is your English class? (When’s your English class?)
6 Is your phone number 4960362?
7 What is his email? (What’s his email?)
8 How old is Pedro?
c
1 Where are you from?
2 Where’s Monterrey?
3 What’s your email?
4 Thanks. What’s your phone number?
5 How old are you?
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
 Give Sts time to cover the left-hand column of the chart  
in b, look at the answers, and see if they can remember 
the questions.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) 
cover the left-hand column in b, look at the answers, and 
see if they can remember the questions. Sts B (book open) 
don’t cover the chart, and help Sts A if necessary. Then they 
swap roles.
c e 2.15 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat. 
e 2.15
Same as script 2.14 with repeat pauses
 Now put Sts in groups of three. Tell Sts to read Lin’s, Pia’s, 
and Alex’s lines.
 Make sure Sts swap roles. Monitor and help as needed.
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could divide the class into two and 
practise this exchange across the class: 
A How are you?  
B I’m fine. How are you? 
A Very well, thanks.
Then get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs, swapping 
roles.
2 GRAMMAR Wh- and How questions with be
a e 2.16 Focus on the four question words and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Elicit their meaning, and 
highlight the two different pronunciations of wh.
e 2.16
See words in Student’s Book on p.14
b Focus on the chart and the example. Then elicit the 
missing question word in 2 (How) and get Sts to write it in.
 Then give Sts time to complete the other questions. 
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c e 2.17 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
3 Who  4 What  5 Where  6 How  7 What’s
e 2.17 
1 A Where are you from? 
B I’m from Germany.
2 A How are you? 
B Fine, thanks.
3 A Who’s he? 
B He’s a friend.
4 A What’s your name? 
B Molly.
5 A Where’s Modena? 
B It’s in Italy.
6 A How old are you? 
B Twenty-six.
7 A What’s your phone number? 
B Oh seven seven oh two,  
 
 
nine six oh eight three six.
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.94. 
Grammar notes
Wh- and How questions with be
In English statements with be, the subject comes before 
the verb. The pattern is S + V.
In questions, the order of the subject and verb is reversed. 
The pattern is V + S.
When a question begins with a Wh- word or How, the 
pattern is Wh- (How) + V + S.
In questions with question words, the verb is is often 
contracted, e.g. What’s, Where’s, Who’s. This is especially the 
case when the subject is a noun, e.g. What’s your name? 
Where’s the toilet? It is often not contracted when the 
subject is a pronoun.
Are is not contracted after a Wh- word: Where are the 
students? NOT Where’re the students?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 31@@
31
2B
d Tell Sts to go to the Vocabulary Bank Numbers on p.116. 
Vocabulary notes
Numbers 11–100
The main problem Sts have with these numbers is the 
similar pronunciation of 13 and 30, 14 and 40, etc. Native 
speakers often clarify, e.g. prices, by asking one three or 
three oh?
Sts also have problems with the numbers that change 
slightly, e.g. three, thirteen, thirty and five, fifteen, fifty.
For the number 100, both a hundred and one hundred are 
acceptable.
  e 2.21 Look at 2 11–100 and focus on a. Play the audio 
and get Sts to repeat numbers 11–20 in chorus. Remind 
Sts that the underlined syllables are stressed more strongly. 
Highlight the word stress and the pronunciation of the 
more difficult words. Give further practice as necessary, 
modelling and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using 
the audio, and getting choral and individual responses.
e 2.21
See 11–20 in Student’s Book on p.116
EXTRA SUPPORT  Ask Sts to cover the words and say the 
numbers. They could do this individually or with a partner.
  e 2.22 Now look at 21–100 and focus on b. Play the 
audio and get Sts to repeat numbers 21–100 in chorus. 
Highlight the word stress and the pronunciation of the 
more difficult words. Give further practice as necessary, 
modelling and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using 
the audio, and getting choral and individual responses.
e 2.22
See 21–100 in Student’s Book on p.116
 Focus on the Word stress box and go through it with 
the class. Give some practice of this by writing up pairs of 
numbers on the board, e.g. 15 / 50, 18 / 80, and getting Sts 
to say them.
 Now focus on Activation. Ask Sts to cover the words and 
say the numbers. They could do this individually or with a 
partner.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems they are having. Write the words on the board 
and model and drill the ones that Sts find difficult.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e e 2.23 Focus on the instructions and the example. 
 Play the audio, pausing after each number to give Sts time 
to write. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit the 
numbers onto the board.
97  11  100  40  29  16  62  56  78  34  81
e 2.23
fifteen, ninety-seven, eleven, a hundred, forty, twenty-nine, sixteen, 
sixty-two, fifty-six, seventy-eight, thirty-four, eighty-one
3 VOCABULARY phone numbers, numbers 11–100
Vocabulary notes
Phone numbers
When saying phone numbers, we give the individual 
digits, (usually in blocks of three or four), so that 3074128 
is said as three zero seven, four one two eight. We don’t say 
thirty, seventy-four, a hundred and twenty-eight, as in some 
languages.
Native speakers sometimes use double when the same 
two numbers come together, e.g. 22 in a phone number 
could be two two or double two. It is perfectly acceptable 
to just say the number twice, but you may want to point 
out this use of double so that Sts understand it if they 
hear it.
Point out that 0 can be said as either zero or oh. Both 
forms are used in audio 2.20.
a e 2.19 Focus on the phone number and the instructions, 
and play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen.
e 2.19
zero three zero six nine, nine nine zero, three seven five
 Then play the audio again and get Sts to listen and 
complete the phone number.
 Check answers, by writing the number on the board.
0 3 0 6 9 9 9 0 3 7 5
 Finally, play the audio again and get Sts to listen and 
repeat the phone number.
b e 2.20 Focus on the first phone number. Ask a student 
to say it, and write what he / she says on the board for the 
class to check. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other the other 
two phone numbers.
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
 Check answers.
e 2.20
1 zero two eight, nine zero one, eight zero three six one
2 oh eight oh eight one, five seven oh, seven two four
3 zero one three one, four nine six, zero six three eight
 Play the audio again, pausing after each phone number, 
and get Sts to repeat it. Give further practice as necessary.
c Focus on the instructions and speech bubble. Put Sts in 
pairs and get them to ask and answer the question.
!  Some Sts may not be happy about using their own phone 
number, so you could suggest that they invent a number, 
which they should write down, but with a normal number of 
digits for the area where they live.
 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to break the phone 
number up into blocks of three or four digits, so it sounds 
more natural.
 Get some feedback by eliciting some numbers onto the 
board.
EXTRA IDEA  You could get Sts to mingle as a whole class to 
ask each other’s phone number.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 32@@
32
2B
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A read one of the 
numbers from each pair in a, and Sts B must say a or b. Then 
they swap roles.
c e 2.26 Focus on the instructions and the four questions. 
Tell Sts they are going to hear four mini conversations, and 
in each one they will hear one of the four questions.
 Play the audio and pause after the first conversation. 
Ask Sts Which question is it? Elicit that the question in the 
conversation is What’s your phone number? Get Sts to write 
1 next to the question.
 Play the rest of the audio for Sts to listen and write 2–4 
next to the other three questions.
 Check answers.
2 What’s your address?  3 How old are you?  4 What’s your 
email?
e 2.26
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
1 A Great. OK, see you on Tuesday.
 
B Yes. Oh, what’s your phone number?
 
A It’s, er, oh two oh, seven nine four six, oh four one five.
2 A Thank you. What’s your address, please?
 
B It’s fifty-seven King Street. Very near here.
3 A Come in, sit down. You’re Martin Blunt, right?
 
B Yes.
 
A And how old are you, Mr Blunt?
 
B I’m thirty-nine… 
4 A Thank you very much. Er, one more thing. What’s your email?
 
B It’s James eighty-five at ukmail dot com.
d Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
that they are going to hear the four conversations again, 
and this time they must write the numbers they hear in 
the answers. 
 Focus on 1–4 and elicit the meaning of King Street. Focus 
on the Email addresses box and go through it with Sts.
 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation to give 
Sts time to write the missing numbers. Play again as 
necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1 020 7946 0415  2 57 King Street  3 Age: 39   
4 james85@ukmail.com
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.88, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
5 WRITING & SPEAKING a form
 This is the first time Sts are sent to the Writing at the 
back of the Student’s Book. In this section, Sts will find 
model texts with exercises and language notes, and then 
a writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercise(s) and set the actual writing (the last 
activity) in class, except maybe for Writing 2, which could 
be set for homework. 
 Tell Sts to go to Writing A form on p.86.
a Focus on the heading and explain / elicit the meaning of 
the word form. Go through the form line by line and check 
the meaning and pronunciation of any new words, e.g. 
divorced, separated, postcode, home, and mobile.
f Tell Sts that Buzz is the name of a number game. 
 Get Sts to sit or stand in a circle and count out loud. When 
they come to a number that contains three (e.g. 13) or a 
multiple of three (three, six, nine, etc.) they have to say buzz 
instead of the number.
 If a student makes a mistake, either saying the number 
instead of buzz, or simply saying the wrong number,  
he / she is out. The next player then starts from the 
beginning again.
 Continue until there is only one student left, or until the 
class reaches, for example, 30.
 Note: You can use any number between three and nine as 
the ‘buzz’ number.
EXTRA IDEA  Another number game you may like to play 
now or when you want to practise numbers is Two-digit 
number chains.
Write three two-digit numbers on the board, e.g.  
27  71  13
Elicit the numbers from the class. Then show Sts that the 
second number begins with seven because the previous 
one ended with seven, and the third number begins with 
one because the second number ended with one. Then ask 
Sts what the fourth number could be and elicit a number, 
e.g. 32, and then another, e.g. 26, and write the numbers up 
on the board.
Tell Sts that the numbers can’t have a zero, i.e. not 20, 30, etc.
Now make a chain round the class. Say the first number, and 
then elicit the second from the first student on your left, and 
continue around the class.
Finally, get Sts to make ‘chains’ in pairs, where A says one 
number, B says another, A says a third, etc.
4  PRONUNCIATION & LISTENING  
understanding numbers
a e 2.24 Remind Sts of the rule about stress on numbers 
like thirteen and thirty.
 Focus on the activity and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen to the difference 
between the pairs of numbers. Pause and play again as 
necessary.
e 2.24
See numbers in Student’s Book on p.15
b e 2.25 Focus on the instructions and play the audio 
once for Sts to circle a or b. Play again as necessary.
 Play the audio again to check answers.
1 a (13)  2 b (40)  3 b (50)  4 a (16)  5 b (70)  6 a (18)   
7 a (19)
e 2.25
1 thirteen
2 forty
3 fifty
4 sixteen
5 seventy
6 eighteen
7 nineteen
 Get Sts to practise saying the numbers in pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 33@@
33
This is the school. It’s a big school with about three hundred and fifty 
students.
Rike and Hyeongwoo are students at the school.
Hyeongwoo is twenty-three years old. He’s from Korea. He’s a 
beginner student. His class is small, with only five students.
His teacher is Stephen. He’s English. He’s very friendly, and he’s a very 
good teacher.
Rike is nineteen years old. She’s from Germany. She’s an intermediate 
student, and her class is big, with eleven students.
Her teacher is Laura. She’s English. She’s really nice, and she’s a very 
good teacher, too.
When Rike and Hyeongwoo aren’t in class, they’re in the computer 
room…or here, in the canteen. In the evening they’re at home.
Rike and Hyeongwoo live in a student house. It’s near the school.
It’s a big house with five bedrooms, a kitchen, and a garden.
Brighton is great for students like Rike and Hyeongwoo. The people 
are friendly, and the town is exciting and fun!
b Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–8. 
Model the pronunciation of Brighton and Bournemouth 
and tell Sts that these are two towns on the south coast of 
England where there are a lot of language schools.
 Play the video again the whole way through.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
1 Brighton  2 isn’t  3 students  4 23  5 Stephen   
6 German  7 teacher  8 is
c Focus on the task and make sure Sts know all the words in 
the list.
 Give Sts time to read the five sentences from the video. 
 Play the extracts video once the whole way through.
1 Brighton is in the south of England.
2 It’s a big school with about three hundred and fifty students.
3 His class is small, with only five students.
4 …they’re in the computer room…or here, in the canteen.
5 It’s a big house with five bedrooms, a kitchen, and a garden.
 Then play the video again, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to complete the gaps.
 Check answers.
1 south  2 big  3 small  4 computer room, canteen  
5 bedrooms, kitchen, garden
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 2.27 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 2B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Focus on Titles in the information box and go through it 
with the class. Highlight that Ms and Mrs are both used for 
women. Ms can be for either a married or single woman, 
but Mrs always indicates that the woman is married.
 Note that there is no question for the Title line. This is 
because people would not normally ask What is your title?
 Now focus on the instructions for a. Point out that the 
questions correspond to the spaces in the form. Also 
point out to Sts that the first one, What’s your name?, has 
been done (f) for them.
 Give Sts time to match each question to a part of the form. 
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
2 d  3 a  4 h  5 c  6 e  7 b  8 g
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to cover the questions and just 
look at the form. Elicit the questions from individual Sts or 
from the class. 
 Now focus on Capital letters in the information box and 
go through it with the class.
 Focus on the instructions for b and give Sts a few minutes 
to complete the form for themselves. Tell Sts to invent the 
information if they want to.
 Monitor and check that they are doing it correctly. Help as 
needed.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
b Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Personal information, A on p.79 and  
B on p.83. 
 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Remind 
them how to say email addresses, and tell them to spell 
names, surnames, and street names so that their partner 
can complete the form correctly.
 Sit A and B face to face if possible.  Sts A start by 
interviewing Sts B and writing the information in the form. 
 Monitor and help. Encourage Sts to use the correct 
sentence rhythm when asking the questions.
 Sts B then interview Sts A and complete their form.
 When they have finished, get them to compare forms. 
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
6 r VIDEO LISTENING
 This is the first of six Video Listenings, which are 
incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable to 
show the video in class, remind Sts that they can find the 
video on Online Practice and ask them to watch the video 
and do the activities for homework.
a Focus on the task. Tell Sts they are going to watch a 
programme about a language school in England.
 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the question.
 Elicit Sts’ opinions.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Meet the students
Hello, I’m Alicia. Today I’m in Brighton.
Brighton is in the south of England. It’s on the coast. It’s a fantastic 
town, and it’s famous for the Royal Pavilion, the pier, and the beach.
But I’m not on holiday. I’m here to visit an English language school.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 34@@
34
Revise and Check
1&2 Revise and Check
c
1 Open  2 Sorry, down  3 know  4 me, what’s, repeat   
5 number, email
d
1 a chair  2 the door  3 a pen  4 the board
PRONUNCIATION
a 
1 /iː/ tree  2 /əʊ/ phone  3 /ɪ/ fish  4 /ʃ/ shower   
5 /h/ house
c 
1 Chinese  2 fifty  3 fifteen  4 tomorrow  5 German
CAN YOU understand this text?
First name
Mark
Bianca
Jacek
Surname
Davis
Costa
Popko
Age
28
20
40
Nationality
American
Brazilian
Polish
Marital 
status
single
single
married
Occupation
teacher
student
doctor
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 c  2 b  3 c  4 a  5 c
e 2.28
1
I = interviewer, J = Jayna
I What’s your name?
J Jayna.
I How do you spell it?
J J-A-Y-N-A.
2
I = interviewer, V = Vera
I Where are you from?
V I’m from Russia.
I Where in Russia?
V Er, Moscow – capital.
3
I = interviewer, R = Richard
I How old are you?
R I’m sixty-six.
4
I = interviewer, M = Mairi
I What’s your mobile phone number?
M It’s zero seven five six, four three seven eight.
5
I = interviewer, Ia = Iain
I What’s your email address?
Ia It’s Iain dot Smith at yahoo dot com.
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, 
in class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and 
the class time available.
The first part revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 
50 (grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), 
so you can use the first part as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. 
The pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank on 
pp.134–135. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the video showing the mouth position for each sound. If you 
don’t want to use this in class, tell Sts to look at it at home 
and to practise making the sounds and saying the words.
The second part presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a 
slightly higher level than those in the File, but which revises 
grammar and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The 
listening is some unscripted street interviews, where people 
are asked questions related to the topics in the Files. Sts can 
either watch the interviews on video or listen to them on 
audio. You can find these on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, Class DVD, and Class Audio CDs 
(audio only). Alternatively, you could set this section / activity 
as homework. Sts can find the video on Online Practice. 
Finally, there is a speaking challenge which assesses Sts’ 
ability to use the language of the Files orally. You could get 
Sts to do these activities in pairs, or Sts can tick the boxes if 
they feel confident that they can do them.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Can you understand these people? 1&2 
Quick Test 2 
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 a  2 b  3 b  4 a  5 b  6 a  7 b  8 a  9 a  10 b   
11 a  12 b  13 a  14 b  15 b
VOCABULARY
a
1 Turkish  2 Switzerland  3 American  4 England   
5 Egypt  6 Japanese
b
1 two  2 seven  3 thirteen  4 twenty-one  5 Thursday   
6 Sunday
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 35@@
3A
35
 3A Where are my keys?
 G  singular and plural nouns, a / an
 V  small things
 P  /z/ and /s/, plural endings
Lesson plan
This lesson is about things that people normally carry 
around with them, and how to form and use singular and 
plural nouns.
The lesson begins with Vocabulary, and Sts learn the 
words for common small objects. Then, in Grammar, real 
information about things people lose every day and have 
to look for provides the context for learning plural nouns. 
Sts also learn the difference between a and an, although 
the concept of articles has already been introduced in 
Vocabulary Bank The classroom in 1 Things in the 
classroom in Practical English 1. This is followed by a 
pronunciation focus first on the /z/ sound, and then on 
plural endings – /z/, /s/, and /ɪz/. In a listening activity, Sts 
hear some short announcements and conversations in 
which the objects mentioned will help them to identify what 
is happening. Finally, in a speaking activity, Sts try to identify 
some of the things from the Vocabulary Bank, photographed 
from a strange angle, and then they talk about what they 
have in their pocket or bag.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar singular and plural nouns; a / an p.140 
Communicative The same or different? p.175  
(instructions p.161) 
Vocabulary Things p.213 (instructions p.203)
For students
Workbook 3A
Online Practice 3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
To revise vocabulary and spelling, play Hangman with a 
word from Vocabulary Bank The classroom in 1 Things in 
the classroom on p.118, e.g. dictionary, chair, coat, etc. (See 
p.21 for instructions on how to play Hangman.) Don’t use any 
of the four words in 1a.
1 VOCABULARY small things
a Books open. Focus on the task.
 Give Sts time to write the words for the four objects.
 Check answers by eliciting the missing letters onto the 
board.
1 book  2 laptop  3 phone  4 photo
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Small things on p.119.
Vocabulary notes
Point out that we only use a or an with singular nouns 
(this will be focused on in detail in Grammar Bank 3A). 
Glasses is a plural noun, although it is one object, like 
trousers, headphones, scissors, and other things that have 
two parts. For this reason, we don’t say a glasses.
Complete beginners may feel a bit overwhelmed with 
the number of new items to learn. This would be a good 
moment to talk to them about strategies to help them 
to remember new words, e.g. writing them on cards 
and sticking them up round their study, copying them 
into a vocabulary notebook, and above all, using all the 
resources on Online Practice to test themselves. 
 Focus on the title, Small things, tell Sts to quickly look at 
the photo, and elicit what the title means.
  e 3.1 Focus on the instructions for a. Play the audio 
for Sts to listen and repeat the words in chorus. Pause 
the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and 
the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 3.1
See Small things in Student’s Book on p.119
 Focus on the a / an and ph box and go through it with 
the class. Elicit / Explain that we use an in front of a noun 
when it starts with a vowel sound, e.g. an umbrella, an ID 
card. 
 Focus on b and get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photo, and say the words. They could do this individually 
or with a partner. Remind Sts to use a or an with all of the 
nouns except glasses.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems they are having. Write the words on the board 
and model and drill the ones that Sts find difficult.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 GRAMMAR singular and plural nouns, a / an
a Focus on the instructions. Read the title and the 
introduction. You could use Sts’ L1 or a simple mime to 
elicit the meaning of look for. Make it clear that the things 
are not in order.
 Give Sts a minute or so to read the list and then, in pairs, 
guess what the top four things (in order) are that people 
look for every day. Tell them not to write anything in the 
boxes yet.
 Elicit some ideas from Sts and write them on the board, 
but don’t tell them if they are correct or not. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 36@@
3A
36
b e 3.2 Tell Sts they are going to hear the answers and 
that the audio goes from 8 to 1. Play the audio, pausing 
after each number for Sts to number the things in a 1–8.
 Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
8 wallets and purses  7 umbrellas  6 bank cards   
5 phone chargers  4 glasses and sunglasses   3 pens and 
pencils  2 mobile phones  1 keys (house and car)
e 3.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
What are the top things people look for every day?
At number eight, it’s…wallets and purses.
At number seven, umbrellas.
At number six, bank cards – credit cards or debit cards.
At number five, phone chargers.
And now for the top four:
At number four, glasses and sunglasses.
At number three, pens and pencils.
And at number two, mobile phones.
And at number one – yes, that’s right – keys. House keys and  
car keys.
So, try to find a safe place…
 Find out if any Sts guessed all of the top four correctly.
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
 Finally, find out if this order is true for any of the Sts. You 
could tell them which things you always look for.
c Remind Sts of the concept of singular and plural by 
showing Sts a pen and saying a pen. Then show the class 
three pens and say pens. Write on the board:
 
SINGULAR = (A) PEN  
PLURAL = PENS
 Focus on the chart and point out that the first one (pencil) 
has been done for them.
 Now give Sts time to complete the chart.
 Check answers. 
1 four pencils
2 a laptop, two laptops
3 an umbrella, three umbrellas
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.96. 
Grammar notes
singular nouns, a / an
You may want to point out to Sts that not all words 
that begin with vowels begin with a vowel sound – 
for example, several words which begin with u are 
pronounced /juː/, e.g. university, so it’s a university (NOT an 
university).
Also, sometimes a word that starts with a vowel sound has 
the consonant h as the first letter. For now, the only word 
Sts will encounter soon is the word hour. The h is silent, 
and we write and say an hour.
plural nouns
Irregular plurals are dealt with in 4A.
Regular nouns form the plural by adding an s. The only 
problem is the pronunciation, as the final s is sometimes 
pronounced /z/, e.g. keys, and sometimes /s/, e.g. books. 
This will be dealt with in Pronunciation.
-es is added to nouns ending in -ch, -sh, -ss, and -x (e.g. 
watch – watches). This is because it would be impossible 
to pronounce the word if only an s were added. (NOT 
watchs)
The -sh ending is not in the chart because Sts don’t yet 
know any words ending in -sh, but you may want to point 
this out, e.g. brush – brushes.
With words ending in consonant + y, the y changes to i 
and -es is added.
With compound nouns, e.g. credit card and identity card,  
s is only added to the second noun when plural.
These rules for forming plural nouns are important 
because they are also true for verbs in the third person in 
the present simple.
the
Explain that we use the to refer to something specific, e.g. 
look at the board, open the door, close the windows. We can 
use the with singular and plural nouns.
Articles are easy for some nationalities and more difficult 
for others, depending on their L1. If articles are a problem 
for your Sts, give more examples to highlight the 
difference between a / an and the, e.g. What is it? It’s a door 
(explaining what it is) and Open the door (talking about a 
specific door, e.g. the door of the classroom).
 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 3.3 and e 3.4 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the information box about the and go through it 
with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 3A on p.97 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 It’s a phone.
2 They’re watches.
3 It’s an umbrella.
4 They’re dictionaries.
5 They’re keys.
6 They’re cities.
7 It’s an email.
8 They’re passports.
9 It’s a tablet.
b
1 What are they? They’re books.
2 What is it? It’s a bag.
3 What are they? They’re glasses.
4 What is it? It’s a (phone) charger.
5 What is it? It’s an ID card.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point. 
e Tell Sts to go to Communication Memory game on p.81.
 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them that they have 30 seconds to 
look at the photo. Make sure nobody is taking notes or 
writing.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 37@@
3A
37
* Voiced and unvoiced consonants
• Voiced consonant sounds are made in the throat 
by vibrating the vocal chords, e.g. /b/, /l/, /m/, /v/, /z/. 
Unvoiced consonant sounds are made in the mouth, 
without vibration in the throat, e.g. /f/, /k/, /p/, /t/, 
/s/, etc.
• You can demonstrate this to Sts by getting them 
to hold their hands against their throats. For voiced 
sounds, they should feel a vibration in their throat, but 
not for unvoiced sounds. However, a common error, 
which is easier to help Sts with, is the tendency to add 
the /ɪz/ pronunciation to nouns which don’t need it, 
e.g. files as /faɪlɪz/, etc. This rule, i.e. when to pronounce 
-es as /ɪz/, is the main focus of the exercises here.
a e 3.5 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 3.5
See words and sound in Student’s Book on p.18
 Focus on the sound picture zebra. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after zebra. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /z/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
b  e 3.6 Focus on the three sounds for plural endings and 
elicit that the second picture is the snake (/s/ sound), and 
the third is /ɪz/.
 Explain to Sts that the plural s is usually pronounced /z/, 
e.g. bags, but can also be /s/, e.g. books. Highlight 
that the -es ending is pronounced /ɪz/ after certain 
combinations of letters, and give Sts the spelling rules 
in the Pronunciation notes. It would help to give them 
an example for each spelling of the final -es ending, e.g. 
pieces, watches, pages, brushes, buses, boxes.
 Focus on the sound picture zebra and on the plural words 
after it. Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Give further practice, as necessary, using choral 
and individual repetition.
 Now repeat the same process for snake /s/ and the /ɪz/ sound.
e 3.6
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.18
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could tell Sts that /s/ is the sound 
made by a snake (sssss) and /z/ is the sound made by a bee 
or mosquito (zzzzz).
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c e 3.7 Focus on the task and the example. Play the audio, 
and pause after It’s a photo for Sts to say They’re photos in 
chorus. You could also demonstrate by saying a sentence 
yourself and eliciting the plural from the class, e.g.   
T It’s a bag.  Sts They’re bags.
 Give Sts exactly 30 seconds. Then tell them to close their 
books.
 Get each pair to write down as many things as they 
remember.
 Call on pairs to read their lists, to see if any pair 
remembered all the items. Reporting Sts should use a or 
an when there was only one of an item, e.g. an umbrella.
a bag, a (phone) charger, a wallet, an umbrella, two watches, 
two passports, a camera, a mobile phone, a notebook, three 
dictionaries, five photos, a tablet, glasses (one pair), a credit card, 
six pencils, three keys
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
3 PRONUNCIATION /z/ and /s/, plural endings
Pronunciation notes
/z/ and /s/
For these sounds, the phonetic symbols are the same as 
the alphabet letters. 
The letter z is always pronounced /z/, e.g. zero, magazine. 
This is a voiced* sound.
The letter s at the beginning of a word is nearly always 
pronounced /s/. This is an unvoiced* sound.
NB Sts will learn the exceptions sure and sugar, where s is 
pronounced /ʃ/, later in the course. 
The letter s in the middle or at the end of a word can be 
pronounced /s/ or /z/:
• In the middle of a word, it can be /s/, e.g. glasses, or /z/, 
e.g. music. 
• At the end of a word, for example in plurals, it can be 
pronounced /s/, e.g. thanks, or /z/, e.g. bags.
Plural endings
When plural nouns end in -s, the s is either pronounced 
/z/ or /s/, depending on the previous sound.
The -s ending on most plural nouns is pronounced /z/ 
when it is added to voiced sounds, e.g. mobiles, doors,  
keys.
The -s ending is pronounced /s/ after the voiced sounds 
/f/, /k/, /p/, /t/, e.g. books, wallets.
The final -es is pronounced /ɪz/ for words ending in -ce, 
-ch, -ge, -sh, -s, and -x, e.g. pieces, watches, pages, etc. This 
adds one more syllable to the word. Show Sts that after 
these sounds, it is very difficult to add only an /s/ sound. 
This is why the extra syllable is added.
-ies is always pronounced /iːz/, e.g. countries.
 !  The difference between /z/ and /s/ is small and not 
easy for Sts to notice or produce at this level. However, it 
is useful to make Sts aware that s can be /z/ or /s/, and to 
point out which sound it is on new words that have an s 
in them.
The most important thing with plurals at this level is to 
help Sts to learn when final -es is pronounced /ɪz/, e.g. 
watches, and when it isn’t, e.g. phones.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 38@@
3A
38
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Before playing the audio again, get Sts to 
look at the photos and write the name of each small thing. 
Then play the audio for them to listen and check.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.88, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
5 SPEAKING
a Focus on the photos and the speech bubbles. 
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Focus on photo 1 and elicit from 
an A the question (What is it?), and then elicit the answer 
from a B (It’s a watch). Now elicit from a B the question 
for photo 2 (What are they?) and from an A the answer 
(They’re books).
 Monitor and help with pronunciation, and make sure Sts 
are asking the correct question.
 When Sts have finished, check answers by asking 
individual Sts.
3 They’re wallets.  4 They’re keys.  5 They’re credit cards.   
6 It’s a (phone) charger.  7 It’s a (mobile) phone.   
8 They’re pieces of paper.  9 It’s a camera.   
10 They’re pens.  11 It’s a laptop.  12 They’re passports.
b Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of pocket. Demonstrate the activity by taking 
something out of your bag / pocket and asking Sts which 
word to tick.
 Now give Sts time to see what they have in their bag / 
pocket.
 Ask them to tick the things they have. 
c Focus on the instructions and the speech bubble, and 
elicit / explain the meaning of I have. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner about 
the things they ticked in b.
EXTRA IDEA  Tell Sts which of the things in the list you have 
in your bag / pocket.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to guess what they think their 
partner has. Write on the board: I THINK YOU HAVE… 
You could get them to guess about you first. 
d This exercise gives Sts the opportunity to name other 
things they have in their bag / pocket. Encourage them to 
ask you the question (How do you say…in English? How do 
you spell it?), and spell the words to them.
 Finally, write all the new words on the board.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 3.9 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 3A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Then play the audio and pause after the second sentence 
It’s a key. Ask Sts what the plural is (keys). Make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do before continuing.
 Play the rest of the audio and give Sts time to say the 
plural in chorus. Correct pronunciation as necessary.
e 3.7
1 It’s a photo. (pause) They’re photos.
2 It’s a key. (pause) They’re keys.
3 It’s a passport. (pause) They’re passports.
4 It’s a phone. (pause) They’re phones.
5 It’s a watch. (pause) They’re watches.
6 It’s a pencil. (pause) They’re pencils.
7 It’s a book. (pause) They’re books.
8 It’s a purse. (pause) They’re purses.
9 It’s a credit card. (pause) They’re credit cards.
 10 It’s a page. (pause) They’re pages.
 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
4 LISTENING
a e 3.8 Focus on the instructions and the photos. Explain 
that Sts are going to hear five short conversations and 
they have to match them to the photos. You could tell 
them that in each conversation, they will hear a word that 
they have just learned in the Vocabulary Bank.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just  
to listen. 
e 3.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
1 Please take out your laptops... All laptops out of cases, please.
2 Please switch off all mobile phones and electronic devices.
3 A Excuse me, is this your bag?
 
B Oh yes! Thanks very much!
4 A Hi. My name’s Sam Smith. I have a reservation.
 
B Can I see your passport, please?
 
A Sure, here you are.
5 A OK, Ms Jones, you’re in room three one five. Here’s your key.
 
B Thank you very much. Er, where’s the lift?
 Now play the first situation again, pause, and elicit the 
answer (photo D). Make sure Sts write 1 in the correct box.
 Then play the other four situations, pausing after each one 
to give Sts time to write the numbers.
 Check answers and elicit where each situation is taking 
place (1 airport security, 2 on a plane, 3 in a taxi, 4 and 5 
in hotels). 
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2 B  3 E  4 A  5 C
b Now tell Sts to listen again, and this time they must write 
the word for the small thing(s) from the Vocabulary Bank 
that they hear in each conversation. Tell them to listen 
carefully to hear whether the things are singular or plural.
 Play the audio, pausing after each situation to give Sts 
time to write.
 Check answers.
1 laptops  2 mobile phones  3 bag  4 passport  5 key
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 39@@
39
3B
 3B Souvenirs
b Focus on the photo of the souvenir stall and point out 
that all the items in a are numbered in the photo. Tell Sts 
to cover a, look at the photo, and say the words. They 
could do this individually or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Say a number to the class to elicit the 
souvenir, e.g.  
T five  Sts a mug
c Do this as a whole-class activity. Write any new words on 
the board, and model and drill their pronunciation.
2 LISTENING
a e 3.11 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand that they have to write the prices of the items. 
Elicit that the £ symbol is for UK pounds, and model and 
drill the pronunciation /paʊnd/. 
 Give Sts time to look at the pictures and read the 
conversation. Ask Sts where the people are (probably in 
London) and elicit that the woman is probably a tourist. 
 Play the audio, pausing after each section to give Sts time 
to write. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1 15  2 6  3 14  4 25
e 3.11
W = woman, M = man
W Excuse me. What are those?
M They’re T-shirts.
W How much are they?
M They’re fifteen pounds.
W And how much are these key rings?
M They’re six pounds.
W And this mug?
M Fourteen pounds.
W Is that a Manchester United shirt?
M No, it’s Arsenal.
W How much is it?
M Twenty-five pounds.
W Oh…no. Thank you. Bye.
 Go through the conversation and explain / elicit the 
following:
• Oh is not a word, just a noise we make when we react 
to something that someone has said.
• the question How much is it / are they? is used to ask 
about the price. 
b e 3.12 Play the audio again and get Sts to repeat each 
line in chorus.
e 3.12
Same as script 3.11 with repeat pauses
 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversation.
 G  this / that / these / those
 V  souvenirs
 P  /ð/, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is buying souvenirs.
First, a photo of a souvenir stall in London is used to teach 
Sts the vocabulary for typical souvenirs. Then a conversation 
between a tourist and the stallholder provide the context for 
introducing the grammar of demonstrative pronouns this, 
that, these, and those.
In Pronunciation, Sts practise the voiced th sound /ð/ used in 
the demonstrative pronouns, and work on sentence rhythm. 
The language is brought together in the final speaking 
activity, in which Sts role-play buying and selling souvenirs.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar this / that / these / those p.141  
Communicative What’s this? What are these? p.176 
(instructions p.162)
For students
Workbook 3B
Online Practice 3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
To revise vocabulary for small things, put Sts in pairs or small 
groups. Give them 30 seconds to look at Vocabulary Bank 
Small things on p.119. Then get them to close their books. 
Give them one minute exactly to write down as many small 
things as they can. 
When the time is up, ask Sts how many words they have. Get 
the pair / group with the most words to spell them to you 
as you write them on the board. They get a point for each 
correct answer.
Finally, tell Sts that in this lesson, they are now going to 
learn vocabulary for souvenirs. Check they understand the 
meaning, and model and drill pronunciation /suːvəˈnɪəz/.
1 VOCABULARY souvenirs
a e 3.10 Books open. Focus on the photo of the souvenir 
stall in b and, if you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, make 
sure Sts understand the meaning of the word souvenir. 
Model and drill pronunciation /suːvəˈnɪə/.
 Now focus on the instructions in a and make sure Sts 
understand what each item is.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just 
to listen.
e 3.10
See words in Student’s Book on p.20
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 40@@
40
3B
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 3.14 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the information box and go through it with  
the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 3B on p.97 and get Sts 
to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 Are those your T-shirts?
2 These are my children.
3 Is that your phone over there?
4 Look at these! They’re great.
5 Who’s that? Is he your brother?
b
1 It’s a key ring from New York.
2 And these are sunglasses.
3 They’re great!
4 Are those mugs?
5 Yes, they are.
6 And this is a plate for Jenny.
7 What’s that?
8 It’s a T-shirt.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING /ð/,  
 sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
/ð/
The letters th can be pronounced two ways in English, /θ/ 
or /ð/. Sts have already been exposed to both sounds, /θ/ 
in three, thirteen, Thursday, thank you, etc., and /ð/ in they, 
the, and brother.
Here the focus is on the /ð/ sound, which occurs in this, 
that, these, and those.
Sts may have problems with this sound, as it may not exist 
in their language. 
Show Sts the correct position of the mouth with the 
tongue behind the teeth and moving forward between 
the teeth as the /ð/ sound is made, or use the Sound Bank 
videos on the Teacher’s Resource Centre. Model the sound 
and have Sts put their hands on their throats to feel the 
vibration of the voiced sound.
It is worth making Sts aware that th can be pronounced in 
two different ways, but at this stage it may not be helpful 
to compare them too much.
c e 3.13 Focus on the instructions and elicit / explain 
the meaning of the question What does the woman buy? 
Model and drill pronunciation. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 3.13
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
M Excuse me, Miss. Is this your phone?
W Oh! Yes, it is. Thank you very much.
M You’re welcome. It’s a very nice phone! The new iPhone.
W Sorry? Oh yes. 
M A souvenir for your family? A football shirt is only twenty-five 
pounds!
W OK. An Arsenal football shirt, please.
M And a T-shirt? 
W Yes, and a T-shirt!
 Then play it again and get Sts to answer the question. 
 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
An Arsenal football shirt and a T-shirt
 Go through the conversation and explain / elicit that 
You’re welcome is a common response to Thanks or 
Thank you. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.88, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
3 GRAMMAR this / that / these / those
a Focus on the chart and elicit the meaning of singular and 
plural. Elicit / Demonstrate the difference between here 
and there. Point out that the first one (this) has been done 
for Sts.
 Get Sts to complete the chart.
 Check answers.
here
there
singular
this
that
plural
these
those
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.96. 
Grammar notes
this / that / these / those 
The words this and these are used for things within reach 
of or near the speaker. That and those are for things that 
are out of reach or farther away.
The best way to explain the words is to demonstrate. 
Touch something that is close to you and say, e.g., This is a 
book or These are pencils. Then point at something across 
the room and say, e.g., That’s a board or Those are bags.
This / These are often used with the word here, e.g. Is this 
your book here? That / Those are often used with there / 
over there, e.g. Is that your bag (over) there?
That is is often contracted as That’s. However, there are no 
contracted forms for this is or these / those are.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 41@@
41
3B
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 mug, 9  2 cap, 12  3 plates, 15  4 T-shirts, 20  5 caps, 24
c This exercise focuses on sentence rhythm. Play the audio 
again and tell Sts to listen to the sentence rhythm. You 
could also point out that in the questions What are these? 
and What are those? are is pronounced /ə/ because it is 
unstressed.
 Now play the audio again, pausing once after each 
question for Sts to listen and repeat, and then again 
after each answer for Sts to repeat that, too. Encourage 
them to try and copy the rhythm on the audio. Give 
further practice as necessary, using choral and individual 
repetition.
 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get one to ask the questions 
and the other to answer. Monitor and help with 
pronunciation and sentence rhythm.
 Then get Sts to swap roles.
d Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication How much are these watches?, A on 
p.79 and B on p.83.
 Go over the instructions and speech bubbles, and make 
sure Sts are clear about what they have to do. They take 
turns asking their partner questions about the items with 
blank price tags. They need to use this / these for things 
which are in touching distance, at the front of the stall, 
and that / those for things which are at the back of the 
stall, out of reach.
 When Sts have asked and answered about all the items, 
get some feedback from the class, e.g. The mugs are £13.
EXTRA SUPPORT  For reference, write the following on the 
board:  
HOW MUCH IS…? / HOW MUCH ARE…?  
IT’S… / THEY’RE…
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 3.17 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 3B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
Sentence rhythm
Remind Sts that in English the words that carry the 
important information are said more strongly than others, 
e.g. in What’s your name?, What and name are stressed 
more strongly than your.
Generally speaking, question words, nouns, verbs, 
adjectives, etc. are usually stressed, whereas small words 
like articles, pronouns, and prepositions are not. It is this 
mixture of stressed and unstressed words which gives 
English its characteristic rhythm. 
Even at this low level, it is good to help Sts, through these 
exercises, to begin to get a feel for English sentence 
rhythm. 
As well as helping their spoken English, an awareness of 
the fact that important words are stressed more strongly 
will help with Sts’ understanding. They can be encouraged 
to listen out for the stressed words in a sentence and 
deduce overall meaning from them.
a e 3.15 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 3.15
See words and sound in Student’s Book on p.21
 Focus on the sound picture mother. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and sound (pause after the 
sound). 
 Now focus on the words after mother. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ð/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each word or the group of words for Sts to listen and 
repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
b e 3.16 Focus on the task and questions 1–5. Ask Sts 
what kind of information these questions are asking for 
(prices). Elicit that the missing words are either a thing or 
things, and prices.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just 
to listen.
e 3.16
1 How much is this mug?
 
It’s nine pounds.
2 How much is that cap?
 
It’s twelve pounds.
3 How much are these plates?
 
They’re fifteen pounds.
4 How much are those T-shirts?
 
They’re twenty pounds.
5 Two caps, please.
 
That’s twenty-four pounds.
 Now play it again, pausing after each conversation to give 
Sts time to write.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 42@@
EPISODE
PE2
42
 2 
 Practical English Can I have an 
orange juice, please?
e 3.18
See prices in Student’s Book on p.22
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice as necessary.
b Draw the symbols for pounds, dollars, and euros on the 
board and elicit what currency they refer to.
 Focus on the instructions and the example. 
 Get Sts to continue matching the prices and words. 
Monitor and deal with any problems.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c e 3.19 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
2 D  3 F  4 C  5 A  6 G  7 J  8 I  9 E  10 B
e 3.19
1 H twelve pounds seventy-five
2 D fifteen euros ninety-nine
3 F fifty dollars nineteen 
4 C five pounds thirty-five
5 A thirteen dollars twenty-five 
6 G three euros twenty
7 J twenty-five cents
8 I one pound fifty
9 E sixty pence
 10 B eighty cents
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each price for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
 Highlight that we don’t use and between pounds and 
pence or between euros and cents in British English (e.g. 
NOT two pounds and twenty), and that we normally only 
use the word pence / cents for an amount that is less than 
a pound / euro (e.g. fifty cents). 
d Tell Sts to cover the words A–J and look at the prices 1–10.
 Give them time to practise saying the prices. Monitor and 
correct any mistakes.
 Then with the prices in words still covered, elicit the prices 
one by one from the class.
EXTRA IDEA  Write some more prices in the three currencies 
on the board for extra practice.
e e 3.20 Focus on the four items and the different prices, 
and elicit them from the class.
 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation for Sts to 
listen and circle the correct price. Play again.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
 You could point out to Sts that native speakers are often 
unsure whether a price is, for example,  2.50 or 2.15 and 
might query it, asking Five oh or one five?
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1 $2.50  2 €15  3 $9.49  4 £30.20
Function understanding prices, buying lunch
 P  /ʊə/, /s/, and /k/
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts learn how to ask for food and drink 
in a restaurant, café, or pub, and how to say prices in 
pounds, dollars, and euros. They also revise asking how 
much something is, which they learned in the previous 
lesson. There is a pronunciation focus on the /ʊə/, /s/, 
and /k/ sounds, which they need to get right in order to 
pronounce the currencies correctly. Language for buying 
something to eat and drink is presented through Rob buying 
lunch in a pub. Sts then go on to practise buying a drink and 
something to eat from the same menu.
The language is further consolidated through listening to 
Jenny and her friend buying lunch in a New York deli. Finally, 
Sts focus on the useful phrases from the lesson.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative Can I have an orange juice, please? p.177 
(instructions p.162)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 2 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 2  
Can you remember? 1–3
Online Practice  Practical English 2  
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise numbers 11–99 by giving Sts a dictation. Dictate 
ten numbers and ask Sts to write them down. Make sure 
you write the numbers down as you say them. Get them to 
compare with a partner, and then check answers.
Now tell Sts to choose five numbers of their own and to 
write them on a piece of paper. Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and 
ask A to dictate their numbers for B to write down. Then get 
Sts to swap roles. Monitor and make a note of any problems.
Ask Sts to check answers by comparing the numbers they 
wrote with the numbers their partner wrote. 
Correct any mistakes on the board.
1 UNDERSTANDING PRICES
a e 3.18 Books open. Focus on the money pictures and 
elicit where they are from (Britain, the EU (the European 
Union), and the United States). You may want to point out 
that not all countries in the EU use the euro.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. Highlight that pence can be shortened to p /piː/.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 43@@
PE2
43
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
 Focus on the The letter c box and go through it with Sts.
EXTRA IDEA  Write these sentences on the board:
1 IN EUROPE A LOT OF COUNTRIES USE THE EURO.
2 THE CINEMA TICKET IS SIX EUROS AND SIXTY CENTS. 
3 CAN I HAVE A COFFEE, PLEASE? 
Model the first sentence. Repeat the sentence and get Sts to 
repeat it. Do the same with sentences 2 and 3. Then put Sts 
in pairs and get them to practise saying the sentences. Get a 
few Sts to say the sentences in front of the class.
3 r BUYING LUNCH
a e 3.22 Focus on the title and photo, and explain /  
elicit the meaning of Buying lunch. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
 Now focus on the menu and answer any questions about 
vocabulary. If possible, show pictures of the different 
foods and drinks, e.g. pie, cheese, tuna, mineral water, etc. If 
Sts don’t recognize the word burger, write HAMBURGER on 
the board and strike through HAM. You might also want to 
point out that Coca-Cola is the real name for Coke, but in 
the UK people just say Coke.
 Give Sts time to read the menu.
 Now play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and 
repeat the food, drinks, and prices. 
e 3.22
See menu in Student’s Book on p.22
 You could help Sts by writing the multi-syllable words on 
the board and underlining the stressed syllables (BURGER, 
SANDWICHES, TUNA, SALAD, CHICKEN, MINERAL WATER, ORANGE 
JUICE, COFFEE), or you could ask them to listen again and 
underline the stressed syllables.
 Then drill the words in chorus and individually.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  In pairs or as a class, get Sts to tell you 
the prices of each item on the menu before they listen to 
the audio.
b Put Sts in pairs and focus on the task and the example. 
Model and drill the question.
 Highlight that Sts should use a singular question for all the 
items, even ones which are plural on the menu, because 
they are just asking for the price of an individual one 
(e.g. How much is a pie / a sandwich?). Quickly elicit the 
questions from the class and then demonstrate a couple 
of questions and answers with a good student. Remind 
Sts to use an, not a, with orange juice.
 Now get Sts to practise in pairs. Monitor and help.
 Make sure they swap roles.
c e 3.23 Focus on the photo and ask Sts who the man on 
the right is (Rob). Ask Sts what they can remember about 
him from the previous Practical English lesson. Ask Sts 
where he is now (In a pub). Elicit that the other man is a 
barman, and model and drill pronunciation.
e 3.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
M = man, W = woman
1
M The New York Times, please.
W Here you are.
M How much is it?
W It’s two dollars fifty.
2
M An umbrella, please.
W For how much? 
M Fifteen euros, please.
W Here you are.
M Thanks.
3
M1 A memory card, please.
M2 Two gigs or four?
M1 Two, please. How much is it?
M2 Nine dollars forty-nine.
M1 Is a credit card OK?
M2 Sure.
4
W A one-way ticket to Oxford, please.
M Thirty pounds twenty p, please.
W Here you are.
M Thank you.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.88, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
2 PRONUNCIATION /ʊə/, /s/, and /k/
Pronunciation notes
The /ʊə/ sound is not a very common sound in English. 
You might like to point out that the sound is a diphthong, 
i.e. two sounds (a combination of /ʊ/ and /ə/).
eu is usually pronounced /ʊə/, and three of the most 
common words with eu are euro, Europe, and European.
The aim of the section on /s/ and /k/ is to help Sts with 
two pronunciations of the letter c.
You might like to highlight the following sound–spelling 
rules.
• The letter c is pronounced /s/ before the vowels e and i, 
e.g. centre, city, nice, piece, pencil.
• The letter c is pronounced /k/ before consonants and 
before the letters a, o, and u, e.g. class, cat, computer, 
coat, picture.
 e 3.21 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 3.21
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.22
 Focus on the sound picture tourist. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and the sound (pause after the 
sound).
 Now focus on the words after tourist. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ʊə/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for snake /s/ and key /k/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 44@@
44
PE2
 Now focus on the instructions and the question. Highlight 
that the prices are going to be in dollars.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and find out how much Jenny’s lunch 
cost. 
 Check the answer.  
Jenny’s lunch is $9.70. 
e 3.25
(script in Student’s Book on p.88)
A = assistant, J = Jenny, Am = Amy
A Hi. How can I help you?
J Hi. How much is this tuna salad? 
A It’s seven twenty.
J OK, fine. And this mineral water, please.
A That’s nine dollars seventy cents.
J Here you are.
A Thank you. Have a nice day.
***
Am Jenny!
J Amy! Hi, how are you?
Am I’m fine. How are you?
J I’m fine, too.
Am What’s that? 
J Oh, just a salad and some water.
Am You are good! Look, wait for me. We can have lunch together in 
the park.
J Sure! Great idea.
Am Can I have a cheese sandwich, a cappuccino, and a brownie, 
please?
h Focus on the chart and tell Sts they need to watch or 
listen and find out what Jenny and Amy have for lunch.
 Play the video / audio again for Sts to listen and complete 
the chart.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Jenny a tuna salad and mineral water
Amy a cheese sandwich, a cappuccino, and a brownie
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
4 r USEFUL PHRASES
 e 3.26 Focus on the phrases and make sure Sts 
understand what each one means.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 3.26
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.23
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
 Focus on the menu. Explain that they have to tick 
the items that Rob asks for. Make sure they cover the 
conversation in d.
 Play the video / audio once or twice for Sts to do the task.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
Sts should tick: a cheese sandwich and a Coke.
e 3.23
B = barman, R = Rob
B Who’s next? 
R Can I have a cheese sandwich, please?
B Anything else? 
R And a Coke, please.
B Ice and lemon?
R No, thanks. 
B There you go.
R Thanks. How much is it?
B Six pounds seventy-five.
R Here you are.
B Thanks. Here’s your change.
d Focus on the instructions and the conversation.
 Then play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the task. Play again as necessary.
 Check answers by playing the video / audio again and 
pausing after each answer.
1 cheese  2 Coke  3 No  4 £6.75  5 are
 Go through the conversation line by line, eliciting / 
explaining any words or phrases Sts don’t know. Highlight 
that Can I have…? is a polite way of ordering food or drink, 
usually with please at the end of the question.
 Highlight also that There you go and Here you are are the 
two common phrases that people use when they give 
something to somebody. There you go is more informal 
than Here you are.
e e 3.24 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat, 
encouraging them to copy the rhythm on the audio. Give 
further practice as necessary.
e 3.24
Same script as 3.23 with repeat pauses
 Put Sts in pairs and assign roles. Give Sts time to practise 
the conversation. Monitor and correct any pronunciation 
mistakes.
 Make sure Sts swap roles.
f Focus on the instructions. Sts role-play a conversation 
using the food items on the menu. Demonstrate the 
activity with a strong student. The student is the barman 
and you order a different food item and a different drink.
 Put Sts in pairs and assign roles. Give them time to role-
play the conversation, ordering different food items and 
drinks. Monitor and help.
 Make sure Sts swap roles.
 Get some pairs to act out the role-play in front of the class.
g e 3.25 Focus on the photos in g and h and ask Sts who 
is in both photos (Jenny). Ask Sts what they can remember 
about her from the previous Practical English lesson. 
Ask who they think the other women might be (the other 
woman in the first photo is the deli assistant, and in the 
second, a friend of Jenny’s called Amy).
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 45@@
45
4A
 4A Meet the family
 G  possessive adjectives, possessive ’s
 V  people and family
 P  /ʌ/, /æ/, and /ə/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is the family.
Sts start by learning the words for people and family 
members in the Vocabulary Bank and also some irregular 
plurals. Then the new vocabulary is supported by the 
pronunciation section, which highlights common sounds 
in the new words. In Grammar, possessive adjectives and 
the possessive ’s are presented through a conversation 
where Sarah, a babysitter, arrives at a couple’s house and is 
introduced to the family.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts listen to a British woman 
showing her birthday card to an Italian friend, and explaining 
who the people who signed it are. The lesson ends with Sts 
talking and writing about their own family.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar possessive adjectives; possessive ’s p.142 
Communicative Family tree p.178 (instructions p.162) 
Vocabulary People and family p.214 (instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook 4A
Online Practice 4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Show Sts a photo of your family, projected onto the board, 
or use a large printed photo. Point to the people in the 
photo and talk about them, e.g. This is my brother. His name’s 
Andrew. He’s 24, etc.
Then write the family words for the people you introduced 
on the board, e.g. FATHER, BROTHER, etc., and model and drill 
the pronunciation.
1 VOCABULARY people and family
a Books open. Focus on the instructions and the four words. 
 Give Sts time to match the words and photos. Even 
complete beginners will probably recognize at least two 
of these words, but if some Sts don’t, then you can elicit 
suggestions from the whole class.
b e 4.1 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers and make sure Sts are clear about the 
meaning of boy, girl, woman, and man. Model and drill the 
pronunciation, especially woman /ˈwʊmən/.
e 4.1
1 a man 
2 a woman
3 a girl
4 a boy
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank People and family on 
p.120. 
Vocabulary notes
Family words in English are different to those in some 
languages where, for example, the word for sister is the 
same as that for brother, but with a feminine ending, 
e.g. hermano, hermana. If this is the case in your Sts’ L1, 
it’s important to point out that if you want to talk about 
brothers and sisters, you must use both words, not just 
the plural of the masculine word, e.g. How many brothers 
and sisters do you have? (= boys or girls), but How many 
brothers do you have? (= only boys). The same applies to 
sons and daughters, though here we tend to use children, 
which covers both.
Depending on your Sts, you may want to teach a few 
other family words, such as stepmother / stepfather, but try 
not to overload them with too much new lexis.
 e 4.2 Look at 1 People and focus on a. Play the audio 
for Sts to listen and repeat the words in chorus. Pause 
the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and the 
pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give further 
practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the words 
yourself, or using the audio, and getting choral and 
individual responses.
e 4.2
See People in Student’s Book on p.120
 e 4.3 Focus on the Irregular plurals box in b and go 
through it with the class. Explain that these four words 
have irregular plurals. Play the audio for Sts to listen 
and repeat the plural words in chorus and individually. 
Highlight how the pronunciation changes in child / 
children and woman / women. Pause and play again as 
necessary. Give further practice as necessary, modelling 
and drilling the words yourself, or using the audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
e 4.3
See Irregular plurals in Student’s Book on p.120
EXTRA SUPPORT  Get Sts to look at the words in a and elicit 
which are plural (children and friends).
 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to look at the photos in 
a and say the words in both the singular and the plural. 
They could do this individually or with a partner. Monitor 
and help. Make a note of any pronunciation problems 
they are having. Write the words on the board and model 
and drill the ones that Sts find difficult.
 e 4.4 Now look at 2 Family. Play the audio for Sts 
to listen and repeat the words in chorus. Pause the 
audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and the 
pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give further 
practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the words 
yourself, or using the audio, and getting choral and 
individual responses.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 46@@
46
4A
e 4.4
See Family in Student’s Book on p.120
 Focus on the parents box and go through it with the class. 
 You may also want to teach the word partner, which is 
very common nowadays to describe the person you are 
either married to or in a relationship with. Highlight that 
this word is also used to describe the person you work 
with in class.
 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words, look 
at the photos, and say the family members. They could do 
this individually or with a partner. Monitor and help. Make 
a note of any pronunciation problems they are having. 
Write the words on the board and model and drill the 
ones that Sts find difficult.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Get Sts A (books open) 
to ask Sts B (books closed) to spell five words. A chooses the 
words and reads them for B to spell, e.g. How do you spell 
‘husband’? Demonstrate with a pair of Sts. When Sts have 
finished, tell them to swap roles.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 PRONUNCIATION /ʌ/, /æ/, and /ə/
Pronunciation notes
Sts may have problems with the first two sounds, /ʌ/ and 
/æ/, as they may not have exactly the same vowel sounds 
in their language. You may want to show them the mouth 
position video for these two sounds or use the Sound 
Bank videos on the Teacher’s Resource Centre.
You may want to highlight the following sound–spelling 
patterns.
• /ʌ/ The letter u is usually pronounced /ʌ/, especially 
between consonants, e.g. husband, Russia. The letter o is 
sometimes pronounced /ʌ/, e.g. mother.
• /æ/ The letter a between consonants is often 
pronounced /æ/, e.g. man, thanks.
• /ə/ This is the most common vowel sound in English. It 
is called the schwa. Many unstressed syllables have this 
sound, e.g. final -er in brother, teacher, etc.
a e 4.5 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 4.5
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.24
 Focus on the sound picture up. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after up. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ʌ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for cat /æ/ and computer /ə/. 
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to repeat. Give further 
practice as necessary.
 Get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
 Finally, focus on the /ə/ box and go through it with the 
class. Give some other examples of words Sts already 
know which have the /ə/ sound, e.g. Saturday, tomorrow, 
children, camera, woman, sister, etc. Highlight that this 
very common sound often occurs after (and sometimes 
before) an unstressed syllable. Final letters -er (e.g. brother, 
mother, teacher) are always pronounced /ə/.
b e 4.6 Focus on the sentences and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 4.6
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.24
 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the sentences.
3 GRAMMAR possessive adjectives, possessive ’s
a e 4.7 Focus on the instructions and the conversation 
on p.25. Elicit the meaning of babysitter (= someone who 
looks after the children when the parents are out).
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time. 
 Check the answer.
b
e 4.7
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.25
b Focus on photo A and the example. Then get Sts to point 
to the people and say their names. 
 Check answers. Say Who’s the man?, etc.
c Play the audio again and go through the conversation 
with Sts line by line. Elicit / Explain / Demonstrate any new 
words or phrases, e.g. come in.
 Focus on the instructions and point out that two of them 
(my husband and our children) have been done for Sts. 
Give Sts a few minutes to complete the chart.
 Check answers, writing the missing words on the board.  
You could also ask Sts to spell the words, to review spelling.
!  Remind Sts that animals are usually it. However, if you 
know whether an animal is male or female, for example 
because it is a pet, you can say he or she. (Sts might 
be interested to know that about 44 per cent of all UK 
households have a pet, usually a fish, a cat, or a dog.)
I
my husband
you
your number
he
his name
she
her name
it
its name
we
our children
you (plural)
your babysitter
they
their names
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 47@@
47
4A
 Now focus on the exercises for 4A on p.99 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1 Their names are Claire and Françoise.
2 What’s your name?
3 His name is Roberto.
4 It’s a good hotel and its restaurant is fantastic.
5 Their surname is Romero.
6 Its name is Café des Fleurs.
7 Her name is Tina.
8 Lisa and Amy are American, but their husbands are British.
9 This is your key.
10 Here are our coffees.
11 I’m Sally, and this is my husband, Tom.
12 Our children are over there.
b
1 Peter is Karen’s father.
2 Diana is Sam’s mother.
3 Karen is Peter’s daughter.
4 Peter is Diana’s husband.
5 Sam is Peter’s son.
6 Diana is Peter’s wife.
7 Sam is Karen’s brother.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g Focus on the instructions and demonstrate the activity, 
which is to consolidate the difference between his  
and her. Point to one student, and ask another student 
What’s his / her name? Elicit His / Her name is _______. 
Repeat with a different student.
 You might want to teach the expression I don’t remember.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to ask and 
answer questions about the other Sts’ names.
 Monitor and help with any pronunciation problems.
h Focus on the instructions and example. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to talk about the people in 
photo A on p.25. Monitor and help.
4 LISTENING
a e 4.11 Focus on the instructions and photo. Ask a couple 
of questions about it, e.g. Who are these people? (Jane and 
Marina / Two girls / Two women), Where are they? (In Italy), 
Whose birthday is it? (Jane’s).
 Tell Sts that they are going to hear Jane and Marina talking 
about the birthday card.
 Focus on the example and make sure Sts understand 
that they have to complete each gap with a name + 
apostrophe s and a family member.
 Play the audio and pause after Jane says and Hayley’s his 
girlfriend. Ask Who’s Hayley? and elicit that she is Paul’s 
girlfriend. 
 Then continue playing the audio for Sts to complete 3–5. 
Play it again as necessary.
 Check answers.
d Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the sentences.
 Check answers. Then explain / elicit the use of the 
possessive ’s. Pick up something that belongs to a student, 
e.g. a book. Ask What is it? (It’s a book.) Then say It’s (name)’s 
book, e.g. It’s Mary’s book. Write the words (NAME)’S BOOK 
on the board and explain that in this case, the ’s shows 
possession.
1 Mario’s  2 husband’s
e e 4.8 Focus on the question and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts to listen.
 Elicit opinions.
e 4.8
M = Maria, C = children, S = Sarah, E = Emma
M Now, children. Sarah is your babysitter. Be good.
C OK, Mum.
M Goodbye, Sarah.
S Bye, Mrs Taylor.
***
S OK, let’s order pizza and watch TV.
E My mother says no pizza and no TV.
S Well, your mother isn’t here, is she?
f Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.98. 
Grammar notes
possessive adjectives
In English, the possessive adjective agrees with the person 
who possesses something, not the noun that follows it, 
e.g. Sam’s key = his key and Ann’s keys = her keys.
Remind Sts that your is used for singular and plural, formal 
and informal.
Some languages use the same possessive adjective for he, 
she, and it. Highlight that in English, we use three different 
possessive adjectives, i.e. his for he, her for she, and its for it.
Point out that the possessive adjective its has no 
apostrophe. Sts may confuse this with it’s = it is.
possessive ’s
Highlight that we use ’s with words for people, e.g. girl, 
boy, husband, and names, e.g. Jack’s car, my husband’s keys, 
to show possession, and as an alternative to a possessive 
adjective. We do not usually use ’s with things, e.g. the 
pages of the book NOT the book’s pages.
For plural nouns, the apostrophe goes after the s, e.g. the 
students’ books. 
NB For irregular plurals, use ’s, e.g. the children’s toys. 
This isn’t focused on in the lesson, but Sts may ask you 
about this.
The pronunciation of the possessive ’s follows the same 
rules as those for the pronunciation of plurals formed 
with s.
 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 4.9 and e 4.10 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the two information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 48@@
48
4A
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to show each other photos of friends 
and family members on their phones, and explain who they 
are. If you can, demonstrate by projecting some of your 
photos onto the board, and tell Sts about the people.
b Tell Sts to go to Writing A post about a photo on p.86.
 Focus on the title and make sure Sts understand it.
 Now focus on a. Look at the photo and read the 
instructions. Point out that the first one (E1 – Alice) has 
been done for Sts. Give them time to read the text and 
write the numbers of the people in the correct place on 
the photo. 
 Check answers. Now ask Who’s Henri? (to elicit Alice’s 
father), and do the same with the other people.
A 2 (Henri – father)
B 3 (Cécile – mother)
C 4 (Pauline – sister)
D 5 (Olivier – brother)
F 6 (Toto – dog)
 Elicit the meaning of the final question, Do you like my 
photo?
 Focus on b and the Punctuation box and go through it 
with the class.
 Finally, focus on c and tell Sts they are going to write 
about their families. Explain that they should follow the 
model in a.
 To show Sts how to begin write the sentence stems on 
the board MY NAME IS _________. I’M FROM _________. 
 Set this for homework so that Sts can attach a photo of 
their family (or friends).
EXTRA CHALLENGE  You could get Sts to draw a family tree 
and tell their partners about their family from memory.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 4.12 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 4A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Draw two circles on the board. In the first, 
write NICOLE’S  JANE’S  JERRY’S  PAUL’S. In the second, write  
WIFE  GIRLFRIEND  BOYFRIEND  SISTER.  
Tell Sts that to complete 2–5, they need to use a name from 
circle 1 and a family word from circle 2.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
3 Susan is Jerry’s wife.
4 Nicole is Jane’s sister.
5 John is Nicole’s boyfriend.
e 4.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
M = Marina, J = Jane
M What a lovely card!
J Yes, it’s from my family.
M Can I see?
J Sure.
M Who’s Paul? Is he your brother?
J Yes, he’s my brother, and Hayley’s his girlfriend.
M How old is Paul?
J He’s twenty-nine. No, he’s thirty.
M What about Susan? Is she your sister? 
J No, Susan’s my brother Jerry’s wife. And Sally’s their daughter.
M Oh yes, I remember – the baby in the photo on your phone.
J Yes. She’s so beautiful.
M So who’s Nicole?
J She’s my sister.
M Is John her husband?
J No, he’s her boyfriend – they aren’t married. Perhaps one day.
M And how old’s Nicole?
J She’s twenty-six.
M And who’s Max?
J He’s my dog!
M Ah. What kind of dog is he?
b Give Sts time to read the two questions. 
 Play the audio again, pausing after each question to give 
Sts time to write. Tell Sts to write full sentences.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 Paul is 30. Nicole is 26.
2 Sally is Jerry’s daughter (and Susan’s). Max is Jane’s dog.
 Remind Sts of the meaning and pronunciation of the 
adjective beautiful /ˈbjuːtɪfl/. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
5 SPEAKING & WRITING
a Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts that they should each 
write the names of six people they know (people in their 
family, or their friends) on a piece of paper. Give Sts one or 
two minutes to do this.
 Read the instructions and the example with the whole 
class. Model the activity by looking at a list from a strong 
student and ask about the first name on the list Who’s 
(name)? Elicit the response He / She’s my (e.g. brother). 
 Sts continue asking and answering in pairs. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 49@@
49
4B
 4B The perfect car
e 4.13 
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
1 It’s a Jaguar. It’s English.
2 It’s a Chevrolet It’s American.
3 It’s a Mercedes. It’s German.
4 It’s a Peugeot. It’s French.
5 It’s a Ferrari. It’s Italian.
6 It’s a Honda. It’s Japanese.
EXTRA SUPPORT If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c e 4.14 Focus on the instructions and the picture. Get 
Sts to cover the conversation in d with a piece of paper. 
Before playing the audio, you might want to tell Sts that 
the woman and her son in the audio are looking at cars 
with a car salesman.
 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand perfect 
and opinion.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the questions. Play again if necessary.
 Check answers.
a the red sports car  b the blue car
e 4.14
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.26
d Focus on the instructions and get Sts to uncover the 
conversation. Play the audio again for Sts to read and 
listen at the same time.
 Then focus on the first highlighted word and elicit / 
explain its meaning with the photo or something blue 
in the classroom. Get Sts to write blue under the correct 
photo. Then tell Sts that the highlighted words are all 
colours or adjectives, i.e. words that describe the cars. 
 Tell Sts that they need to work out the meaning of the 
highlighted words. Tell them not to worry if there are 
some words they can’t work out. The photo will help them 
for some of the words.
 Get Sts to work with a partner. 
 Check answers. Mime, explain, or translate any words Sts 
couldn’t work out.
red car red, fast, expensive, beautiful 
blue car blue, small, slow, ugly  
 Deal with any other new vocabulary in the conversation.
e e 4.15 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Encourage Sts to copy the rhythm 
and intonation on the audio. Give further practice as 
necessary, using choral and individual repetition.
e 4.15
Same as script 4.14 with repeat pauses
 G  adjectives
 V  colours and common adjectives
 P  /ɑː/ and /ɔː/, linking
Lesson plan
This lesson uses the context of a son and his elderly mother 
buying a car for Sts to learn some common adjectives and 
how to use them. The vocabulary load at the beginning 
of the lesson is quite high, as it includes both colours and 
adjectives, although some beginners may already know 
some of these words. Sts then move on to the grammar of 
adjectives, which is relatively straightforward. Pronunciation 
focuses on the sounds /ɑː/ and /ɔː/, and on how words are 
linked in English, which will help Sts to understand when 
they hear words run together. Sts then use adjectives in a 
speaking activity where they talk about their preferences, 
and the lesson ends with a video about the Beaulieu Motor 
Museum. If you are not able to watch the video in class, 
make sure you get Sts to watch it at home and do the 
exercises.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar adjectives p.143 
Communicative What is it? p.180 (instructions p.162) 
Vocabulary Colours and common adjectives p.215 
(instructions p.204)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Beaulieu Motor Museum
For students
Workbook 4B
Online Practice 4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise nationality adjectives. Call out the names of the 
countries in Vocabulary Bank Countries and nationalities 
on p.117 and get the class or individual Sts to say the word 
for the nationality.
1 LISTENING & VOCABULARY colours and  
 common adjectives
a Books open. Focus on the quiz and the speech bubble. 
Then drill the English pronunciation of the car makes: 
Chevrolet /ˈʃevrəleɪ/, Honda /ˈhɒndə/, Ferrari /fəˈrɑːri/, 
Mercedes /məˈseɪdiz/, Peugeot /ˈpɜːʒəʊ/, and Jaguar  
/ˈdʒæɡjuə/.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to match the car logos 
to the car makes and then write the nationalities.
b e 4.13 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 50@@
50
4B
 e 4.18 Focus on Positive and negative adjectives in 
the box in d and go through it with the class. Then play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the adjectives. 
e 4.18
See Positive and negative adjectives in Student’s Book on p.121
 Now focus on very in the box and go through it with Sts.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g Focus on the instructions and the example. Give Sts a few 
minutes to think of adjectives to describe their own car or 
their family’s car.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Sts could write a sentence with two 
adjectives about their car, e.g. My car is a Renault. It’s small 
and cheap.
 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to tell each 
other about their cars.
 Monitor and help.
 Get some feedback from various Sts. You could find out if 
any Sts have the same car and if they have used the same 
adjectives to describe it.
2 GRAMMAR adjectives
a Focus on the sentences and give Sts time to circle the 
correct one for 1 and 2. Sts should be able to do this from 
examples of this grammar point that they saw in the 
conversation between the salesman, the woman and her 
son, e.g. a good car.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 a  2 b
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.98. 
Grammar notes
adjectives
In English, an adjective can go after the verb be, but when 
it is with a noun, it always goes before the noun, e.g. My 
car is fast. It’s a fast car.
Adjectives are the same for singular and plural nouns, so 
you never add an s to an adjective. This is different from 
many other languages, where adjectives have to ‘agree’ 
with nouns.
Adjectives have no masculine or feminine form.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 4.19 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 4B on p.99 and get Sts 
to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
 Put Sts in groups of three. Assign roles and get them to 
practise the conversation.
 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use the intonation 
they heard on the audio.
 You could get some groups to act out the conversation 
for the class.
f Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Adjectives on p.121.
Vocabulary notes
Common adjectives
beautiful
We normally use beautiful for a woman (not a man) or 
an animal, place, piece of music, etc. You could also elicit 
good-looking, which Sts saw in 2B, and tell them that it is 
used for both men and women. 
Positive and negative adjectives 
very good / very bad
Sts have already seen very in the phrase very well. 
Highlight that it can be used with many adjectives,  
e.g. very big, very small, etc., but not with adjectives that 
already have a strong meaning, so NOT very fantastic or 
very awful / terrible.
 e 4.16 Focus on 1 Colours. Play the audio for Sts 
to listen and repeat the colours in chorus. Pause the 
audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and the 
pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give further 
practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 4.16
See Colours in Student’s Book on p.121
 Focus on Activation. Ask Sts to cover the words, look at 
the photos, and ask and answer about the colours in pairs.
EXTRA IDEA  You could point to different objects in the 
classroom and say What colour is it? to practise the ten 
colours in the Vocabulary Bank.
 e 4.17 Look at 2 Common adjectives and focus on a. 
Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the adjectives in 
chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word 
stress and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. 
Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses
e 4.17
See Common adjectives in Student’s Book on p.121
 Now focus on b. Ask Sts to cover the words, look at 
the photos, and say the adjectives. They could do this 
individually or with a partner.
 Now focus on Activation. Model and drill the question 
What’s the opposite of ‘new’? and elicit / explain the 
meaning of the opposite.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to test each 
other on the adjectives.
 Monitor and correct any pronunciation mistakes on the 
board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 51@@
51
4B
Linking
It is very common in English to link words together, 
especially when one word finishes with a consonant 
sound and the next word begins with a vowel sound, 
e.g. an old umbrella. Being aware of this will help Sts to 
‘separate’ words in their head when people speak to them.
a e 4.21 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 4.21
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.27
 Focus on the sound picture car. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound). 
 Now focus on the words after car. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ɑː/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for horse /ɔː/. 
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 4.22 Focus on the word linking in the title and tell Sts 
that when one word ends with a consonant, e.g. big, and 
the next word begins with a vowel, e.g. umbrella, we link 
the two words: big umbrella. 
 Now focus on the phrases and highlight the linking marks. 
Remind Sts that the underlined syllables in the multi-
syllable words are stressed more.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 4.22
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.27
 Now play the audio, pausing after each phrase for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the phrases.
c e 4.23 Focus on the instructions.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. Tell them not to write yet.
e 4.23
1 an ugly house
2 an easy exercise
3 my old ID card
4 good evening
5 an American friend
 Now play it again, pausing after each phrase to give Sts 
time to write.
 Check answers by eliciting each phrase onto the board.
See script 4.23
a
1 It’s an old car.
2 They’re black coats.
3 It’s a new phone. 
4 They’re big houses.
5 They’re expensive (sun)glasses.
6 It’s a good book.
b
1 It’s a beautiful day.
2 Amy’s husband is very nice.
3 They’re very difficult questions.
4 This is a cheap phone.
5 It’s a terrible photo.
6 Maggie is a fantastic teacher.
7 Our cat is very old.
8 This isn’t a very good restaurant.
9 It’s a very long exercise.
 10 Their dog is very ugly.
 11 Italian bags are very expensive.
 12 This is a very small room.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c e 4.20 Focus on the instructions and example. Explain 
to Sts that they are going to hear a phrase in the singular, 
and they have to say the plural form.
 Play the example, an American car, pausing for Sts to say 
American cars in chorus.
 Play the audio, pausing after each item, for Sts to listen 
and say the plural.
e 4.20
1 an American car (pause) American cars
2 an expensive watch (pause) expensive watches
3 a big house (pause) big houses
4 a tall man (pause) tall men
5 a long book (pause) long books
6 a new phone (pause) new phones
7 a good friend (pause) good friends
8 a beautiful woman (pause) beautiful women
9 a small child (pause) small children
 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3 PRONUNCIATION /ɑː/ and /ɔː/, linking
Pronunciation notes
/ɑː/ and /ɔː/
Remind Sts that the two dots in the symbols mean that 
they are long sounds.
You may want to highlight the following sound–spelling 
patterns.
• /ɑː/ The letters ar are usually pronounced /ɑː/, e.g. car, 
are. In American English and in some regions of Britain, 
words like fast and glasses are pronounced /fæst/ 
and /ˈɡlæsɪz/. If this is the way you pronounce them, 
explain this to Sts, and teach them your pronunciation 
rather than the pronunciation on the audio.
• /ɔː/ The letters al usually have an /ɔː/ sound, e.g. call, 
talk. The letters or are usually pronounced /ɔː/,  
e.g. short, but sometimes /ɜː/ after w, e.g. world.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 52@@
52
4B
This is an American Harley Davidson, this is an Italian Ducati, and this 
is a German BMW.
The National Motor Museum is fantastic, and Beaulieu is a beautiful 
village. Come and see!
b Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–8, 
making sure they understand all the lexis, e.g. presenter, 
famous, etc. 
 Play the video again the whole way through.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
1 T  2 F  3 F  4 T  5 F  6 F  7 F  8 T
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences 
(playing the video again if necessary). Correct the answers.
2 It is famous for its big house, old church, and fantastic motor 
museum.
3 The National Motor Museum is 62 years old.
5 The Ferrari Dino is 40 years old.
6 The Ford Anglia is a British car
7 It’s famous because it’s in the Harry Potter films.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c Do this as a whole-class activity.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 4.24 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 4B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying 
the phrases.
d Focus on the instructions. Now tell Sts to go back to 
Vocabulary Bank Adjectives on p.121. Focus on the 
photo of the bag, and elicit It’s a black bag. Do the same 
with blue keys. You may want to highlight that It’s a is 
linked.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to make ten sentences 
about the photos.
 Then use the numbers to elicit the phrases from the class 
or from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Put Sts in pairs and get them to write their 
ten sentences.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
4 SPEAKING
 Focus on the eight items and make sure Sts know what 
they are.
 Now focus on the phrase I prefer… and demonstrate / 
elicit its meaning.
 Focus on the example speech bubbles and explain that 
the person saying Me too agrees with the first person.
 Demonstrate the activity by saying what you prefer for a 
couple of categories, or get a good pair to demonstrate 
the activity to the class.
 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss each item.
 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
5 r VIDEO LISTENING
a Focus on the task.
 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the question.
 Elicit Sts’ opinions.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Beaulieu Motor Museum
Hi! I’m Louise, and today I’m in Beaulieu. 
Beaulieu is a small village. It’s in England, but Beaulieu is a French 
word. In English, we say Bjuli, but in French it’s Beau lieu – beautiful 
place.
And it really is beautiful! Beaulieu is in the New Forest. It’s famous for 
its big house, old church, and fantastic motor museum.
The National Motor Museum in Beaulieu is sixty-two years old. It’s a 
very interesting place, with lots and lots of cars. Let’s go and see!
These are some of the cars.
These are old, vintage cars. These are fast, modern cars. This is a very 
small car.
This is my favourite car. It’s British and its name is Bluebird. It’s fifty-
five years old and it’s very, very fast!
These cars are from lots of different countries.
This is a Mercedes sixty hp. It’s a German car. It’s a hundred and ten 
years old and it’s black and gold.
This is a Ferrari Dino. It’s Italian. It’s forty years old. It’s red and it’s 
great.
This is a Ford Anglia. Ford is an American company, but the Anglia is 
a British car.
This blue Ford Anglia is very famous. It’s the Weasley’s car in the 
Harry Potter films!
But the National Motor Museum isn’t just famous for cars. It’s also 
famous for motorbikes.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 53@@
53
Revise and Check 
 3&4 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 b  2 c  3 a  4 c  5 c
e 4.25
1
I = interviewer, R = Richard
I What’s in your bag?
R Er, my coat, and water, and wallet.
2
I = interviewer, R = Rachel
I What’s in your bag?
R In my bag I keep my purse, my phone, and an umbrella.
3
I = interviewer, K = Kieran
I Are you from a big or small family?
K I’m from a small family. I have my mum, my dad, and one little 
sister.
4
I = interviewer, D= Debra
I How much is a cup of coffee in your local coffee shop?
D It’s four dollars.
I Do you think it’s cheap or expensive?
D I think it’s expensive.
5
I = interviewer, S = Susan
I Can you describe your car?
S I have a Fiat five hundred automatic, so a small car.
 
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.34.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4  
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 a  2 b  3 b  4 b  5 a  6 a  7 b  8 b  9 a  10 a   
11 b   12 b  13 a  14 b  15 a
VOCABULARY
a
1 a credit card  2 a teddy  3 an umbrella  4 a key  5 a cap
b
1 mother  2 husband  3 daughter  4 brother  5 girlfriend
c
1 women  2 children  3 men  4 people
d
1 blue  2 green  3 red  4 yellow  5 black  6 pink
e
1 small  2 cheap  3 short  4 old  5 beautiful
PRONUNCIATION
a
1 /ə/ computer  2 /ʌ/ up  3 /ɔː/ horse  4 /ɑː/ car  5 /æ/ cat
c
1 woman  2 family  3 orange  4 expensive  5 sister
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
Photo1: 1 Jeremy  2 Anna  3 Matthew  4 Susanna
Photo 2: 1 Louise  2 Claire  3 Anne
b
1 His surname is Fisher.
2 He’s from Liverpool / the UK.
3 His son’s name is Matthew.
4 Susanna’s 19 / nineteen.
5 She’s French.
6 She’s Claire’s sister.
7 No, she isn’t.
8 She’s 31 / thirty-one.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 54@@
54
5A
 5A A big breakfast?
 G  present simple + and – : I, you, we, they
 V  food and drink
 P  /dʒ/ and /ɡ/
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is what people have for breakfast 
and how important breakfast is.
Sts begin by revising some food and drink words which have 
already come up, before going to the Vocabulary Bank to 
learn more. They then read an article where different people 
talk about their breakfasts, and the article is then used to 
present the I, you, we, and they forms of verbs in the present 
simple. Sts then listen to three people talking about their 
favourite meal of the day, where they have it, and what they 
have. In Pronunciation, Sts have more practice in word stress 
and pronouncing consonant sounds. The lesson builds up to 
a speaking activity, where Sts talk about their eating habits 
and what people eat in their country. Finally, Sts write a 
paragraph about their own typical breakfast. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar present simple + and – : I, you, we, they p.144 
Communicative Talk about food p.181 (instructions p.163) 
Vocabulary Food and drink p.216 (instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook 5A
Online Practice 5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Write the names of some ‘international’ food words on 
the board, e.g. PASTA, PIZZA, SUSHI, BURGERS, CROISSANTS, etc. If 
possible, choose words that are the same or very similar in 
your Sts’ L1.You might be able to elicit more words from the 
class. Model and drill pronunciation. 
Ask Sts Where are these foods from? and elicit a response, e.g. 
Pasta and pizza are from Italy, etc.
1 VOCABULARY food and drink
a Books open. Focus on the title of the lesson, A big 
breakfast?, and elicit / explain that breakfast is what people 
eat in the morning. Elicit the word lunch, which Sts saw in 
Practical English 2. 
 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
b e 5.1 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers by getting Sts to spell the words for you to 
write on the board, and then to tell you the letter of the 
photo. Model and drill the pronunciation of the food and 
drink words: tea /tiː/, cheese /tʃiːz/, orange juice  
/ˌɒrɪndʒ ˈdʒuːs/, sandwich /ˈsænwɪtʃ/, and eggs /eɡz/.
1 tea, D   2 cheese, E   3 orange juice, A   4 sandwich, B   
5 eggs, C
e 5.1 
1 D tea
2 E cheese
3 A orange juice
4 B sandwich
5 C eggs
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Food and drink on 
p.122. 
Vocabulary notes
Pronunciation
You may want to highlight that:
• ea is pronounced /iː/ in tea and meat, but /e/ in bread 
and breakfast, and /ə/ in cereal.
• vegetables and chocolate both have a syllable which is 
not pronounced.
• the d in sandwich /ˈsænwɪtʃ/ is not usually 
pronounced.
• the s in sugar is pronounced /ʃ/.
Meals
Lunch is the word we use for the meal eaten at midday or 
in the early afternoon, and dinner is usually in the evening 
(however, in some parts of the UK, some people call the 
midday meal dinner if it is their main meal of the day).
Supper can also be used to refer to the evening meal.
Verbs
The verbs eat and drink describe the general actions, e.g. 
I eat a lot of bread. I don’t drink coffee. However, we usually 
use have with meals, e.g. have breakfast, and to describe 
what we eat / drink at a particular meal, e.g. I have toast 
and tea for breakfast.
 e 5.2 Focus on a. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat the words in chorus. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 5.2
See Food and drink in Student’s Book on p.122
 e 5.3 Now focus on the information box in b. Play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat the words and phrases in 
chorus. Highlight the word stress and the pronunciation 
of the more difficult words. Give further practice as 
necessary, modelling and drilling the pronunciation 
yourself, or using the audio, and getting choral and 
individual responses.
e 5.3
See information box in Student’s Book on p.122
 Finally, focus on Activation and ask Sts to cover the words 
in a with a piece of paper, look only at the photos (they 
do this for each row of photos), and say the words. They 
could do this individually or with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 55@@
5A
55
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems they are still having, to focus on at the end of 
the activity.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 READING & SPEAKING
a Focus on the instructions and the photos of breakfasts, 
and elicit the food words which Sts already know, e.g. 
coffee, fruit, etc. 
 Now focus on the question and make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of important. Model and drill pronunciation.
 Give Sts time to read the article and comments, and 
answer the question. Tell them not to worry about the 
gaps in the comments.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article and comments 
the first time, check whether you need to pre-teach any 
vocabulary.
a Marta, Paulo, Sakura  b Rob
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read the article out loud with the class to 
help Sts understand the comments.
b e 5.4 Now tell Sts to read the comments again and this 
time to complete the gaps with words for food or drink. 
Tell them to look at the photos. Point out that the first one 
(croissant) has been done for them.
 Give Sts time to complete the gaps. 
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
2 milk  3 fruit  4 yogurt  5 coffee  6 rice  7 fish
e 5.4
Marta, Italy 
I have breakfast in a great café near my office. I have a croissant and 
coffee – an espresso with hot milk. Mmm. I love breakfast! It’s my 
favourite meal.
Paulo, Brazil 
I have breakfast at home, but I don’t have a big breakfast. I have fruit 
and yogurt, and sometimes toast. It’s a healthy breakfast. That’s a 
good thing at the beginning of the day. 
Rob, UK 
I don’t eat in the morning – I’m not hungry. I just have a coffee at 
work. But I have lunch early, at about 12.30. 
Sakura, Japan 
I really like breakfast. It’s an important meal for Japanese people. 
I have breakfast at home with my family. We have a traditional 
breakfast. It isn’t very different from lunch and dinner. We have rice, 
fish, and miso soup, and we drink green tea. We don’t drink a lot of 
coffee in my family.
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. Other lexis Sts may ask 
about are healthy, I’m hungry, traditional, different, and a 
lot of. Highlight that we use I’m before hungry, not I have, 
which may be what Sts use in their L1. You may also need 
to explain that miso is a substance made from beans, used 
in Japanese cooking, especially soup.
c Tell Sts to read the comments again and circle the places 
people have their breakfast and underline any other 
words for food and drink that they didn’t write in the gaps.
 Check answers.
1 Places: a café (Marta), at home (Paulo), at work (Rob), at 
home (Sakura)
2 Other words for food and drink: espresso, toast, soup, 
green tea
d Focus on the questions. You could tell Sts if breakfast is 
important for you, what you have, and where you have it. 
 Give Sts time to think about their answers.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to ask and answer the 
questions. Monitor and help.
 Get feedback by asking some Sts to tell the class what 
their partner has for breakfast.
3 GRAMMAR present simple + and – : I, you,  
 we, they
a Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the sentences. 
 Check answers and write them on the board.
1 have  2 like  3 have  4 don’t have  5 don’t eat   
6 don’t drink
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.100.
Grammar notes
present simple + and – : I, you, we, they
The I, we, you, and they forms of the present simple are 
the same, e.g. I have, you have, we have, they have. The 
verb endings don’t change, unlike in many languages. 
Highlight that it is the subject pronoun I / you / we / they 
that changes, not the verb (have). For this reason, it is 
essential to always use pronouns – otherwise it won’t be 
clear which person you are talking about.
In the present simple, for I, we, you, and they, we use don’t 
before the infinitive form of the verb to form negatives. 
Don’t is the contraction of do not. Do and don’t are called 
auxiliary verbs. They are used to form negatives and 
questions. Remind Sts that native speakers nearly always 
use the contracted form don’t in spoken English.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 5.5 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 5A on p.101 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 I have eggs for breakfast.
2 We don’t drink coffee in the evening.
3 They like chocolate.
4 You eat meat.
5 We eat rice in the evening.
6 I don’t have sugar in my coffee.
7 You don’t like cheese.
8 The children eat vegetables.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 56@@
5A
56
4 At work.
5 Different things but with chips.
6 Water and then a coffee.
 Finally, repeat the process for Sarah. 
7 Usually at home. On Wednesdays at a café.
8 Fruit and an egg. On Wednesdays a croissant.
9 Coffee or tea. On Wednesdays hot chocolate.
e 5.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
Will   My favourite meal of the day is lunch. I’m always hungry 
then. I have lunch at work – we have a canteen there. I have 
different things for lunch, but always with chips – I love chips. 
Sometimes a burger and chips, sometimes fish and chips. I 
drink water with my lunch, but after lunch, I have a coffee – an 
espresso.
Sarah  My favourite meal of the day is breakfast. I usually have it at 
home, but on Wednesday I have my yoga class and I have 
breakfast at a café near the yoga studio. At home I have fruit 
and an egg, and coffee or tea. But at the café I have a croissant 
and hot chocolate.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c Focus on the question and give Sts a few minutes to think 
about their answer.
 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to tell each 
other what their favourite meal is. 
 Get some feedback from the class. With a show of hands, 
you could find out which is the class’s favourite meal.
5 PRONUNCIATION /dʒ/ and /ɡ/
Pronunciation notes
/dʒ/ and /ɡ/
The sounds in this lesson are all consonant sounds. For 
information on /dʒ/, see the Pronunciation notes in 2A.
You might want to highlight the following sound–
spelling rule.
• /ɡ/ This sound only occurs where there is the letter g.
You could remind Sts that the letter g is always 
pronounced /ɡ/ when it comes after a vowel at the end 
of a word, e.g. bag and dog, and often at the beginning 
and in the middle of a word, e.g. glasses and sugar, before 
a, o, and u. However, before e and i, the letter g is often 
pronounced /dʒ/, e.g. German, orange.
a e 5.8 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen. 
e 5.8
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.31
 Now focus on the sound picture jazz. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and the sound (pause after the 
sound).
 Then focus on the words after jazz. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /dʒ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat. You might 
want to highlight the two silent letters in vegetables. 
b
1 People in the UK don’t have a big lunch… 
We always have lunch with my family on Sundays.
2 I don’t eat meat. I’m a vegetarian. 
They eat a lot of fish and rice in Japan. 
3 You drink a lot of coffee! It isn’t good for you. 
They don’t drink coffee. They only drink tea.
4 We don’t go to restaurants. They’re very expensive. 
I don’t have breakfast at home. I go to a café.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c Focus on the emoticons in the instructions and the 
speech bubble, and elicit the meaning of I like / I don’t like. 
Model and drill the pronunciation.
 Now tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Food and drink 
on p.122.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other what food 
and drink they like and dislike.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write I LIKE and I DON’T LIKE on the board for 
reference. Demonstrate first by telling Sts about foods you 
like and don’t like.
 Get some feedback from the class.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
4 LISTENING
a e 5.6 Focus on the instructions and the phrase favourite 
meal. Tell Sts they are going to listen to three people 
talking about their favourite meal. Point out each person’s 
answer in the chart (i.e. Anna – dinner, Will – lunch, etc.). 
Tell Sts they are going to listen to Anna and they must 
complete the first column in the chart. If you know 
your Sts’ L1, you may want to pre-teach the adverbs of 
frequency usually and always, which come up in these 
recordings.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and do the task. Play again as necessary.
 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1 At home or at a restaurant.
2 Meat or fish and vegetables.
3 A glass of wine.
e 5.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
Anna   My favourite meal of the day is dinner. I usually have dinner at 
home, but sometimes at a restaurant. I usually have meat or 
fish and vegetables, and if I’m at a restaurant, I have a glass of 
wine.
b e 5.7 Now tell Sts to focus on the second column in the 
chart. 
 Play the audio, pausing after Will to give Sts time to write. 
Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 57@@
5A
57
7 WRITING a comment post
 Tell Sts to go to Writing A comment post on p.86.
a Focus on the title, A comment post, and make sure Sts 
understand it.
 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to read 
Marcos’s comment.
 Before eliciting Sts’ opinions on whether they like Marcos’s 
breakfast, elicit each item he has and check Sts know the 
meaning: orange, apple, bread, butter, jam. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
 If you didn’t focus on the word healthy in Paulo’s text in 2, 
then focus on it here. If you did, check Sts can remember 
what it means.
 Now tell Sts if you like or don’t like Marcos’s breakfast, and 
then ask What about you? With a show of hands, you could 
find out how many Sts like his breakfast.
b Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to look at the 
highlighted words and then complete sentences 1–3.
 Check answers.
1 but  2 or  3 and
 Check Sts know the meaning of the three words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write the following sentences on the board 
to help Sts understand how to use and, or, and but.
I LIKE TEA. I LIKE COFFEE. 
 I LIKE TEA AND COFFEE.
SOME DAYS I DRINK TEA, AND SOME DAYS I DRINK COFFEE. 
  
I DRINK TEA OR COFFEE.
I LIKE CEREAL. I DON’T LIKE TOAST. 
 I LIKE CEREAL, BUT I DON’T LIKE 
TOAST.
c Give Sts time to write their own comments. Tell them to 
use Marcos’s comment as a model. They can begin with 
For breakfast, I have… Give Sts six to eight minutes to write 
about 50 words for this task.
 Go around the room to monitor and help as Sts are 
writing. However, don’t make a lot of corrections at this 
time. Allow Sts to focus on putting their ideas down on 
paper.
EXTRA IDEA  You could get Sts to post their comments 
around the classroom. Then Sts can circulate around the 
room and read about their classmates’ breakfasts. (Check to 
make sure that comments don’t have too many errors before 
Sts put them up.)
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 5.10 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 5A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Now repeat the same process for girl /ɡ/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
 Finally, focus on the g and j box and go through it with Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 5.9 Focus on the sentences and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 5.9
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.31
 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
for Sts to listen and repeat. 
 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences. Monitor and help.
 Get individual Sts to say the sentences to the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Dictate some more words with the letter 
g in them and get Sts to write them in the correct row in a, 
e.g. Germany, Egypt, bag, dog, glasses, mug, charger, green, 
ugly, good.
6 SPEAKING
a Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the 
meaning of true.
 Now focus on the questionnaire and the two sections,  
You and Your country, and make sure Sts understand all 
the phrases. Highlight that where there is a question 
word, it tells Sts what kind of word or phrase they should 
put in the gaps, and where there are two alternatives (as 
in some of the sentences in the Your country section), they 
should choose one of the words / phrases to complete 
the gaps. Demonstrate by telling them a few sentences 
about you and your country.
 Give Sts time to complete the sentences so that they are 
true for them and their country. 
b Focus on the first speech bubble and the question What 
about you?, used to check the listener’s statement. You 
could tell the class where you have breakfast, and then 
ask a student What about you? If you are not from your 
Sts’ country, you could also focus on the first phrase in 
the Your country section, and say what people from your 
country have for breakfast, then ask What about in your 
country?
 Then put Sts in pairs and give them time to talk about 
each sentence. In the You section, they should say 
alternate sentences, but each time finish with What 
about you? In the Your country section, if Sts are from the 
same country, they should agree their answers. If not, 
they should simply tell each other what happens in their 
country.
 Monitor and help.
 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If your Sts are all from the same country, 
you could do the Your country section as a whole class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 58@@
58
 5B A very long flight
1 GRAMMAR present simple ? : I, you, we, they
a e 5.11 Books open. Focus on the lesson title and elicit / 
explain flight. Then focus on the pictures and ask Sts a few 
questions about them, e.g. Where are the people? Who is 
the man?, etc.
 Now focus on the task and get Sts to cover the 
conversation. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and number the pictures. Make it clear to Sts that, 
at this stage, they are not expected to understand every 
word of the conversation; they just need to get a general 
idea of what is happening. Sts will get help here from the 
sound effects and from words they already know. 
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again, pausing after each section to check answers.
1 B  2 D  3 A  4 C
e 5.11 
E = Eve, W = Wendy, FA = flight attendant
1 E Do you like the book?
 
W Yes, I do. It’s very good. 
 
E She’s my favourite writer. I love her books. 
2 E Do you live in New York?
 
W No, I don’t. I live in London. My husband and I work for a British 
company.
 
E Oh! Do you have children?
 
W No, we don’t. 
 
E I have two sons and a daughter. David and Andrew are at 
university, and Carla’s at school. Look. Here are some photos…
This is a photo of our holiday in Barbados. Do you know 
Barbados?
 
W No, I don’t.
3 FA Do you want meat, fish, or pasta?
 
E Oh…er…fish, please.
 
W Pasta for me, please.
***
 
E How’s your pasta?
 
W It’s OK.
 
E This fish isn’t very good. Excuse me, I don’t like this fish. Can I 
have the pasta, please?
 
FA I’m sorry, madam. It’s finished.
4 E Oh, I need to go to the toilet. Oops, sorry.
 
W Excuse me. What time do we arrive? 
 
FA In twenty-five minutes, madam.
 
W That’s good!
b Get Sts to uncover the conversation and focus on the 
instructions. Sts have seen all the words in the list in 
previous lessons, but you might want to quickly check 
that they can remember what they mean.
 There is quite a lot of new vocabulary in the conversation, 
so Sts will need to use the pictures as a guide.
 Give Sts time to read the conversation and decide what 
the missing words are.
c Get Sts to compare answers, and then play the audio 
again for them to listen and check. 
 Play again, pausing after each gap, and elicit the answers 
onto the board.
1 book  2 New York  3 children  4 meat  5 pasta  6 time
 G  present simple ? : I, you, we, they
 V  common verb phrases 1
 P  /w/ and /v/, sentence rhythm and linking
Lesson plan
The focus of this lesson is on forming questions in the 
present simple using I / you / we / they with some common 
verb phrases.
A conversation between a British and an American woman 
travelling on a plane provides the context for Sts to revise 
positive and negative forms of I, we, you, and they in the 
present simple, and it also introduces the grammar of 
question formation. After the grammar presentation and 
practice, Sts go to the Vocabulary Bank to learn a group 
of common verb phrases, which are then recycled in the 
listening (the two women from the first activity meet again 
on the return flight). In Pronunciation, Sts focus on two 
consonant sounds, /w/ and /v/, and they practise sentence 
rhythm and linking. Finally, all the language is brought 
together in the speaking activity, where Sts ask and answer 
questions about lifestyle before writing a few sentences 
about themselves.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar present simple ? : I, you, we, and they p.145 
Communicative Do you…? p.182 (instructions p.163) 
Vocabulary Common verb phrases p.217  
(instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook 5B
Online Practice 5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise present simple + and – sentences by writing the 
following on the board:
I LIKE
I DON’T LIKE
FOOTBALL.
TENNIS.
DOGS.
CATS.
TEA.
COFFEE.
Model and drill pronunciation of the nouns and then of  
I like / don’t like.
Put Sts in pairs and demonstrate the activity yourself by 
making true sentences using I like / I don’t like… Point out 
that you don’t use the before the nouns, e.g. NOT I like the 
football (because you are making general statements).
Sts practise in pairs, taking it in turns to say what they like / 
don’t like.
Get some feedback.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 59@@
59
a
1 A Do you have children?
 
B No, I don’t.
2 I don’t like this photo. It’s terrible.
3 A Do you want a coffee?
 
B No, thanks. I don’t drink coffee.
4 I don’t have brothers and sisters. I’m an only child.
5 A Do you listen to music on the radio?
 
B I don’t listen to pop music, but I listen to Classic FM…
6 A Excuse me, do you work here?
 
B No, I don’t. Sorry.
7 A Do you like American TV series?
 
B No, I don’t. I don’t watch TV. I read.
8 A Do you have a big family?
 
B Yes, I do. I have two brothers and three sisters.
9 A Do you speak Spanish?
 
B No, I don’t. I only speak English.
10 A Do you like Saturdays?
 
B Yes, I do. I don’t work at the weekend.
b
1 I don’t know.
2 Do you live near here?
3 I don’t like football.
4 Do you want a sandwich?
5 They work in the city centre.
6 I have two sisters.
7 Do you speak French?
8 I don’t need a big car.
9 Do you go to German classes?
10 I don’t have a watch.
11 Do you listen to music in the car?
12 I don’t work on Sundays.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 VOCABULARY common verb phrases 1
a Focus on the instructions and point out that the first one 
(1d) has been done for Sts.
 Give Sts a few minutes to match the phrases. 
 Check answers.
2 a  3 c  4 e  5 b
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Common verb 
phrases 1 on p.123.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight the irregular pronunciation of the verb live  
/lɪv/. Sts might expect /laɪv/, especially as like /laɪk/ is 
taught here, too. You could tell Sts that i + consonant + e 
is usually /aɪ/.
Highlight also the use of the preposition to in listen to the 
radio, but remind Sts that if there is no object after listen, 
you don’t use to. Compare Please listen! and Listen to me.
  e 5.13 Focus on the instructions for a. Play the audio 
and get Sts to listen and repeat the phrases in chorus. 
Make sure Sts understand the meaning of each phrase. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
 Go through the conversation with Sts line by line. Elicit / 
Explain any words or phrases that Sts don’t understand, 
e.g. writer, Do you know…?, Do you want…?, etc. Highlight 
that oops (Part 4) is an exclamation word that we 
sometimes use when someone has a small accident or 
does something by mistake. Here, Eve knocks Wendy as 
she gets out of her seat.
 Highlight also the sentence I need to go to the toilet. Elicit 
the meaning of need and explain that after need, you can 
use a noun, e.g. I need a piece of paper, or to + a verb in the 
infinitive, e.g. I need to be home at five o’clock. 
!  Sts may ask about the meaning of do here. Explain that we 
use do to make a question, in the same way as they learned 
in the last lesson that we use don’t. This will be explained 
later in the grammar section.
!  The question Do you have children? can also be asked as 
Do you have any children? However, at this level, we think it is 
easier to teach the question without any. 
 Elicit a reaction from the class, using L1 if necessary, by 
asking Is the American woman happy that it’s almost the end 
of the flight? Why? 
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to practise the conversation in pairs. 
d Get Sts to underline all the questions and short answers in 
Parts 1 and 2 of the conversation.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Eve 
Do you like the book?
 
Wendy 
Yes, I do.
2 Eve 
Do you live in New York? 
 
Wendy 
No, I don’t.
 
Eve 
Do you have children? 
 
Wendy 
No, we don’t.
 
Eve 
Do you know Barbados?
 
Wendy 
No, I don’t.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Do the first one as a class and then put Sts 
in pairs to underline the questions and short answers in  
Part 2.
e Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.100.
Grammar notes
present simple ? : I, you, we, they
We use the verb do + the infinitive of a verb to form 
questions. Do in this context cannot be translated. It 
simply indicates to the other person that you are going to 
ask a question in the present tense.
Highlight the use of the short answers Yes, I do and 
No, I don’t, which can be used as an alternative to just 
answering Yes or No. You might add that a simple Yes or 
No can sound too abrupt to an English speaker.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 5.12 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 5B on p.101 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 60@@
60
5B
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. For 8, you could ask Sts if they can remember a 
similar expression to Have a good day! which they saw in 
2A (Have a nice day!).
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2 a  3 a  4 b  5 b  6 b  7 a  8 b  9 a  10 a
e 5.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
T = taxi driver, E = Eve, A = announcer
T Where to, ma’am?
E Hello. To the airport, please.
T JFK or Newark?
E JFK, please.
***
E Oh dear. The traffic is bad this morning.
T Yes. It’s terrible. Where are you from?
E I’m from Manchester, but I live in London. Are you from New York?
T No, ma’am, I’m from Puerto Rico.
E Oh, do you like New York?
T It’s a great city, but it’s very expensive.
E London is very expensive, too. Do you have children?
T I have two daughters.
E Oh, really? I have two sons and a daughter. David and Andrew are 
at university, and Carla’s at school…
***
T OK. Here we are.
E How much is that? 
T That’s eighty-seven dollars fifty.
E Here’s a hundred dollars. Keep the change.
T Thanks. Have a good flight. 
E I need to hurry. I’m late!
A This is the final call for flight BA six-four-one to London Heathrow. 
Would all passengers please proceed to Gate B-five. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
b e 5.16 Focus on the task, making sure Sts know what a 
surprise is. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question. 
 Check the answer.
Because Wendy, the American woman, is on the same flight.
e 5.16
A = announcer, FA = flight attendant, E = Eve
A   This is the final call for flight BA six-four-one to London 
Heathrow. Would all passengers please proceed to Gate B-five.
FA1 Can I see your passport and boarding pass, please?
E  Here you are.
***
FA2 Good afternoon, madam. Your boarding pass, please. 
E  Oh, yes.
FA2 Seat three-D. This way, please.
E  Oh, what a nice surprise! We meet again!
W  Oh. Hello!
 Finally, ask Sts Is the American woman happy to see the 
British woman again?
e 5.13
See Common verb phrases 1 in Student’s Book on p.123
  e 5.14 Now focus on b. Focus on the example and 
then demonstrate the activity by saying part of a phrase, 
omitting the verb, and eliciting the complete phrase from 
the class, e.g. 
 T tea  Sts drink tea
 Play the audio and pause after the first prompt (in a flat) 
and elicit the phrase (live in a flat) from the class. Make 
sure Sts are clear what they have to do before continuing.
 Play the rest of the audio, and give Sts time to say the 
phrases in chorus.
e 5.14
1 in a flat (pause) live in a flat
2 breakfast (pause) have breakfast
3 TV (pause) watch TV
4 to the radio (pause) listen to the radio
5 the newspaper (pause) read the newspaper
6 fast food (pause) eat fast food
7 tea (pause) drink tea
8 English (pause) speak English
9 a coffee (pause) want a coffee
10 a dog (pause) have a dog
11 cats (pause) like cats
12 in a bank (pause) work in a bank
13 Spanish (pause) study Spanish
14 to English classes (pause) go to English classes
15 a new car (pause) need a new car
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
 Now focus on the speech bubbles in Activation. Put Sts 
in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions.
 Get some pairs to ask and answer in front of the class.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point. 
c Focus on the instructions and the examples.
 Give Sts time to write their four true sentences.
d Get Sts to read their sentences to each other and see if 
any of them are the same.
 Get some feedback from various pairs.
3 LISTENING
a e 5.15 Focus on the picture and establish the context 
for the listening by asking questions, e.g. Who is she? (She’s 
Eve, the British woman from the flight.), Where is she? (She’s 
in a taxi.)
 Focus on the instructions and check that Sts understand 
end and back to the airport. 
 Focus on the options in sentences 1–10. Give Sts time 
to read them and ask you about any words they don’t 
understand, e.g. traffic, gate. Point out that the first one 
(1b) has been done for them.
 Play the audio for Sts to circle the correct option. You 
could pause after each question and give Sts time to 
choose the correct answer. Play the audio again as 
necessary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 61@@
61
5B
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 5.19
1 I work in a café.
2 I eat a lot of fruit.
3 Do you need an umbrella?
4 Do you have a cat?
5 I want a sandwich.
 Now play it again, pausing after each item to give Sts time 
to write.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See script 5.19
EXTRA IDEA  Play the audio again, pausing after each item 
and getting Sts to listen and repeat. Then put Sts in pairs and 
get them to practise saying the sentences.
e Focus on the instructions and the example. Elicit / Explain 
the meaning of near. Model and drill pronunciation.
 Go through the other nine questions, checking Sts know 
the meaning of all the lexis, e.g. a gym. Model and drill any 
words you think Sts might have problems with.
 Give Sts time to complete 2–10 with the verbs from the list.
 Check answers by asking individual Sts to read the two 
phrases aloud (they should include the verb with each 
phrase, e.g. live near here, live in a house).
2 have  3 watch  4 listen  5 read  6 eat  7 drink   
8 speak  9 need  10 go
 Remind Sts that have has two meanings, have = 
possession, as in have a dog, and have = eat, as in have 
breakfast.
f Focus on the instructions and speech bubbles. Remind Sts 
that we use do to make questions in the present simple. 
Elicit the possible answers (Yes or Yes, I do. / No or No, I 
don’t.).
 Model and drill some or all of the questions. Encourage 
Sts to use the correct sentence rhythm and not to 
overstress Do you…?
 Demonstrate the activity by getting the class to interview 
you first, asking you some or all of the questions. Give 
true answers and, where possible, try to give some extra 
information, but use language within the Sts’ range.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to take turns asking and 
answering questions with the phrases. Encourage them to 
give extra information in their answers.
 Monitor and help with pronunciation and sentence 
rhythm. Correct any mistakes on the board.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 5.20 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 5B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
4 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING /w/ and /v/,  
 sentence rhythm and linking
Pronunciation notes
/w/ and /v/
The /w/ and /v/ sounds are often confused because in 
several languages w is pronounced /v/.
You may want to highlight to Sts the following sound–
spelling patterns.
• /w/ The letter w (without h) is always pronounced /w/ 
at the beginning of a word, e.g. watch. The letters wh 
are usually pronounced /w/, e.g. what and where, but 
there are some exceptions, e.g. who /huː/.
• /v/ The letter v is always pronounced /v/, e.g. live.
Sentence rhythm and linking
For information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 2B.
For information on linking, see the Pronunciation notes 
in 4B.
a e 5.17 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 5.17
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.33
 Focus on the sound picture witch. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after witch. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /w/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for vase /v/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 5.18 Focus on the sentences and remind Sts that the 
words in bold are the ones which are stressed (because 
they carry the important information). Also remind them 
that the underlined syllables in the multi-syllable words 
are stressed more. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
 Highlight the linked phrases, e.g. live in a / Yes, I do, and 
model and drill the pronunciation.
e 5.18
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.33
c Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat. 
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d e 5.19 Tell Sts they are going to hear five short sentences 
or questions and they must write them down.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 62@@
 1 
Practical English
EPISODE
62
PE3
 3 
Practical English What time is it?
e 5.21
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.34
 Now tell Sts to uncover the conversations. Play the 
video / audio again and tell Sts to read and listen at the 
same time.
 Explain / Elicit new vocabulary as you go, e.g. tired, hurry. 
Sts will be able to understand the times (eleven o’clock, a 
quarter to eight, etc.) because of the clocks in the photos. 
Highlight that seven forty-seven is digital time, but Sts 
should have no problem with this.
 You could focus on the sentences with need (I need to go 
and You need to hurry) and remind Sts that after need, you 
can use a noun, e.g. I need a coffee, or to + verb, e.g. I need 
to go.
 Finally, ask Is Rob usually early or late for things? and elicit 
that he’s usually late.
b e 5.22 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Make 
sure Sts pronounce quarter as /ˈkwɔːtə/ and half as  
/hɑːf/ (pointing out the silent l). You could pause the 
audio after each line and get individual Sts to repeat. Give 
further practice of any phrases Sts found difficult.
e 5.22
Same as script 5.21 with repeat pauses
 Then get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs.
!  There are two common ways of asking the time: What’s 
the time? and What time is it? Here What time is it? is taught, 
as it is easier for Sts to move from this to questions with the 
present, like What time do you finish work?
c Focus on the instructions and either get Sts to do it in 
pairs or do it as a whole-class activity. Tell Sts to look at 
the clock in photo A and ask What time is it? (It’s eleven 
o’clock.) Do the same for photo B (It’s a quarter to eight.) 
and photo C (It’s half past ten.).
2 VOCABULARY the time
a e 5.23 Give Sts time to look at the clocks and read the 
times. 
 Then play the audio and get Sts to listen and repeat the 
times in chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Give further 
practice of words which your Sts find difficult.
e 5.23
See times in Student’s Book on p.34
 Focus on o’clock and explain that we sometimes use the 
word o’clock when we are just saying the hour, as in It’s one 
o’clock or It’s six o’clock, but you can also say It’s six. We don’t 
use o’clock when including minutes in the time, e.g. It’s 
twenty past four NOT It’s twenty past four o’clock.
 Remind Sts of the pronunciation of half and quarter. You 
might also mention that some people don’t put a in front 
of quarter, e.g. It’s quarter past three. Both are correct.
Function telling the time
 V  the time, saying how you feel, e.g. I’m tired, hungry, etc.
 P  /ɒ/, silent consonants
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts learn how to tell the time. In most 
languages, there are two possible ways of telling the time: 
digital (hour + minutes), e.g. seven forty, six twenty, and 
analogue (minutes before (to) or after (past) the hour), e.g. 
twenty to six, twenty past six. Sts will hear both if they travel 
to an English-speaking country. To avoid confusing Sts with 
two forms, the focus here is on the more common analogue 
time. Teachers may want to point out the alternative 
(digital time) to Sts, so they will recognize it if they hear it, 
and can use it if they find it easier. After Sts have learned 
and practised telling the time, they focus on words with 
silent consonants, such as half and Wednesday. The next 
vocabulary focus is on a few adjectives describing how you 
feel. After listening to Jenny and her friend, Amy, on a night 
out, Sts practise some useful phrases. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative  Time bingo p.183 (instructions p.163)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 3 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 3 
Can you remember? 1–5
Online Practice  Practical English 3 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise numbers 1–30. Get Sts to count around the class, first 
normally, then in twos (2, 4, 6, etc.), in threes (3, 6, 9, etc.), and 
finally with fives (5, 10, 15, etc.).
1 r TELLING THE TIME
a e 5.21 Books closed. Show Sts your watch or a picture 
of a watch, and ask What is it? (A watch) Then point to the 
clock in the classroom (or draw one on the board), and ask 
What is it? (A clock) Say What time is it? and then look at 
your watch or at your mobile phone. Now model and drill 
the question and write it on the board.
 Books open. Focus on the instructions and ask Sts to cover 
the conversations with a piece of paper.
 Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and match 
the conversations and photos. Play again as necessary.
 Check answers.
1 A  2 C  3 B
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 63@@
63
3 PRONUNCIATION /ɒ/, silent consonants
Pronunciation notes
/ɒ/
This sound is sometimes the letter o, e.g. coffee and not, 
but can exceptionally be the letter a, especially after w, 
e.g. want, watch, what. However, you may want to remind 
Sts to be careful with the letters o and a, as they have 
several other pronunciations, depending on the word.
Silent consonants
English words frequently have consonants that are not 
pronounced, i.e. that are ‘silent’. It is important for Sts to 
realize that in English, spelling and pronunciation do not 
always go together.
Encourage Sts to cross out silent letters when they learn 
new words, e.g. listen.
It is also common for English words to be pronounced 
with fewer syllables than appear in the written word, e.g. 
Wednesday /ˈwenzdeɪ/ and interesting /ˈɪntrəstɪŋ/.
a e 5.25 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 5.25
See words and sound in Student’s Book on p.35
 Focus on the sound picture clock. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after clock. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ɒ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Play the audio again from the beginning for Sts to listen 
and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
b e 5.26 Write the word HALF on the board and say it  
/hɑːf/. Ask Which letter is not pronounced? Elicit that the 
letter l is not pronounced: it is silent.
 Focus on the Silent letters box and go through it with 
the class.
 Now focus on the instructions. Play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen. Highlight that the 
letters with a red strikethrough line are silent.
e 5.26
See words in Student’s Book on p.35
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Remind Sts that Wednesday looks as if it has three 
syllables, but in fact it is pronounced as a two-syllable 
word /ˈwenzdeɪ/. The first d and the second e are both 
silent.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
 Finally, get a few individual Sts to say the words.
c e 5.27 Give Sts a minute to look at the conversations 
and note the words with silent letters.
b Tell Sts to cover the times and look at the clocks. Give 
them time to practise saying the times to themselves.
 Monitor and help, correcting pronunciation as necessary. 
Note any general problems, and focus on them on the 
board at the end.
 With the first line of sentences covered, ask individuals 
Clock one. What time is it? Do the same for all the clocks, 
calling on Sts at random. Sts could also practise this in 
pairs.
c e 5.24 Focus on the instructions. Draw a clock on the 
board like the ones in the Student’s Book, with no hands. 
Play the audio and pause after the first time. Ask a student 
to come to the board and draw the time. Then get Sts to 
draw the time (twenty to nine) on the first clock in their 
books.
 Play the rest of the audio, pausing after each item to give 
Sts time to draw the hands on their clocks.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by writing the times on the board, or by getting 
individual Sts to come to the board to draw the time on 
each clock.
e 5.24 
1 It’s twenty to nine.
2 It’s quarter past seven.
3 It’s five past two.
4 It’s twelve o’clock.
5 It’s half past eight.
6 It’s quarter past eleven.
d Put Sts in pairs to practise asking and answering about the 
clocks.
 Monitor and help as needed. Note any problems and 
write these on the board.
 Finally, focus on The time box and go through it with the 
class. Highlight that you can always use digital time, and 
this has become more common with digital watches and 
mobile phone use. However, the analogue use of telling 
the time is still widely used by native speakers.
e Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to go to 
Communication What time is it?, A on p.79 and  
B on p.83.
 Sts each have ten clocks, five of which are complete and 
five of which have no clock hands. Sts share information 
and draw the missing clock hands.
 Go through the instructions with Sts and get a good pair 
to demonstrate. Monitor and help.
 When Sts have finished, get them to compare their clocks 
and check the times.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 3.
PE3
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 64@@
64
 Check answers.
Sts should tick: a theatre and a restaurant.
e 5.30
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
A = Amy, J = Jenny
A Hi. Sorry I’m late. What time’s the show?
J Don’t worry. It’s at eight o’clock.
A What time is it now?
J It’s OK. It’s only twenty to eight.
***
A What a great show!
J Yes, fantastic. I’m hungry. Do you want a pizza?
A What time is it?
J Um, quarter to eleven.
A It’s late, and I’m tired.
J Oh, come on. I know a really good Italian restaurant near here.
A Oh, OK. Let’s go.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  You could play the video / audio again 
and write these questions on the board:
WHO IS LATE, AMY OR JENNY? 
IS THE SHOW GOOD? 
WHO IS TIRED? 
WHAT RESTAURANT DO THEY GO TO? 
WHAT DO THEY EAT?
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
b Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 1–3. 
Make sure they understand what they mean.
 Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and 
complete the sentences with the times. Play again as 
necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 eight o’clock
2 twenty to eight
3 a quarter to eleven
6 r USEFUL PHRASES
  e 5.31 Focus on the phrases and make sure Sts 
understand what each one means.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 5.31
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.35
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 5.27
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.35
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversations.
 Ask two or three pairs to practise each conversation for 
the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts practise in pairs, play the audio, 
pausing after each line for Sts to listen and repeat.
4 VOCABULARY saying how you feel
a e 5.28 Pretend to be, for example, very hot, by miming. 
Write on the board: I’M HOT. = I FEEL HOT. Focus on the title, 
saying how you feel, and explain / elicit its meaning.
 Now focus on sentences 1–5 and make sure Sts 
understand what they mean.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 5.28
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.35
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat. Give extra practice as necessary, 
focusing on the words which Sts find most difficult.
b Focus on the instructions and give Sts a few minutes to 
match 1–5 in a to a–e.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c e 5.29 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
1 b  2 c  3 a  4 e  5 d
e 5.29
a 3 A I’m hungry. 
B Time for lunch.
b 1 A I’m tired. 
B Time for bed.
c  2 A I’m cold. 
B It’s five degrees this morning.
d 5 A I’m thirsty. 
B I need a glass of water.
e 4 A I’m hot. 
B It’s thirty-five degrees!
 Highlight that we use be, NOT have, with hot, cold, hungry, 
etc. because they are adjectives. Many languages express 
these feelings using have + noun.
 Now either put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and 
answer the question How do you feel at the moment?, or do 
it as a whole-class activity.
 If Sts worked in pairs, ask a few Sts how they feel.
5 r A NIGHT OUT
a e 5.30 Focus on the instructions and the five places in 
the list. Make sure Sts know what they mean. Model and 
drill their pronunciation.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and tick the two places Jenny and Amy 
go to.
PE3
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 65@@
6A
65
 6A A school reunion
 G  present simple: he, she, it
 V  jobs and places of work
 P  third person -es, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
This lesson introduces the third person singular (he, she, it) of 
the present simple. This is the only verb form in the present 
tense that is different, as there is a change to the verb 
ending (+ -s or -es, e.g. works, teaches), and where a different 
auxiliary is used (does / doesn’t) to form questions and 
negatives. For this reason, a whole lesson has been devoted 
to this point, and beginners will need time to assimilate it.
The context of this lesson is a school reunion. The new 
grammar point is presented through a conversation 
between two old school friends who are talking (not always 
very sympathetically) about other classmates they haven’t 
seen for years. This leads into Pronunciation, where Sts 
practise the three possible third person -s sounds, /s/, /z/, 
and /ɪz/. This is followed by Vocabulary, where Sts learn the 
words for some common jobs and places of work (e.g. in an 
office). Then Sts read about people who use English in their 
work, e.g. a Spanish waiter serving tourists in Madrid. There 
is a second pronunciation focus on sentence rhythm, and 
then Sts talk about the jobs of two people they know and 
whether they use English at work. Finally, Sts write a couple 
of paragraphs about the two people they spoke about.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar present simple: he, she, it p.146 
Communicative What do they do? Where do they work? 
p.184 (instructions p.164) 
Vocabulary Jobs and places of work p.218  
(instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook 6A
Online Practice 6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Write seven dashes on the board and play Hangman with 
the word DOCTOR (see p.21 for how to play Hangman). Tell Sts 
that the word is a job, making sure Sts know what job means.
When the word has been guessed, ask Sts if they know any 
other English words for jobs, and write them on the board.
1 VOCABULARY jobs and places of work
a Books open. Focus on the photos and the question.
 Give Sts time to complete the jobs.
 Check answers.
1 taxi driver   2 teacher   3 receptionist
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Jobs and places of 
work on p.124.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that:
• in English, we always use a or an before jobs, e.g. He’s a 
teacher. My sister’s an actress.
• waiter is used for a man, and waitress for a woman.
• an assistant is someone who helps others. For example, 
a shop assistant helps customers in shops and 
serves them.
There are various different prepositions used when saying 
what people do, e.g. work for a company, be at school / 
university, work in an office, etc. It is important to highlight 
these from the beginning, but it will take Sts time to use 
them correctly.
 e 6.1 Look at 1 What do they do? and focus on a. Play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the words in chorus. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 6.1
See What do they do? in Student’s Book on p.124
 Now focus on b. Get Sts to cover the words and look at 
the questions in the speech bubbles, What does he / she 
do?, and explain / elicit that this is the same as What is 
his / her job? Model and drill the examples in chorus and 
individually.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to ask and answer 
questions about the photos. Monitor and help, correcting 
pronunciation where necessary.
 e 6.2 Now focus on c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat the sentences.
e 6.2
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.124
 Highlight that we say work for a company, be at school /  
university. Elicit / Explain the meaning of unemployed and 
retired.
 Now focus on d. If Sts are working, check that they know 
how to say their own job and get them to write it on the 
line. Write any new jobs on the board. Get Sts to underline 
the stress in these words.
 If Sts are not working, get them to write what is true for 
them, e.g. I’m at school. / I’m a student. / I’m unemployed. / 
I’m retired.
 e 6.3 Look at 2 Where do they work? and focus on a. 
Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the phrases in 
chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word 
stress and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. 
Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 66@@
66
6A
e 6.3
See Where do they work? in Student’s Book on p.124
 Highlight that we use usually say work in a place, but with 
home, we use the preposition at, i.e. at home.
 Now focus on b and get Sts to cover the phrases, look 
at the photos, and say the phrases. They could do this 
individually or with a partner.
 Now focus on c. Model and drill the example question 
and answer in chorus and individually.
 Then get Sts to ask and answer questions about the 
jobs in pairs. Monitor and help, correcting pronunciation 
where necessary.
 Finally, focus on d. Get Sts to write a sentence with their 
place of work or study. Write any new places on the board. 
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c Focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to choose a job 
from the Vocabulary Bank on p.124. 
 Tell Sts to stand up and mingle and ask at least five other 
Sts the two questions.
 Get some feedback from various Sts.
2 GRAMMAR present simple: he, she, it
a Do this as a whole-class activity. If Sts can’t guess, 
tell them to look at the title of the lesson, A school 
reunion, and elicit / explain its meaning. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
They are old school friends. They are at a school reunion.
b e 6.4 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–5. 
 Now get Sts to cover the conversation and play the audio 
once the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 6.4
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.36
 Play the audio again and give Sts time to do the task.
 Find out, with a show of hands, how many Sts have 
put T (true) or F (false) for each item, but don’t give the 
correct answers at this point, as Sts will check their own 
answers in c.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
c Tell Sts to uncover the conversation, and play the audio 
again for them to read and listen at the same time. Get Sts 
to check their answers to b.
 Check answers.
1 T   2 F   3 T   4 F   5 F
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences. 
Check answers.
2 She works for a newspaper, The Times.
4 He teaches French.
5 Laura is Matt’s wife.
 Now go through the conversation line by line, dealing 
with any vocabulary problems that arose. 
d Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
conversation again and to complete the chart.
 Check answers and write them on the board. Highlight 
the changes from first person singular to third person.
he / she
+
She works for a newspaper.
−
She doesn’t wear glasses.
?
What does he do?
e Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.102. 
Grammar notes
present simple: he, she, it
The he, she, and it forms of the present simple are different 
from the other forms. The positive form of the verb always 
finishes with an -s (or -es). At this level, Sts will probably 
find it difficult to remember to add the -s / -es and will 
need constant reminding.
Highlight that we form negatives by putting doesn’t  
/ˈdʌznt/ (NOT don’t) before the infinitive form. Emphasize 
that there is no s on the main verb in these sentences.  
A typical mistake is: He doesn’t works here.
Doesn’t is the contracted form of does not. Remind Sts 
that native speakers usually use contractions in spoken 
English.
Highlight that we use does (NOT do) with he, she, or it and 
the infinitive to make questions, e.g. Does she work for our 
magazine?
 !  If Sts ask about the meaning of does, tell them that, 
like do, it is a word we need in the present simple to help 
make negatives and questions and it cannot be translated.
Spelling rules: third person -s
Highlight that most verbs make the he / she / it form by 
adding -s, e.g. eats, drinks.
Verbs ending in -ch, -sh, -s, -z, -ss, -zz, and -x make the he / 
she / it form by adding -es, e.g. watches, finishes, kisses.
Verbs ending in a consonant + y make the he / she / it 
form by changing the y to i and adding -es, e.g. studies. 
This change does not occur when the verb ends in a 
vowel + y, e.g. plays.
Point out that spelling rules for verbs in the third person 
singular are the same as those for plural nouns (see 
Student’s Book 3A on p.96 and the Pronunciation notes 
on the next page).
The verbs have, do, and go are irregular in the he / she / it  
form and change to has, does, and goes. Highlight that 
goes /ɡəʊz/ and does /dʌz/ are pronounced differently.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 6.5 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. You may want to point out that the sentences  
It works / It doesn’t work are a different meaning of the verb 
work (= It isn’t broken / It’s broken).
 Then go through the rules with the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 67@@
67
6A
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and circle the 
verbs where the final -es is pronounced /ɪz/.
 Check answers.
Sts should circle: finishes, teaches, watches
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each verb for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to circle the verbs before playing 
the audio.
b e 6.7 Focus on the instructions and the example, and 
tell Sts they will hear a sentence with I and then they 
will hear either he, she, it, a name, or a family member. 
They have to say the sentence again, beginning with the 
word(s) they just heard.
 Play the example, pausing for Sts to say He lives in New York 
in chorus. Make sure Sts understand what they have to do 
before continuing.
 Play the rest of the audio and give Sts time to say the third 
person forms in chorus.
e 6.7
1 I live in New York. He (pause) He lives in New York.
2 I finish work at eight. She (pause) She finishes work at eight.
3 I teach English. My brother (pause) My brother teaches English.
4 I watch CNN. She (pause) She watches CNN.
5 I write books. He (pause) He writes books.
6 I go to university. John (pause) John goes to university.
7 I don’t eat meat. My sister (pause) My sister doesn’t eat meat.
8 I don’t read newspapers. My husband (pause) My husband doesn’t 
read newspapers.
9 Do you work? He (pause) Does he work?
 10 Do you drink coffee? She (pause) Does she drink coffee?
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
4 READING
a Do this as a whole-class activity. Write any new jobs on 
the board. Model and drill their pronunciation.
b Focus on the article and read the introduction together 
(as far as Write and tell us.). Make sure Sts understand the 
phrase have in common.
 Tell Sts to read the rest of the article and complete the 
two gaps with jobs from the Vocabulary Bank Jobs and 
places of work on p.124.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c e 6.8 Play the audio for Sts to read and listen at the 
same time.
 Check answers.
1 waiter   2 receptionist
e 6.8
See article in Student’s Book on p.37
d Focus on the Why…? Because… box and go through it 
with the class. Model and drill the pronunciation of the 
two words.
 Focus on the information box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 6A on p.103 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 He reads magazines.
2 My sister studies Italian.
3 Does he speak English?
4 My brother doesn’t eat fish.
5 Where does your wife work?
6 Tom doesn’t speak Italian.
7 Does she like cats?
8 Andrew has two brothers.
9 What does he eat for lunch?
10 My mother watches a lot of TV.
11 What does your son do?
12 Maria doesn’t need a new car.
b
1 She listens to the radio in the car.
2 My brother goes to university in Manchester.
3 We don’t work at the weekend.
4 Does Angela live with her mother?
5 The programme finishes at 9.30.
6 She usually has fruit for breakfast.
7 We don’t watch TV at the weekend.
8 Do you want tea or coffee?
9 Where do your children go to school?
10 Linda doesn’t eat meat, fish, or eggs. She’s a vegan.
11 Does Andrew like his new job?
12 Luisa doesn’t have brothers or sisters.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3 PRONUNCIATION third person -es
Pronunciation notes
The rules for pronouncing the third person -s are the 
same as those for pronouncing the s of plural nouns (see 
Pronunciation notes in 3A on p.37).
The difference between the /s/ and /z/ endings is small, 
and you may not wish to focus too much on it at this level.
We suggest you highlight the /ɪz/ pronunciation of the 
-es ending in verbs that end in -sh and -ch, e.g. watches, 
teaches. Stress that this adds an extra syllable to the 
word: watch = one syllable; watches = two syllables. Write 
examples on the board showing the stressed syllables, e.g. 
watches, teaches.
a e 6.6 Focus on the aim, third person -es, and tell Sts that 
the endings of present simple verbs with he, she, and it 
have the same pronunciation rules as plural nouns, e.g. 
books /s/, bags /z/, watches /ɪz/.
 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts just to listen.
e 6.6
See list of words in Student’s Book on p.37
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 68@@
68
6A
 Get feedback and find out about some of the Sts’ friends’ 
or relatives’ jobs. If some Sts discuss jobs that aren’t on the 
vocabulary list, write these on the board and encourage 
Sts to add them to their notebooks.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to 
ask you first about a friend’s or a relative’s job.
EXTRA IDEA  If most of your class have jobs, elicit the 
questions What do you do? Where do you work? Do you speak 
English at work? Do you like your job? Then get them to ask 
each other the questions. 
6 WRITING
 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to read the model 
paragraph. Point out that the sentences are the answers 
to the questions in 5c.
 Give Sts time to write about their two people. Monitor 
and help. Correct any mistakes on the board.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 6.11 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 6A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
 Now focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
quesrions 1−5.
 Give Sts time to read the article again.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the questions.
 Check answers.
1 Because he needs to help tourists. Because a lot of tourists 
don’t speak Spanish.
2 He helps customers with the menu and he says what the 
special dishes are.
3 She works for a multinational company.
4 She welcomes people and she answers the phone.
5 Because it’s the language of the company.
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
5  PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Sentence rhythm
For information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 2B.
a e 6.9 Focus on the instructions and the conversation. 
Remind Sts that the words in bigger font are the ones 
which are stressed (because they carry the important 
information). Also remind them that the underlined 
syllables in the multi-syllable words are stressed more.
 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts to listen and 
read at the same time.
e 6.9
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.37
b e 6.10 Play the audio again, pausing after each line if 
necessary, for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to try and copy the rhythm on the audio by stressing the 
bigger words in bold more strongly and by saying the 
others more lightly and quickly.
e 6.10
Same as script 6.9 with repeat pauses
EXTRA SUPPORT  Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
the conversation. Make sure they swap roles.
c Focus on the instructions and tell Sts they are going to 
have a similar conversation as in a about two people 
they know.
 Focus on the question prompts and the example. Elicit the 
other questions Sts will need to ask, using the prompts:
 
Where does she work?
 
Does she speak English at work?
 
Does she like her job?
 Model and drill the questions. Then put Sts in pairs, A and 
B. Get A to tell B who his / her first person is.
 B then asks the four questions.
 Then B tells A who his / her first person is. A then asks the 
four questions.
 They then repeat this for their second person. Monitor and 
help with vocabulary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 69@@
69
6B
b e 6.12 Focus on the photos and captions. Tell Sts that 
they are going to listen to Hannah, answering the eight 
questions in the questionnaire, and the first time they 
listen, they only need to find out if she likes mornings.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Yes, she does.
e 6.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
I = interviewer, H = Hannah
I Hannah works for the BBC. She has a son, Kit, who’s three 
years old. 
Hannah, what time do you usually get up?
H I get up at seven. But I also get up in the night, because Kit usually 
calls me. I tell him to sleep, but he usually comes into my bed.
I Do you usually feel tired?
H Yes, I always feel tired!
I Do you have a shower or a bath in the morning?
H I turn on the TV for Kit and then I have a bath in five minutes.
I Do you always have breakfast?
H Yes, I need breakfast every day!
I Where do you have it? 
H I have it in a café on the way to work.
I What do you have for breakfast?
H I have a coffee, and sometimes I have some toast with avocado. 
It’s delicious.
I What time do you go to work?
H The perfect time to leave the house is at eight, but we usually 
leave at twenty past eight.
I Do you usually need to hurry in the morning?
H Yes, always! 
I Do you like mornings?
H Yes. I love mornings.
I Why?
H Because I love my job, and I’m happy to go to work!
c Play the audio again for Sts to listen for Hannah’s answers 
to questions 1–8 in the questionnaire. They can write the 
question number and a short answer on a piece of paper. 
Play the audio again as necessary.
 Check answers by playing the audio again and pausing 
after Hannah answers each question.
 Check answers.
1 She gets up at 7.00.
2 Yes, she always feels tired.
3 Yes, she has a bath in the morning.
4 Yes, she always has breakfast. In a café.
5 She has a coffee and sometimes some toast with avocado.
6 She goes to work at 8.20.
7 Yes, she always needs to hurry.
8 Yes because she loves her job and is happy to go to work.
 Highlight any new useful lexis, e.g. leave, hurry, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
 G  adverbs of frequency
 V  a typical day
 P  /j/ and /juː/, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is daily routine, and it begins with 
a questionnaire, Are you a morning person?, about typical 
morning activities. This leads into learning the vocabulary 
to talk about daily routines, and a grammar focus on using 
adverbs of frequency. We have deliberately limited the 
choice of adverbs to the four most common ones – always, 
never, usually, and sometimes. The focus is on their position 
with the present simple (other adverbs of frequency, and 
their position after be, are taught in English File Elementary). 
Pronunciation focuses on the /j/ sound, e.g. usually, and on 
sentence rhythm. Sts then consolidate the grammar and 
vocabulary in a speaking and writing activity where they first 
talk about their typical evening, and then write about their 
typical morning. The lesson ends with a video about a day 
in the life of a tour guide in New York. If you are not able to 
watch the video in class, make sure you get Sts to watch it at 
home and do the exercises.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar adverbs of frequency p.147 
Communicative What do you usually do? p.185 
(instructions p.164) 
Vocabulary What’s the word? p.219 (instructions p.205)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video A day in the life of a New York tour guide
For students
Workbook 6B
Online Practice 6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write A.M. and P.M. on the board and elicit that they refer to 
the time (before midday and after).
Then tell Sts you want them to say either Good morning, 
Good afternoon, or Good evening when you say what the 
time is.
Then say, e.g. It’s 9 a.m., and elicit Good morning. Continue to 
give Sts practice with all three expressions.
1 LISTENING & SPEAKING
a Books open. Focus on the questionnaire Are you a morning 
person? and elicit / explain what morning person means  
(a person who is very awake and energetic in the 
morning, but is usually tired at night). Give Sts time to 
read the questions. Then go through them, making sure 
Sts understand each one.
 Give Sts time to think about their answers.
 6B Good morning, goodnight
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 70@@
70
6B
 e 6.15 Focus on the instructions for b and the example. 
Demonstrate the activity by playing the first two 
sentences and asking Sts to point to the pictures. Each 
time, ask them What number is the picture?
 Now play the audio from the beginning, pausing after 
each sentence for Sts to listen and point to the picture.
She finishes work at six o’clock: Picture 7
She goes to the gym: Picture 10
She watches TV: Picture 14
She goes shopping: Picture 9
She goes to work: Picture 4
She does housework: Picture 13
She gets up at a quarter to seven: Picture 1
She goes to bed at half past eleven: Picture 16
She makes dinner: Picture 11
She has a coffee: Picture 5
She has dinner at half past eight: Picture 12
e 6.15
Lisa has lunch at one o’clock.
She finishes work at six o’clock.
She goes to the gym.
She watches TV.
She goes shopping.
She goes to work.
She does housework.
She gets up at quarter to seven.
She goes to bed at half past eleven.
She makes dinner.
She has a coffee.
She has dinner at half past eight.
 Focus on the instructions for Activation. Elicit the first five 
sentences, i.e. In the morning: She gets up at a quarter to 
seven; She has breakfast; She has a shower; etc.
 Then get Sts to continue in pairs. Remind them to use 
the third person -s. Monitor and help. Make a note of any 
mistakes and correct them on the board later.
 Finally, elicit Lisa’s day from the whole class, picture by 
picture.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
b Focus on the instructions and demonstrate the activity, or 
get a good student to demonstrate.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to continue miming or 
drawing.
 Monitor and help. Correct any mistakes on the board.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Let Sts refer to Vocabulary Bank A typical 
day on p.125 if they can’t remember all the verb phrases.
d e 6.13 Tell Sts they are now going to listen and repeat 
questions 1–8 in a.
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat, encouraging 
them to copy the rhythm.
 Give further practice as necessary.
e 6.13
See questions 1–8 in a in Student’s Book on p.38
e Tell Sts they are now going to interview each other. 
Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you some 
or all of the questions in the questionnaire. Give simple 
answers that Sts can understand.
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Ask Sts B to close their books. Tell 
Sts A to ask Sts B the questions and to write down their 
answers on a piece of paper.
 Then they swap roles. Monitor and help.
 When Sts have finished, get some feedback. Ask a few 
Sts to tell you if their partner is a morning person or not, 
and why.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  You could get Sts to change pairs and 
tell another student what they know about their first partner, 
e.g. Amy gets up at 7.30. She has a shower, etc.
2 VOCABULARY a typical day
a Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank A typical day on 
p.125. 
Vocabulary notes
make and do
Make and do are problematic verbs for many Sts who 
use one verb in their L1 for both meanings. If Sts want to 
know more about the difference, you could tell them that 
make usually = create (something new).
Highlight that do housework means doing jobs in the 
house, like cleaning or ironing. Sts may confuse this with 
homework (= work a teacher gives you to do at home).
go with to and the
If Sts want more information about why we don’t use the 
before work, school, and bed, give them a simplified rule 
and tell them that we don’t use the with more general 
words for places, only with more specific ones that not 
everyone goes to, e.g. the gym. If you have university 
students in the class, tell them that we also say go to 
university NOT go to the university.
 e 6.14 Focus on a. Play the audio for Sts to listen 
and repeat the phrases in chorus. Pause the audio 
as necessary. Highlight the word stress and the 
pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give further 
practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 6.14
See A typical day in Student’s Book on p.125
 Focus on the information box and go through it with 
the class. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 71@@
71
6B
a
1 My husband sometimes goes to the gym.
2 I always have a shower in the morning.
3 We usually have breakfast at home.
4 I never go to bed before 12.00.
5 Do they usually go to work by bus?
6 Jan sometimes has a sandwich for lunch.
7 Does the restaurant usually close late?
8 She never goes shopping after work.
9 I usually do my homework at the weekend.
10 I sometimes make fish for dinner.
b
1 Alex sometimes goes to bed very late.
2 We always do housework at the weekend.
3 Do you usually have lunch at home at the weekend?
4 I never have a bath, I always have a shower.
5 My sister always gets up early.
6 I never speak English at work.
7 We sometimes watch TV after dinner.
8 They never drink coffee in the evening.
9 Does your husband usually finish work at 7.30 p.m.?
 10 We sometimes drink tea with milk, but I prefer it with lemon.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4 PRONUNCIATION /j/ and /juː/, sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
/j/ 
You might like to highlight the following sound–spelling 
patterns.
• /j/ The letter y at the beginning of a word is 
pronounced /j/, e.g. yes. 
• The sound /j/ is not pronounced the same as the 
letter j, which is pronounced /dʒ/.
/juː/
In many English words, a /j/ sound is inserted before the 
/uː/ sound, either at the beginning of a word e.g. use, 
usually, university, or in the middle of a word, after some 
consonants, e.g. music, beautiful, new.
Sentence rhythm
For information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 2B.
a e 6.17 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 6.17
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.39
 
3 GRAMMAR adverbs of frequency
a Focus on the chart and elicit the days of the week from 
the letters at the top of the chart.
 Then elicit the meaning of the highlighted words by 
looking at the ticks and crosses and asking How many 
days? (always = five days, never = no days, usually = four 
days, sometimes = two days).
 If you know your Sts’ L1, you may want to elicit a 
translation of these words.
 Focus on the matching task. Tell Sts that 1–4 are the first 
halves of a sentence and a–d are the second halves. Tell 
Sts they have to read the sentences and match the two 
parts. Point out that the first one (1c) has been done 
for them.
 Give Sts time to complete the task.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by asking individual Sts to read out the complete 
sentence.
2 d   3 a   4 b
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.102. 
Grammar notes
adverbs of frequency
With all verbs except be, adverbs of frequency go before 
the main verb. At this level, we have not focused on 
adverbs of frequency with be. This is taught in English File 
Elementary.
In positive sentences, adverbs of frequency usually go 
between the pronoun and the verb, e.g. I always have 
coffee for breakfast.
 !  Sometimes and usually can also be used at the 
beginning of a sentence, but it is probably best to just 
give Sts a simple rule at this level.
In questions, adverbs of frequency go before the 
main verb.
Highlight that we always use a positive verb with never, 
e.g. I never eat meat. NOT I never don’t eat meat.
You may want to tell Sts that in a negative sentence, 
adverbs of frequency go between don’t / doesn’t and the 
main verb, e.g. I don’t usually have breakfast. However, this 
is not practised in the exercises.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 6.16 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 6B on p.103 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 72@@
72
6B
d Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. outside class. Then focus on the example 
and highlight the extra information. Demonstrate the 
activity by telling Sts about yourself with some of the 
phrases. Encourage Sts to add a bit of extra information or 
a reason.
 Ask a few Sts to make a true sentence with the first 
prompt. If they use always or usually, you could ask them 
Which radio station? 
 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to make true sentences. 
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any general problems 
and deal with them at the end.
 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could ask Sts to write the sentences 
and then read them out to a partner.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  At the end, you could get Sts to tell the 
class a sentence about their partner, e.g. Ivan always drinks 
espresso after lunch.
5 SPEAKING & WRITING
a Tell Sts they are going to use the pictures in the 
Vocabulary Bank A typical day to tell a partner about 
their typical evening. Focus on the example and elicit 
more example sentences from two or three Sts, e.g. I 
usually have dinner at about half past six. Then I watch TV…
 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank A typical day on 
p.125. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to continue describing their 
typical weekday evening, and to use adverbs of frequency 
whenever appropriate. 
 Get feedback from some Sts. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get fast finishers to talk about their 
typical Saturday or Sunday.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
b Write on the board: MY TYPICAL MORNING AND AFTERNOON, 
and write a sentence with the first expression (get up) on 
the board, e.g. I USUALLY GET UP AT SEVEN O’CLOCK.
 Ask Sts to copy the title and write a sentence saying what 
time they get up in the morning. Check to make sure Sts 
understand the task.
 Then tell Sts to refer back to the Vocabulary Bank on 
p.125 for the phrases they need to write about their typical 
morning and afternoon (during the week). Remind them 
to use adverbs of frequency and time words.
 Monitor and help while they do so.
 If you are short of time, Sts could do this for homework.
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to write their texts on a piece of paper, 
and not in their notebooks. Take in Sts’ texts, and read one 
out to the class. Ask Sts to guess who wrote it. Repeat with 
as many other texts as you have time for.
 Focus on the sound picture yacht. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after yacht. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /j/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for the /juː/ sound.
 Then play the audio again from the beginning, pausing at 
the end of the group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 6.18 Focus on the conversation and play the audio 
once the whole way through for Sts just to listen. Remind 
them that the words in bigger font are the ones which are 
stressed (because they carry the important information). 
Also remind them that the underlined syllables in the 
multi-syllable words are stressed more. 
e 6.18
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.38
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat, 
encouraging them to try to copy the rhythm on the audio 
by stressing the bigger bold words more strongly and by 
saying the others more lightly and quickly. Pause and play 
again as necessary. Highlight that about = more or less, 
approximately.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversation. Make sure they swap roles.
c Now tell Sts they are going to ask and answer the 
questions in b about a typical weekday. Demonstrate 
the activity by getting Sts to ask you the questions and 
answer them. Try to use about in one of your answers,  
e.g. I go to bed at about 9.30, and write the sentence on the 
board. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, paying special attention to sentence stress. 
Monitor and help. You could expand this activity by 
writing a few more verb prompts on the board, e.g. HAVE 
BREAKFAST, GO TO WORK, etc.
 Make a note of any general problems Sts are having and 
deal with these on the board at the end.
 Get some feedback from various Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Draw a clock on the board and use it to 
quickly revise the time with the class before they ask each 
other the questions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 73@@
73
6B
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences. 
Check answers. 
2 He usually gets up at eight o’clock.
3 He usually has fruit and cereal, and sometimes he has an 
omelette.
4 He works for a company called Real New York Tours.
5 His tours begin at ten o’clock.
6 He usually has a pizza for lunch.
 10 Every day he walks about six miles.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–3.
 Play the extracts video for Sts to watch and complete the 
sentences.
 Check answers.
1 Every morning  2 After  3 Then
1 Every morning he goes there by subway.
2 After work, Peter takes the subway back to Brooklyn.
3 Then he relaxes.
e Do this as a whole-class activity.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 6.19 Tell Sts to go to p.131 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 6B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
6 r VIDEO LISTENING
a Focus on the photos. Ask What does he do? and elicit / 
teach He’s a tour guide. Model and drill pronunciation. 
 Now tell Sts to look at the photos and, in pairs, number 
them 1–6 in order to show one day in the life of a tour 
guide in New York.
b Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and check.
 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1 D  2 C  3 F  4 A  5 B  6 E
A day in the life of a New York tour guide
N = narrator, P = Peter
N Hi! I’m in New York. I’m from England, but I’m here to learn about 
the life of a tour guide.
 
Peter Greenwald is a New York tour guide. He lives in a small 
apartment in Brooklyn.  
He usually gets up at eight o’clock.  
Peter has a big breakfast. He usually has fruit and cereal, and 
sometimes he has an omelette.  
He leaves the house at nine o’clock.
 
Peter works for a company called Real New York Tours.  
His tours always begin in Times Square. Every morning, he goes 
there by subway.  
Peter usually arrives at about nine forty-five.  
He meets his group and tells them about the tour. At ten o’clock, 
the tour begins.
P OK, let’s go!
N Peter takes them to places of interest all around Manhattan.  
They have lunch in Greenwich Village. Peter usually has a real 
New York pizza.
 
The tour ends in Wall Street.
P Wall Street is a very old street. The New York Stock Exchange is here.
N After work, Peter takes the subway back to Brooklyn.  
Then he relaxes. He usually reads a book. Sometimes, he watches 
TV.  
He goes to bed at about eleven o’clock. He needs to sleep. Every 
day he walks about six miles! 
 
Peter is an excellent tour guide: he loves his job, and he loves 
New York.
c Before Sts watch the video again, focus on the Glossary 
and go through it with the class.
 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–10. 
Make sure they understand all the lexis, e.g. miles.
 Play the video again for Sts to mark the sentences T (true) 
or F (false).
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
1 T  2 F  3 F  4 F  5 F  6 F  7 T  8 T  9 T  10 F
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 74@@
74
Revise and Check
 5&6 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 b   2 c   3 c   4 a   5 c
e 6.20
1
I = interviewer, J = John
I What do you usually have for breakfast?
J Um, just toast and a cup of tea, maybe.
2
I = interviewer, H = Hanna
I Do you live in a house or a flat?
H It’s a house.
I Where is it?
H It’s in Stockport, outside Manchester.
3
I = interviewer, L = Lisa
I Do you have children?
L I have children, yes I do. I have one son. He is sixteen.
4
I = interviewer, S = Susan
I What do you do?
S I’m retired.
I Do you like being retired?
S I do...very much.
5
I = interviewer, K = Kieran
I What time do you get up during the week?
K Um, quite early. Usually before eight a.m.
I And at weekends?
K At the weekends, much later. About ten a.m.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.34.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Can you understand these people? 5&6 
Quick Test 6 
File 6 Test 
Progress Test 1–6
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 a   2 a   3 b   4 a   5 b   6 a   7 b   8 a   9 b   10 a   
11 b   12 b   13 a   14 b   15 b
VOCABULARY
a
1 water   2 sugar   3 milk   4 cheese   5 orange juice
b
1 read   2 listen   3 go   4 live   5 get   6 watch   7 do   
8 speak   9 have   10 drink
c
1 unemployed   2 waiter   3 retired   4 nurse   5 journalist
d
1 (a) quarter to eight / seven forty-five   
2 ten past nine   
3 twenty-five past five / five twenty-five   
4 half past three / three thirty   
5 five to seven / six fifty-five
PRONUNCIATION
a
1 /j/ yacht   2 /dʒ/ jazz   3 /w/ witch   4 /v/ vase   5 /g/ girl
c
1 potatoes   2 policeman   3 always   4 usually   5 cereal
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
1 meat   2 vegetables   3 good   4 potatoes   5 Don’t   
6 hamburgers   7 every   8 coffee   9 small   10 Stop
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 75@@
7A
75
 7A Have a nice weekend!
 G  word order in questions: be and present simple
 V  common verb phrases 2: free time
 P  /w/, /h/, /eə/, and /aʊ/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is sport and other free-time activities.
The lesson begins with an article about what British people 
do at the weekend. This is followed by an interview with a 
British woman who talks about her typical weekend. Then 
in Vocabulary, Sts learn some more common verb phrases 
to describe free-time activities. In Grammar, the focus is 
on word order in questions (both with the verb be and the 
present simple of other verbs). The pronunciation focus is 
on four more sounds, /w/, /h/, /eə/, and /aʊ/. The lesson ends 
with a speaking activity where Sts use the grammar and 
vocabulary to talk about what they do at the weekend.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar word order in questions: be and present 
simple p.148 
Communicative Free time questionnaire p.186 
(instructions p.164) 
Vocabulary Common verb phrases 2: free time p.220 
(instructions p.206)
For students
Workbook 7A
Online Practice 7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write SATURDAY and SUNDAY on the board. Ask Sts what we 
call these two days, and elicit the weekend.
Then ask the class Who needs to work or study on Saturdays? 
and get a show of hands. Then do the same for Sundays. 
Ask Sts who said they worked on Saturday or Sunday what 
free days they have during the week.
1 READING & LISTENING
a Books open. Focus on the photos and the percentages in 
the list. Point out how to say the symbol %. Then focus on 
the title of the article and elicit / explain what it means. 
 Give Sts time to read the article and then, in pairs, ask 
them to try to complete the gaps with the percentages in 
the list.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
b e 7.1 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers. 
1 75%  2 66%  3 46%  4 48%  5 10%
e 7.1
Three out of four British people do the same thing every weekend!
After a hard week at work, the weekend is a time to do something 
fun and exciting. But a new study says that seventy-five per cent of 
British people do the same activities every Saturday and Sunday.
What do they do? Sixty-six per cent watch TV, forty-six per cent go 
shopping, and forty-eight per cent do housework.
And ten per cent spend the weekend at home – they never leave the 
house!
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c e 7.2 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
the question. Before playing the audio, point out the 
Glossary and go through it with the class.
 Play the audio once the whole way through.
 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Yes. She does the same thing every weekend, except when she’s 
on holiday.
e 7.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.89)
I = interviewer, P = Polly
I Do you go out on Friday night?
P Yes, my husband Andrew and I always go out for a drink or for 
dinner.
I Where do you go?
P We usually go to our local pub because they have good food 
there. We sometimes meet friends there, too.
I What time do you get up on Saturday and Sunday?
P On Saturday, at seven thirty. On Sunday, it depends. At about 
nine?
I What do you usually do on a Saturday?
P I work from nine to four. I’m a hairdresser, and we’re open on 
Saturdays. Then, after work, I go to the supermarket and buy food 
for the week. In the evening, we usually stay at home and watch 
TV. My husband’s a big football fan, and he always watches Match 
of the Day.
I Where do you usually have lunch on Sunday?
P With my parents, or sometimes Andrew’s parents. My dad makes 
a very good Sunday lunch – he’s the cook in the family.
I Are you tired on Sunday evening?
P Yes, because in the afternoon we need to do housework. 
Cleaning, washing – things like that.
I Do you do the same thing every weekend?
P Yeah – more or less. Except when we’re on holiday.
I What’s your favourite part of the weekend?
P Friday night, definitely!
d Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the sentences. 
Point out the example.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and mark each 
sentence with a day of the week.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 76@@
7A
76
1 Su She does housework.
2 Sa She gets up at 7.30.
3 Su She gets up at about 9.00.
4 Fr She goes to the pub with her husband.
5 Sa She goes to the supermarket.
6 Su She has lunch with her parents.
7 Fr She meets friends.
8 Sa She watches TV.
9 Sa She works until 4.00 p.m.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to look at what Polly does on 
Saturday and Sunday, and number the things in the order 
she does them.
Play the audio again for Sts to check.
Check answers.
Saturday
1 She gets up at 7.30.
2 She works until 4.00 p.m.
3 She goes to the supermarket.
4 She watches TV.
Sunday
1 She gets up at 9.00.
2 She has lunch with her parents.
3 She does housework.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.89, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e Put Sts in pairs or small groups to answer the questions. 
 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups. You 
could tell the class if your weekends are all the same or 
different.
2 VOCABULARY common verb phrases 2:  
 free time
a This exercise focuses on three verb–noun collocations 
that Sts heard in the interview with Polly. Focus on the 
instructions and give Sts a few minutes to complete the 
sentences.
b e 7.3 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
1 go  2 meet  3 stay
e 7.3
1 My husband Andrew and I always go out for a drink or for dinner.
2 We sometimes meet friends there, too.
3 In the evening, we usually stay at home and watch TV.
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Common verb 
phrases 2 on p.126.
Vocabulary notes
You might want to highlight that:
• we use play + names of ball and racket sports, e.g. golf, 
football, tennis, etc.
• we use play with musical instruments, e.g. play the 
piano. With musical instruments, we use the (play the 
piano), but not with sports (play football).
• we say do sport (in general).
 e 7.4 Look at 1 Free time and focus on a. Play the audio 
for Sts to listen and repeat the verbs and verb phrases in 
chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word 
stress and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. 
Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 7.4
See Free time in Student’s Book on p.126
 Now focus on b. Ask Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photos, and say the verbs or verb phrases. They could do 
this individually or with a partner.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems. 
 Focus on the meet box and go through it with the class.
 Now focus on Activation. Write SOMETIMES and NEVER on 
the board. Demonstrate the activity by making sentences 
about yourself, e.g. I sometimes go to the beach, I never play 
the piano. Elicit sentences with sometimes and never from 
two or three Sts, and then ask Sts to continue in pairs.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any common mistakes 
and deal with them afterwards on the board.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3 GRAMMAR word order in questions: be and  
 present simple
a Focus on the task. Elicit the first question and write it on 
the board (WHAT’S YOUR FAVOURITE PART OF THE WEEKEND?).
 Give Sts a few minutes to write the other three questions.
 Check answers and write them on the board.
2 Are you tired on Sunday evening?
3 What do you usually do on Saturday?
4 Do you do the same thing every weekend?
 Give Sts time to see if they can remember Polly’s answers.
 Elicit the answers from individual Sts.
1 Friday night
2 Yes
3 She works from nine to four. After work, she goes to the 
supermarket and buys food for the week. In the evening, she 
usually stays at home and watches TV.
4 Yeah – more or less.
b Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.104. 
Grammar notes
word order in questions
questions with be
Remind Sts that to make a question with the verb be, 
you simply invert the subject and the verb, so They are 
American becomes Are they American? and This is your 
coat becomes Is this your coat? It’s important to highlight 
again that questions with be do not use the auxiliaries do 
or does.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 77@@
7A
77
4 PRONUNCIATION /w/, /h/, /eə/, and /aʊ/
Pronunciation notes
/w/, /h/, /eə/, and /aʊ/
You may want to highlight the following sound–spelling 
patterns.
• /w/ For information on this sound, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 5B. Note that most question 
words, e.g. What, Where, Why, are pronounced /w/. The 
most common exception is Who, which is pronounced 
/huː/.
• /h/ For information on this sound, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 1A.
• /eə/ The letters ere are sometimes pronounced /eə/, 
e.g. where, but can also be /ɪə/, as in here.
• /aʊ/ ou and ow are often pronounced /aʊ/, e.g. house, 
brown. NB ow can also be /əʊ/, as in window.
a e 7.7 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 7.7
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.43
 Focus on the sound picture witch. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound).
 Now focus on the words after witch. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /w/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for house /h/, chair /eə/, and 
owl /aʊ/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 7.8 Focus on the conversations and play the audio 
once the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 7.8
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.43
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each question 
and answer for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Finally, give Sts time in pairs to practise the activity, asking 
and answering the questions. 
 Make sure Sts swap roles.
In questions with be, Sts sometimes forget to invert the 
subject and verb. Typical mistakes include: Ana’s a student? 
Your brother’s at university?
questions with other verbs
Remind Sts that with other main verbs in the present 
simple, you need to first use the auxiliary do or does, then 
the subject, and then the main verb in the infinitive, so 
She lives in London becomes Does she live in London?
If a question has a question word, e.g. What or Where, etc., 
then the question word always comes first.
The acronyms ASI (Auxiliary verb + Subject + Infinitive) 
and QuASI (Question word + Auxiliary verb + Subject + 
Infinitive) will help Sts remember the correct word order 
in questions in the present simple (with verbs other 
than be).
In questions with the auxiliaries do or does, Sts may leave 
out the auxiliary or get the word order wrong.  
Typical mistakes include: You live with your parents? How 
you do spell it?
 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 7.5 and e 7.6 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 7A on p.105 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 What music does she like?
2 How old is your sister?
3 What do you want for lunch?
4 Who’s that woman with Bob?
5 When do you have English classes? 
6 How do you spell your last name?
7 Where does your wife work?
8 Where do you usually go on holiday?
b
1 Where do your brothers work?
2 Is this your phone?
3 What time does the film start?
4 Does your husband speak Spanish?
5 How is your family?
6 Are we late for class?
7 Do your children like sushi?
8 What time does your wife finish work?
9 Why are you tired?
10 Who do you play tennis with?
c
1 Is football your favourite sport?
2 How do you relax at weekends?
3 What films are on TV this weekend?
4 Are you hungry? It’s time for lunch.
5 Where do you usually have lunch on Sundays?
6 Does your son play a lot of computer games?
7 How old is your teacher?
8 What TV programmes does your husband like?
9 Do you do sport or exercise during the week?
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 78@@
7A
78
5 SPEAKING
a Focus on the task and questions. Elicit from the class what 
the missing words are.
questions 1–8  Do / do you
question 9  Are you
question 10  do you
question 11  is / ’s
 Check Sts are making the questions correctly by getting 
them to ask you all of them. Give answers for yourself.
 Explain that later they will ask the questions, but now they 
just have to think about their answers. 
b Focus on the examples. Demonstrate the activity by 
asking a few Sts the first question, Do you go out on Friday 
or Saturday night?
 Then put Sts in pairs to ask and answer the questions and 
write their partner’s answers. 
 Monitor and help.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Encourage Sts to ask for and add extra 
information. 
c Focus on the task and example. Get Sts to find new 
partners. With their new partners, they ask and answer 
questions about their first partner’s weekend. Remind 
them to use does in non-be questions and to use the 
correct pronouns and possessive forms (he, she, his, her). 
For question 9, they will need to ask Is he / she…? and for 
question 11, they will have to change your to his or her.
 Monitor and help. Make notes of any problems and deal 
with these at the end.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 7.9 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 7A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 79@@
79
7B 
Lights, camera, action!
e 7.10
D = director, S = Scarlett, Sa = Sam
D OK. Be quiet, please. Scene one, take one. Lights, camera…action!
S Hello, Sam.
Sa Hello, Scarlett.
S Come in. Sit down. We need to talk.
Sa Talk? What about?
S Us. You and me.
Sa Listen to me, Scarlett. I love you! Do you love me?
S I don’t know, Sam. I need time.
Sa And Rupert? Do you love him?
S Don’t talk about Rupert. Yes, I like Rupert, but I don’t love him. You 
don’t understand.
Sa Don’t cry, Scarlett. Please don’t cry.
D Cut! Great! I like it. 
***
D OK, scene two. This is a big scene. Scarlett, go to the windows. 
Open them. Sam, go to Scarlett. Stand next to her. Scarlett, look at 
him. That’s great. Don’t move.
Sa What do I say to her? I don’t remember.
D Nothing. Don’t say anything. Kiss her.
b Now play the audio again and get Sts to complete the 
gaps. Point out that the first one (Be) has been done 
for them.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2 Come  3 Listen  4 talk  5 Don’t  6 go  7 Open   
8 Stand  9 look  10 say
c Tell Sts to cover the conversation and to look at sentences 
1–6 and the words in the list. Point out that the first one 
(Us) has been done for them. You could tell Sts that the 
gaps are all object pronouns and explain that a subject 
pronoun is used for a person who does an action, and an 
object pronoun is for the person who receives the action.
 Give Sts time to complete the task.
d e 7.11 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the sentences in full. 
Highlight that although the word them is pronounced  
/ðem/ when said in isolation, it is usually pronounced 
/ðəm/ when it follows other words, e.g. Open them /ðəm/.
2 me  3 you, me  4 him  5 it  6 them
e 7.11
1 S We need to talk.
 
Sa Talk? What about?
 
S Us. 
2 Listen to me, Scarlett.
3 I love you! Do you love me?
4 I like Rupert, but I don’t love him.
5 Great! I like it.
6 Go to the windows. Open them.
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
e Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.104. 
 G  imperatives, object pronouns: me, him, etc.
 V  kinds of films
 P  sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
In this lesson, actors on a film set provide the context for 
introducing imperatives and object pronouns.
The lesson starts with a conversation in which two actors 
are acting a scene in a film and the film director is giving 
them instructions. This allows Sts to see the new grammar 
in context before going to the Grammar Bank to practise 
it. In Vocabulary, Sts learn words for different film genres, e.g. 
a comedy, a drama, etc. Then Sts listen to five people talking 
about the Alien films and the actors in them, with more 
practice of object pronouns. This leads into Pronunciation, 
where Sts practise sentence rhythm in conversations similar 
to the listening. The lesson ends with Sts giving their own 
opinions about actors, actresses, and films.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar imperatives; object pronouns: me, him, etc.  
p.149 
Communicative What do you think of…? p.187 
(instructions p.165)
For students
Workbook 7B
Online Practice 7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the names of some actors, actresses, and film directors 
on the board.
Then ask Sts What does he / she do? and elicit He’s an actor. / 
She’s an actress. / He’s a film director., etc.
Then ask Sts if they know any more film directors, and if they 
think they are good.
1 GRAMMAR imperatives, object pronouns: me,  
 him, etc.
a e 7.10 Books open. Focus on the instructions and 
questions. Tell Sts not to write anything the first time they 
listen.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time and answer the questions. Tell 
them not to worry about the gaps.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to cover the conversation and 
just listen.
 Check answers.
She doesn’t know.
No, she likes Rupert, but she doesn’t love him.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 80@@
80
e 7.14
1 I (pause) me
2 you (pause) you
3 he (pause) him
4 she (pause) her
5 it (pause) it
6 we (pause) us
7 they (pause) them
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write all the object pronouns on the board 
for Sts to look at while listening.
g e 7.15 Focus on the instructions and example. Ask why 
the new sentence uses her and elicit that it is because 
Scarlett is a woman.
 Play the audio, pausing after each item for Sts to listen and 
respond in chorus.
e 7.15
1 I love Scarlett. (pause) I love her.
2 I don’t like dogs. (pause) I don’t like them.
3 I like your house. (pause) I like it.
4 Wait for Daniel. (pause) Wait for him.
5 Read the book. (pause) Read it.
6 I love cats. (pause) I love them.
7 Speak to your mother. (pause) Speak to her.
8 I don’t like your brother. (pause) I don’t like him.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write HIM, HER, IT, THEM on the board as a 
reminder for Sts.
h Put Sts in groups of three and get them to act out the 
conversation in a.
 Monitor and help. Make sure they swap roles.
 You could get a group to perform the role-play for the 
class.
2 VOCABULARY kinds of films
Vocabulary notes
This list of kinds of films is deliberately quite restricted. You 
may want to teach other types, e.g. rom-coms.
Some films are a combination of two kinds of films, e.g. a 
film can be both horror and science fiction, like the Alien 
films in this lesson.
a Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to match film types 1–7 
to film titles A–G.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to do the task. 
b e 7.16 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers. You could ask Sts if they know any of the 
films in A–G.
1 D  2 C  3 E  4 F  5 A  6 G  7 B
Grammar notes
imperatives
Highlight the simplicity of imperatives in English. There 
are only two forms: positive and negative, e.g. Wait, Don’t 
wait. Elicit / Give a few more examples of imperatives, 
encouraging Sts to give the negative forms, e.g. Sit down, 
Look, Listen, Go, Speak, etc.
object pronouns
Like subject pronouns, object pronouns are used to refer 
to people and things when we don’t want to repeat a 
noun, e.g. Rachel likes Jim, but she doesn’t love him.
Highlight that it is used for things, him for a man or boy, 
and her for a woman or girl. You may want to remind Sts 
that her is also the possessive adjective for a woman. The 
plural form them is used for both people and things.
Highlight that the object pronouns for it and you are the 
same as the subject pronouns.
 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 7.12 and e 7.13 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 7B on p.105 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 It’s very cold in here. Close the window, please.
2 Don’t eat those eggs! I want to make an omelette.
3 Don’t play the piano! The baby’s in bed!
4 Speak slowly, please. I don’t understand you.
5 You’re very tired. Go to bed.
6 Don’t make pasta for lunch! I don’t like it.
7 Sit down and open your books at page 43.
8 Don’t read my emails! They’re private.
9 Don’t worry! It isn’t a big problem.
b
1 I have an old bike, but I don’t use it very much.
2 Jim likes Sarah, but she doesn’t like him.
3 My children love music. I sing to them every night.
4 I don’t know her very well.
5 These are my new shoes. Do you like them?
6 I’m hungry. Can you make me a sandwich, please?
7 Our children usually have lunch with us at the weekend.
8 I don’t have my car today. Can I go to the concert with you?
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f e 7.14 Focus on the example and explain to Sts that 
they will hear a subject pronoun and they should say the 
object pronoun. 
 Play the example, pausing after the speaker says I for Sts  
to say me in chorus.
 Continue playing the audio, pausing after each item for 
Sts to listen and respond in chorus.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 81@@
81
e 7.18
(script in Student’s Book on p.90)
1
A Excuse me. Can you answer a few questions?
B Sure.
A Do you like the Alien films?
B I like the first one. It’s great. I don’t know the others.
A OK, thanks.
2
A Do you like the Alien films?
B Yes. They’re brilliant.
A Do you like Charlize Theron in Alien: Prometheus?
B She’s OK, but I prefer Sigourney Weaver.
3
A Do you like the Alien films?
B No, I hate science fiction films. I think they’re awful.
4
A Do you like the Alien films?
B Yes, I love them. And the actors are fantastic.
A Do you like Michael Fassbender?
B I really like him. I think he’s great.
5
A Do you like the Alien films?
B Sorry, I don’t know them.
 You could highlight the meaning of really (= very or very 
much) in I really like him.
c Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
five extracts. You could put Sts in pairs and get them to 
see if they can remember who or what the bold pronouns 
refer to.
 Play the audio again the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and do the task. Play the audio again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1 It’s great. = the first Alien film 
2 She’s OK… = Charlize Theron
3 I think they’re awful. = science fiction films 
4 I really like him. I think he’s great. = Michael Fassbender
5 Sorry, I don’t know them. = the Alien films
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.90, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell Sts what 
you think of the films and actors, too.
4 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING sentence  
 rhythm 
Pronunciation notes
Sentence rhythm
Remind Sts that in English, the words that carry the 
important information are said more strongly than 
others, e.g. in Do you like Sigourney Weaver?, the words like 
Sigourney Weaver are stressed more strongly than Do you.
For more information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 3B.
When we give a positive or negative opinion, we often 
stress the adjective more strongly, e.g. I don’t like him. He’s 
awful.
a e 7.19 Focus on the task and the conversations. Remind 
Sts that the words in bigger bold print are stressed.
e 7.16
1 D action films
2 C animations
3 E comedies
4 F dramas
5 A horror films
6 G science fiction films
7 B westerns
c e 7.17 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 7.17
1 action films 
2 animations 
3 comedies 
4 dramas
5 horror films 
6 science fiction films 
7 westerns
EXTRA IDEA  You could write each kind of film on the 
board and elicit from the class titles of recent films, or films 
everyone knows, for each category.
3 LISTENING
a Focus on the posters and photos, and do the question as 
a whole-class activity.
 Ask Sts if they have seen any of the films. You could tell 
them that the Alien films began with Alien in 1979, which 
was directed by Ridley Scott. It was followed by three 
sequels, Aliens (1986), Alien 3 (1992), and Alien Resurrection 
(1997). Scott also directed a prequel series – Prometheus 
(2012) and Alien: Covenant (2017).
 Now ask Sts if they know any of the actors / actresses. You 
could tell Sts that Charlize Theron (1975–) is South African, 
Michael Fassbender (1977–) is Irish, and Sigourney Weaver 
(1949–) is American.
!  Don’t ask Sts if they like the films or actors, as they will be 
answering this later.
b e 7.18 Focus on the instructions. Make sure Sts 
understand that the speakers are answering questions 
about the Alien series, not just one film.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and find out which speakers liked all the films.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speakers 2 and 4
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 82@@
82
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 7.19
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.45
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each question 
and answer for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
b Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations in a.
 You could get some pairs to read the conversations in 
front of the class.
c Focus on the instructions and the chart. For the first 
column, you could elicit the Star Wars films as an example 
of a series. You could also tell Sts that nowadays the word 
actor is sometimes used for both men and women. 
 Give Sts time to complete their chart with films / people 
that they like (or don’t like). Make sure they write the kinds 
of films in the plural, e.g. action films.
d Focus on the instructions. Explain that the questions 
should all start with Do you like…, and encourage Sts to 
use Yes, I like him / her / them (a lot) or No, I don’t like him / 
her / them in their answers. Tell Sts to use What about you? 
to ask the question back to their partner. Encourage them 
to use adjectives too, e.g. very / really good, fantastic, great, 
terrible, etc. You could write these on the board to remind 
Sts to use them.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer about the 
information in their chart in c.
 Get some feedback from various pairs by asking, e.g. What 
actors / actresses do you like? What kinds of films do you like?
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
  e 7.20 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 7B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 83@@
83
Christmas Day: The day when Christians celebrate the 
birth of Christ. It is celebrated on 25th December.
New Year’s Day: The first day of the new year, in most 
countries 1st January.
Halloween: A holiday celebrated on 31st October 
in which children dress up and go around the 
neighbourhood, calling out Trick or treat? People then give 
them sweets or other ‘treats’.
Valentine’s Day: It is celebrated on 14th February and is 
the day of romance.
Thanksgiving: Each year on the fourth Thursday in 
November, American and Canadian families get together 
for Thanksgiving.
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Months and ordinal 
numbers on p.127.
Vocabulary notes
Depending on your Sts’ L1, some of the months of the 
year in English may be similar in their language. However, 
the word stress is probably different, and it’s important 
that Sts focus on this.
 e 7.21 Look at 1 Months and focus on a. Give Sts 
time to read the list of months. Now play the audio for 
Sts to listen and repeat the months in chorus. Pause 
the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and 
the pronunciation of the more difficult months. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 7.21
See Months in Student’s Book on p.127
 Focus on the information box and explain that in English 
months begin with a capital letter. If appropriate, compare 
this with Sts’ L1.
 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the months 
and focus on the abbreviations. Get them to remember 
and say the months individually or with a partner. 
EXTRA IDEA  Test Sts by telling them to close their books. 
Write the abbreviations for the months on the board in order 
(numbered 1–12), e.g. JAN, FEB, and elicit the month from Sts.
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to test each other in A / B pairs. A says a 
number, e.g. five, and B then says the month (May).
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 4.
c Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
answer questions 1–4.
 Check answers.
1 February
2 May
3 January, June, July
4 September, October, November, December
Function saying the date, talking on the phone 
 V  months, ordinal numbers
 P  /θ/ 
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts learn how to say the date in English. This 
involves first teaching Sts the months of the year. Sts then 
learn ordinal numbers, which are presented through a 
general knowledge quiz, and, finally, they learn how to say 
the date. As this is the Beginner level, Sts are just taught 
one way of saying the date, i.e. the first of May (as opposed 
to May the first). They are not taught how to say the year, as 
this is introduced in English File Elementary. Sts then listen 
to a telephone conversation between Rob and Jenny, which 
involves them understanding various dates, and they learn 
some useful phrases. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative Famous birthdays p.188  
(instructions p.165) 
Vocabulary Months and ordinal numbers p.222 
(instructions p.206)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 4 
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 4 
Can you remember? 1–7
Online Practice  Practical English 4 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Play the number game Buzz. For instructions, see 2B, 
3 Vocabulary, exercise f on p.32.
1 VOCABULARY months
a Books open. Focus on the instructions. Explain / Elicit what 
special means.
 Focus on the names of the special days. Ask Sts which of 
these special days are celebrated in their country. If Sts are 
not familiar with a holiday, explain it without saying which 
month it is in. 
 Focus on the months and model and drill pronunciation. 
Sts may have difficulty with January /ˈdʒænjuəri/ and 
February /ˈfebruəri/.
 Now get Sts to match the special days to the months. Tell 
them to guess if they are not sure.
 Check answers.
1 C  2 A  3 E  4 B  5 D
PE4
 4 
Practical English What’s the date?
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 84@@
84
 e 7.23 Look at 2 Ordinal numbers and focus on a. Play 
the audio and get Sts to repeat the ordinal numbers in 
chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word 
stress and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. 
Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses. You may want to model 
and drill some of the trickier ones yourself, e.g. fifth /fɪfθ/, 
eighth /eɪtθ/, and twelfth /twelfθ/.
e 7.23
See Ordinal numbers in Student’s Book on p.127
 e 7.24 Now focus on b. Point out that we say twenty-
first, twenty-second, twenty-third NOT twenty-oneth, 
twenty-twoth, twenty-threeth. Play the audio and get Sts to 
repeat the ordinal numbers in chorus. Pause the audio as 
necessary. Give further practice as necessary, modelling 
and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, 
and getting choral and individual responses.
e 7.24
See Ordinal numbers in Student’s Book on p.127
 Give Sts time to practise saying the ordinal numbers. 
Monitor and help. Make a note of any general problems 
they are having, and focus on these when Sts finish.
 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words, look 
at the numbers, and say the numbers. They can do this 
individually or with a partner.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 4.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point. 
Pronunciation notes
The letters th can only be pronounced in two ways: /θ/ 
as in thumb /θʌm/ or /ð/ as in mother /ˈmʌðə/, and there 
are no easy rules to give Sts. They have already focused 
on this voiced* sound /ð/ in 3B. The /θ/ sound in thumb is 
unvoiced*.
* For an explanation of voiced and unvoiced sounds, see 
the Pronunciation notes in 3A on p.37.
It is hard for many Sts to produce the /ð/ sound, and so 
the aim here should be for intelligibility and helping Sts to 
at least make a reasonable approximation of the sound.
d e 7.25 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 7.25
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.46
 Focus on the sound picture thumb. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and the sound (pause after the 
sound).
 Now focus on the words after thumb. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /θ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after the 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
2 VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION ordinal  
 numbers; /θ/
a Focus on the quiz and go through the nine questions, 
making sure Sts understand them and the three options. 
 Now focus on the words in red (first, second, etc.) and 
elicit / explain that these are ‘ordinal numbers’, so called 
because they tell us the order of something.
 Now put Sts in pairs and give them time to circle the 
answers. Tell them to guess if they are not sure of an 
answer. Monitor and help with any vocabulary problems.
b e 7.22 Play the audio, pausing after each number for Sts 
to listen and check.
 Check answers and elicit more information for each 
question, e.g. Who is J.K. Rowling?, etc. Find out who got 
the most correct answers.
1 b  2 c  3 b  4 b  5 a  6 a  7 c  8 b  9 a
e 7.22
1 J.K. Rowling’s first name is Joanne.
2 The second meal of the day is lunch.
3 The third book in the Lord of the Rings trilogy is The Return of the 
King.
4 The fourth letter on the top row of a keyboard is R.
5 The city with a famous street called Fifth Avenue is New York.
6 The sixth president of the USA was John Quincy Adams.
7 The seventh Star Wars film is The Force Awakens.
8 The eighth month of the year is August.
9 The Ninth Legion was a group of soldiers from Rome.
 Tell Sts to cover the quiz. Write the number 1 on the board 
and ask What’s the number? (One), What’s the ordinal? 
(First). Do the same for 2 and 3. Finally, write number 4 on 
the board and see if the class can remember fourth.
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Months and ordinal 
numbers on p.127.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that:
• we put the two letters after the number to distinguish 
it from a normal (cardinal) number. Remind Sts again 
that the two letters are the last two letters of the ordinal 
number, e.g. first 
 1st.
• first, second, and third are irregular in that they are 
completely different in form from the cardinal numbers 
one, two, and three.
• all the other ordinals are formed by adding th to the 
cardinal number, pronounced /θ/.
• the following ordinals are slightly irregular in their full 
written form:
  fifth /fɪfθ/ (compare with ordinal, five)
  eighth /eɪtθ/ (compare with ordinal, eight)
  ninth /naɪnθ/ (compare with ordinal, nine)
  twelfth /twelfθ/ (compare with ordinal, twelve)
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 85@@
85
 Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and 
complete the task. Play again as necessary.  
NB Wine (answer 2) is a new word for Sts, although some 
may already know it. 
 Check answers.
1 Rob goes to his father’s house.
2 Wine
3 The second of July
e 7.28
(script in Student’s Book on p.90)
R = Rob, H = Henry
R Dad! 
H Rob, hi!
R Hi. This is for you.
H For me? It’s my favourite wine. Thanks, Rob. But why?
R For your birthday, of course! Happy birthday!
H Rob, it isn’t my birthday today! My birthday’s on the second of 
July! Today’s the second of June.
R Oh no!
H Don’t worry. Come in! Have a glass of wine…
 Now focus on the Saying the date box and go through it 
with the class.
 Highlight that the British convention for saying dates is  
to say, for example the fourth of May. You can also say 
May the fourth. At this level, it is better for Sts to just learn 
one way.
 Explain that although we don’t have to use an ordinal 
when writing a date (see the three different ways of 
writing it), we always use the ordinal when saying the 
date: the fourth of May NOT four May.
 Highlight that we say, but don’t write, the and of, e.g. (the) 
4th (of) June.
!  You may want to point out that the American English 
convention for writing dates is to give the month first and 
then the day, e.g. 8/12 = 12th August. 
d e 7.29 Focus on the instructions and the dates.
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Give further 
practice as necessary.
e 7.29
See dates in Student’s Book on p.47
 Focus on the first date again. Elicit how to say it (the first of 
January) and write it on the board.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to practise saying the 
dates. Note any problems and focus on them at the end.
 Finally, ask individual Sts to say each of the dates.
e Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
word tomorrow. Put Sts in pairs to answer the three 
questions.
 Elicit answers.
f Focus on the instructions. Model and drill When’s your 
birthday? Elicit an answer (month and day, not year) from  
a student.
 Get Sts to stand up and ask other Sts When’s your birthday? 
Tell them to make a list of names and dates.
!  If your class is very large, tell them just to ask ten Sts.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
e e 7.26 Focus on the instructions and the example.
 Play the example, pausing after one for Sts to say first in 
chorus.
 Play the audio and pause after the next number (three). 
Ask Sts what the ordinal number is (third). Play the audio, 
so Sts can hear the correct answer. Make sure Sts are clear 
what they have to do before continuing.
 Play the rest of the audio and give Sts time to say the 
ordinal numbers in chorus. 
e 7.26
one (pause) first
three (pause) third
five (pause) fifth
nine (pause) ninth
twelve (pause) twelfth
sixteen (pause) sixteenth
twenty (pause) twentieth
twenty-two (pause) twenty-second
twenty-seven (pause) twenty-seventh
thirty-one (pause) thirty-first
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3 r SAYING THE DATE
a e 7.27 Focus on the title, Saying the date, and explain / 
elicit the meaning of date.
 Now focus on the instructions and the conversation. 
Highlight that three of the missing words in the spaces  
are ordinal numbers. 
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen. 
 Now play it again and get Sts to complete the task.
 Check answers. You might want to point out to Sts that 
dad is an informal way of saying father. 
1 2nd  2 1st  3 2nd  4 birthday
e 7.27
R = Rob, A = Alan
R What’s the date today?
A I think it’s the second of June.
R Are you sure? Isn’t it the first?
A No, definitely the second.
R Oh no! It’s my dad’s birthday.
b Focus on the instructions. Play the video / audio again, 
pausing after each line for Sts to watch or listen and 
repeat.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversation.
 Make sure they swap roles. Monitor and help.
 Get some pairs to perform the role-play for the class.
c e 7.28 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
read questions 1–3.
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 86@@
86
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences. 
Check answers.
1 Rob thinks Jenny arrives in London on 12th March.
2 He thinks she leaves on the 19th.
4 She is with her family.
5 Rob needs to call Jenny on Tuesday 3rd December.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
5 r USEFUL PHRASES
 e 7.31 Focus on the phrases and make sure Sts 
understand what each one means.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 7.31
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.47
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs and ask them to write a 
short conversation, using some of the Useful phrases and 
including at least two dates. When they have finished, get 
a few pairs to act out their role-play for the class. The others 
should listen and make a note of the dates.
 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to compare lists. Get 
them to make a list with the number of birthdays in each 
month. Which month has the most birthdays?
 If Sts see they are missing a birthday on their lists, they 
should ask When is (name)’s birthday?
g Focus on the instructions and the speech bubble. 
Demonstrate the activity yourself by writing down three 
birthdays on the board, as in the example, and telling Sts 
whose birthdays they are, e.g. My mother’s birthday is the 
fourth of October.
 Give Sts a few minutes to write down their three 
important birthdays. Monitor and help as needed.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other about their 
important birthdays.
 Get some feedback from the class.
4 r TALKING ON THE PHONE
a e 7.30 Focus on the photo and ask Sts to describe it 
(Jenny is on the phone).
 Focus on the question and then play the video / audio 
once the whole way through for Sts to watch or listen 
and answer the questions. You may want to pre-teach the 
word trip before Sts watch or listen. 
 Check the answer.
He wants to talk about her trip to London (in March).
e 7.30
(script in Student’s Book on p.90)
J = Jenny, R = Rob, JM = Jenny’s mum
J Hello?
R Hello. Is that, uh, Jennifer Zielinski?
J Yes. Who’s that?
R This is Rob Walker.
J I’m sorry, who?
R Rob Walker. I work for London24seven. We need to talk about your 
trip to London in March. Er…you arrive on the twelfth of March 
and you leave on the nineteenth, is that right? 
J I’m really sorry, Mr Walker…er…Rob, but I’m not at work. Today is 
a holiday here. 
R A holiday?
J Yes, you know, it’s Thanksgiving. I’m at my parents’ house, with my 
family.
R Thanksgiving. Of course. Sorry. We don’t have Thanksgiving in 
England.
J No problem. Listen, call me on Monday at work. No, not Monday, 
Tuesday.
R Tuesday the third of December?
J Yes. 
JM Jenny! Hurry up!
J Er, talk to you on Tuesday. Thanks for calling.
R Bye.
J Bye.
b Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–5.
 Play the video / audio again for Sts to mark the sentences 
T (true) or F (false). Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 F  2 F  3 T  4 F  5 F
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 87@@
8A
87
 8A Can I park here?
 G  can / can’t
 V  more verb phrases
 P  can / can’t: /ə/, /æ/, and /ɑː/, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
Can is a very versatile verb in English and is used to express 
ability, possibility, permission, and to make requests.
This lesson focuses on two of the most common uses: 
permission and possibility. Can for ability is mentioned 
briefly in the Grammar Bank, but is taught in English File 
Elementary.
The lesson begins with a text about driving tests and 
licences in different countries. The grammar is presented 
in a series of tweets and a conversation about a young 
woman learning to drive. Then there is a pronunciation 
focus on sentence rhythm and on can / can’t (particularly the 
difference between the positive and negative forms).  
The vocabulary focus is on more verb phrases, especially 
those used in the context of permission / possibility, e.g. pay, 
park. 
Finally, Sts role-play conversations between tourists and 
locals about what people can / can’t do in their town, and 
then they write a few sentences to give tourists useful 
information.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar can / can’t p.150 
Communicative Can you? p.189 (instructions p.165)
For students
Workbook 8A
Online Practice 8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
 A CAR.  
Use mime to elicit drive a car, start a car, stop a car, and 
park a car. 
Write them on the board. Model and drill pronunciation.
Then teach driving licence and driving test, and explain that 
you can pass or fail a test. 
1 READING & VOCABULARY
a Books open. Focus on the instructions and the title of the 
text. If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, make sure Sts 
know the verb drive. Model and drill pronunciation.
 Give Sts time to read the text and complete the gaps with 
the countries in the list.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the text the first time, check 
whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
b e 8.1 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers and make sure Sts understand to pass and 
fail (a test), and the difference between a theory test and a 
practical test.
1 the USA   2 Mexico   3 the UK   4 South Africa   5 Pakistan
e 8.1
1 In some states in the USA, for example Kansas and Idaho, you can 
have a driving licence when you’re fourteen.
2 In some cities in Mexico, you don’t need to take a test to get a 
driving licence – you only need to be eighteen.
3 In the UK, you can drive when you are seventeen. First, you  
need to pass a theory test and then you have a practical test. 
Forty-seven per cent of people pass first time. 
4 In South Africa, the driving test is very difficult. Only three per 
cent pass first time. 
5 In Pakistan, the driving test is very easy and not many people fail. 
You can take the theory test and the practical test on the  
same day.
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c e 8.2 Focus on the task.
 Play the audio, pausing after each highlighted phrase for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
e 8.2
See highlighted phrases in a in Student’s Book on p.48
 Ask the class what the situation is in their country. If 
your country hasn’t been mentioned, tell Sts what the 
situation is.
2 GRAMMAR can / can’t
a Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
a tweet is (= a message sent using the Twitter social 
networking service).
 Give Sts time to match the tweets and photos.
b e 8.3 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers. You could explain the meaning of 
instructor and remind Sts what you need to do to get 
a driving licence in the UK (i.e. pass a theory test and a 
practical test).
1 C   2 B   3 A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 88@@
8A
88
e 8.3
C 1   The theory test is very difficult. I can practise online, but I can’t 
answer the questions. ‘Can you park on a yellow line?’ I don’t 
know!
B 2  A pass in the theory – fantastic! My first lesson with Dad – total 
disaster! Now Dad says I can’t practise in his car.
A 3   Dad’s a terrible teacher. I need some practical lessons with a 
good driving instructor! Friends, can you help?
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arise.
c e 8.4 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the situation.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
read and listen at the same time.
e 8.4
I = instructor, A = Anna
I Hello, can I help you?
A Yes, can I book some driving lessons, please?
I Yes, of course.
A When can I start?
I I’m free on Monday. We can meet at your house.
A Can you come at eight thirty?
I Um, no, sorry, I can’t. I have a lesson at eight.
A OK. Can you come at ten o ‘clock?
I Yes, I can. The lessons are one hour, so ten to eleven, OK?
A Great!
I What’s your name and address?
A It’s Anna Jones…
 Now play the audio again and get Sts to complete the 
gaps with the verbs in the list. Play again as necessary.
 Check answers. You could explain the meaning of book 
lessons.
1 help   2 book   3 start   4 meet  5 come  6 come
d e 8.5 Focus on the instructions. You might want to  
pre-teach turn right / left and traffic lights. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question. Play again as necessary.
 Check the answer. You could try to elicit why she doesn’t 
pass. (Because she turns left, not right. / She doesn’t stop at 
a red traffic light. / She doesn’t see that it is no parking.) You 
could also try to elicit what the instructor says to her. (You 
need more driving lessons.)
No, she doesn’t.
e 8.5
E = examiner, A = Anna, I = instructor
E Good morning, Ms Jones.
A Er…good morning. I’m very nervous.
E Can you start the car, please? 
***
E OK. Turn right. Right, not left.
A Sorry!
E The traffic lights are red! Stop!
***
E OK, can you park the car, please?
A Can I park here?
E No, you can’t. Look, it’s no parking. Park over there.
A Sorry. I’m very nervous.
I Well, Ms Jones, I’m sorry, but you need more driving lessons.
e Tell Sts to look at the tweets in a and the conversation  
in c and to complete the chart. Point out that the first  
one (can) has been done for them.
 Check answers. 
can / can’t
−
I can’t answer the questions.
?
Can you come at 8.30?
f
Yes, I can.
g
No, I can’t.
f Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.106. 
Grammar notes
can / can’t
Can / Can’t are used to talk about permission (you can park 
there = it is permitted) and possibility (Can I book some 
driving lessons? = Is it possible for me to book some lessons?). 
NB Can for ability is taught in English File Elementary.
There are only two possible forms: can or can’t (there is no 
change for the third person).
The negative can’t is a contraction of cannot. Can’t is 
almost always used in both conversation and informal 
writing.
Questions with can are formed by inverting the subject 
and the auxiliary can, not with do.
The verb after can is the infinitive, e.g. You can park here 
NOT to + infinitive You can to park here.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 8.6  
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the information box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 8A on p.107 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 89@@
8A
89
a e 8.7 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 8.7
See sounds and sentences in Student’s Book on p.49
 Focus on the sound picture computer. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and the sound (pause after the 
sound). 
 Now focus on the question and answer after computer. 
Remind Sts that the pink letter is the /ə/ sound, and that 
the words in bigger font are stressed. Play the audio, 
pausing after each sentence for Sts to listen and repeat, 
encouraging them to copy the rhythm.
 Now repeat the same process for cat /æ/ and car /ɑː/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each question and answer for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 8.8 This section gives Sts practice in distinguishing 
between can and can’t. Focus on the sentences and give 
Sts time to read them.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to hear 
the difference between the sentences. Try to elicit what 
the difference is – the negative can’t /kɑːnt/ is longer and 
is stressed compared to the shorter and unstressed  
can /kən/.
e 8.8
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.49
c e 8.9 Now tell Sts that they are going to hear only one 
of the sentences (a or b) and they have to circle the letter 
of the one they hear.
 Play the audio, pausing for Sts to circle a or b.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read out the letter a or b 
and the full sentence.
1 a (We can park here.)
2 b (I can’t help you.)
3 b (You can’t sit here.)
4 a (Max can go with me.)
e 8.9
1 We can park here.
2 I can’t help you.
3 You can’t sit here.
4 Max can go with me.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Get Sts A to say 
either sentence a or b for items 1–4 to Sts B, who listen and 
say a or b, depending on which sentence they understand. 
Sts A say yes or no. Then they swap roles.
a
1 Can we sit here?
2 I can’t drink this.
3 James can help us tomorrow.
4 Can you come to lunch on Sunday?
5 You can finish work early today.
6 We can’t park here.
7 Can we watch TV after dinner?
8 He can’t go to school today.
b
1 I can’t drive to work tomorrow. My sister needs the car.
2 Can I stay with you?
3 Can we swim here?
4 The restaurant’s very near. We can walk there.
5 Where can we go for lunch? I’m hungry.
6 You can watch TV when you finish your homework.
7 Can you come to dinner at my house on Saturday?
8 Excuse me. You can’t listen to music in the museum.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3 PRONUNCIATION & LISTENING can / can’t:  
 /ə/, /æ/, and /ɑː/, sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
There are two main pronunciation problems related to 
can / can’t:
1 •  Can is usually unstressed = /kən/ in positive 
sentences, e.g. You can take photos. Your Sts may find 
this difficult to hear and to say. However, getting 
the stress correct is vital because if they stress can, 
the listener may think they are saying a negative 
sentence.
 •  Can in Can I park here? can be stressed /kæn/ or 
unstressed /kən/ depending on how fast you are 
speaking. It is always stressed in positive short 
answers, e.g. Yes, I can. However, can is usually 
unstressed in questions with a question word,  
e.g. Where can we park?
2 The negative can’t is always stressed. Not stressing it 
can cause a communication problem (the listener may 
understand can instead of can’t). The pronunciation of 
can’t varies among different groups of native English 
speakers, e.g. in standard American English, it is usually 
pronounced /kænt/. In standard British English, it is 
usually pronounced /kɑːnt/, but there are regional 
variations. If your own pronunciation of can’t is different 
from what is on the audio, you may want to model the 
sentences yourself. The important thing is for Sts to 
make sure that they stress can’t and, as ever, the aim in 
pronunciation is intelligibility rather than perfection.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 90@@
8A
90
4 VOCABULARY more verb phrases
a Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of sign. If you have any on the classroom wall, 
you could point to them. Tell Sts they need to complete 
each sentence with can or can’t and a verb from the list. 
Go through the list of verbs and make sure Sts know what 
they all mean.
 Focus on the example and remind Sts of the use of the 
impersonal form of you in the sentence You can’t swim 
here (you = people in general). 
 Give Sts time to complete the sentences, and then get 
them to compare with a partner.
b e 8.11 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read full sentences.
See words in bold in script 8.11
e 8.11
1 You can’t swim here.
2 You can pay by credit card here.
3 You can’t use your mobile phone here.
4 You can park here.
5 You can have a coffee here.
6 You can use the internet here.
7 You can’t take photos here.
8 You can’t play football here.
9 You can change money here.
 10 You can’t drive fast here.
c Ask Sts to cover sentences 1–10 and look at the signs. 
Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to say the can / can’t 
sentences for 1–5 and Sts B for 6–10. Then they should 
swap roles.
 Monitor and make a note of any pronunciation problems 
and drill any sentences that Sts are mispronouncing.
5 SPEAKING & WRITING
a Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication I’m a tourist. Where can I…?,  
A on p.80 and B on p.84.
 Give Sts time to read the instructions and check they 
understand them. Deal with any new vocabulary,  
e.g. museum. Model and drill pronunciation.
!  If your Sts are all from the same town, encourage Sts A 
to pretend that they don’t know anything about the town. 
If all the Sts are from different countries or towns / cities, 
get them to do the activity about their hometown, so for 
example, if a B student is from Lima, he / she should answer 
(and later write) about Lima.
d Focus on the conversation in 2c. Put Sts in pairs and 
assign roles (Anna and the instructor / examiner). Tell Sts 
to practise the conversation and then swap roles.
 Monitor and make a note of any pronunciation problems. 
Correct any mistakes on the board.
 You could get some pairs to perform the conversation for 
the class.
e e 8.10 Tell Sts they are going to listen to four 
conversations with can and they have to work out where 
the people are. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through and get Sts to 
complete the gaps in 1–4 with places.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Play the audio from the beginning, pausing after each 
conversation, and elicit where the people are. You could 
ask Sts to say how they guessed. If Sts ask why we use the 
different prepositions on and in, tell them they will focus 
on this later in 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1 train   2 shop   3 restaurant   4 street
e 8.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.90)
1
A Excuse me, can I sit here?
B Er, yes, I think it’s free.
A Thanks.
2
A Can I help you?
B Do you have this T-shirt in large?
A Just a moment. Sorry, we only have small and medium at the 
moment. I can phone and see if they have a large in another store.
B No, that’s OK, thanks.
3
A Are you ready to order?
B Yes, can I have the burger, but with salad, not chips?
A Yes, madam, that’s fine. And for you, sir?
C The pasta, please.
A And to drink? 
4
A Hey! You can’t sing here.
B Why not?
A Because you need a permit.
B Where can I get a permit?
A You need to go online and look for…
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.90, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 91@@
8A
91
 Tell Sts they are going to do a role-play where A is a tourist 
and B lives in the town A is visiting.
 Demonstrate the activity by getting a student A to ask B 
the first question in each of the two sections (Where can I 
have a good, cheap meal? / Can I take photos in museums?). 
Encourage B, the local person, to give a clear answer, e.g. 
You can have a good, cheap meal in (name of restaurant 
or part of town), and if possible to add some extra 
information, e.g. It’s a very nice restaurant. For the second 
question, encourage B to use a short answer (Yes, you  
can / No, you can’t).
 Give Sts A time to ask their questions. Monitor and help.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Give Sts time to read the questions they 
will be asked and to think of their answers.
 Get Sts to swap roles, so B is now the tourist. Monitor 
and help.
 If there’s time, get one or two pairs to perform their  
role-play for the class.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
b Focus on the instructions and the example. Make sure Sts 
write about their hometown.
 Elicit a couple more examples from Sts and write them on 
the board (YOU CAN GO TO GOOD CONCERTS; YOU CAN’T SMOKE 
IN RESTAURANTS…).
 Give Sts time to write their four sentences. Monitor 
and help.
 Get some general feedback from the class. If all the Sts are 
from the same town, see if they agree with the sentences 
that other Sts have written.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 8.12 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 8A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 92@@
92
 8B I ♥ cooking
 e 8.13 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat 
the activities in chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. 
Highlight the word stress and the pronunciation of the 
more difficult words. Highlight that the -ing ending is not 
stressed. Give further practice as necessary, modelling and 
drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses
e 8.13
See Activities in Student’s Book on p.128
 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the activities and 
give them time to look at the photos and say the activities. 
They could do this individually or with a partner. Monitor 
and correct any mistakes in pronunciation while Sts do this.
 Then, with Sts looking only at the photos, elicit all the 
activities from the class, helping them with pronunciation.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 GRAMMAR like / love / hate + verb + -ing
a Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts they are going to read 
information on a dating website (a website where people 
can find a new partner). 
 Focus on the website and on the verbs love and hate. 
Remind Sts that in English, we use love to say, e.g. I love 
you, but we also use love to mean we like something very 
much, e.g. I love playing the piano. Explain / Elicit that hate 
in I hate shopping is a stronger way of saying I don’t like….
 Give Sts time to read the information about the six people 
and deal with any vocabulary problems. Highlight the 
difference between shopping and buying: shopping = 
going to (usually several) shops to buy food, clothes, etc. 
and buying = giving money in exchange for something. 
We always put a noun (a thing) after buying, e.g. buying 
CDs, etc., but not after shopping.
 Now ask Sts to read the information again and, in pairs, 
match the women and men. Explain that they need to 
complete sentences 1–3 with the name of the most 
suitable man.
 Focus on the gapped sentence and get Sts to say who 
they think are a good ‘match’. Encourage them to explain 
their choices. Get them to begin We think… and then ask 
the rest of the class if they agree.
1 Isabella and William because she loves playing the piano and 
he likes classical music; she likes doing sport and he loves 
running and cycling; and she doesn’t like travelling and he 
hates flying.
2 Angie and Luke because she loves buying clothes and 
he loves shopping; and she likes the cinema and he likes 
watching films. 
3 Adriana and Daniel because she loves walking in the 
mountains and he likes camping; and she likes good food and 
he loves cooking. 
 G  like / love / hate + verb + -ing
 V  activities
 P  /ʊ/, /uː/, and /ŋ/, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
This lesson focuses on free-time activities.
After learning some common free-time activities in 
Vocabulary, e.g. swimming, travelling, the grammar (like /  
love / hate + verb + -ing) is presented through the context of 
a dating website. In Pronunciation & Speaking, Sts practise 
the short and long vowel sounds /ʊ/ and /uː/, and the /ŋ/ 
sound, as well as sentence rhythm. They then say whether 
they like the activities in the Vocabulary section. Finally, Sts 
read various tweets in which people around the world say 
what they like doing alone and what they like doing with 
friends, and then write their own tweet. Finally, Sts watch a 
video about a gospel choir. If you are not able to watch the 
video in class, make sure you get Sts to watch it at home and 
do the exercises.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar like, love, hate + verb + -ing p.151 
Communicative What do you like doing? p.190 
(instructions p.166) 
Vocabulary Activities p.221 (instructions p.206)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Singing in a choir
For students
Workbook 8B
Online Practice 8B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write FREE TIME on the board and elicit the meaning (Sts saw 
this phrase in 7A).
Ask Sts What do people do in their free time? and elicit verbs 
onto the board, e.g. READ, WATCH TV, etc.
1 VOCABULARY activities
a Books open. Focus on the task and either do this as a 
whole-class activity or get Sts to complete the missing 
letters individually. 
 Ask What’s the activity in 1? and elicit reading. Don’t ask 
What’s she doing?, as this grammar is not taught until 9A.
 Check answers.
2 swimming   3 cooking 
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Activities on p.128.
Vocabulary notes
When we talk about activities, we usually use the -ing 
form of the verb, because we see the activity as a noun, 
e.g. Swimming is good exercise, I love walking, etc.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 93@@
93
3 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING /ʊ/, /uː/, and  
 /ŋ/, sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
/ʊ/, /uː/, and /ŋ/
Remind Sts that the two dots in the symbol /uː/ mean that 
it’s a long sound.
You may want to highlight the following sound–spelling 
rules.
• The most common pronunciation of oo is the long 
sound /uː/, e.g. food, school, soon. However, oo is 
sometimes pronounced using the short /ʊ/, e.g. good, 
book, look.
• The letters -ng at the end of a word (and without an e 
after them) are always pronounced /ŋ/ in English, e.g. 
thing, wrong. However, -nge is usually pronounced /ndʒ/, 
e.g. change.
Sentence rhythm
For information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 3B.
a e 8.15 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 8.15
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.51
 Focus on the sound picture bull. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound). 
 Now focus on the words after bull. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ʊ/ sound. Play the audio, pausing after 
each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for boot /uː/ and singer /ŋ/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 8.16 Focus on the conversation. Remind Sts that the 
words in bigger font are the ones which are stressed 
(because they carry the important information). Also 
remind them that the underlined syllables in the multi-
syllable words are stressed more. Play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts to read and listen at the same 
time. Make sure they understand it all.
e 8.16
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.51
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
or question for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm on the audio by stressing the bigger 
words in bold more strongly and by saying the others 
more lightly and quickly.
 Now get Sts to practise the conversation in pairs. 
 Then get them to swap roles.
b Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Do this as a whole-class activity.
1 love  2 like  3 don’t like  4 hate
c Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.106. 
Grammar notes
like / love / hate + verb + -ing
When another verb follows love, like, or don’t like, the -ing 
form is normally used, e.g. camping, cooking, not the 
infinitive, e.g. NOT I like camp.
To + the infinitive after like and love is sometimes used 
(especially in American English), e.g. I like to swim, but it is 
easier for Sts at this level to learn the most common form. 
Highlight that I hate getting up early is a stronger way of 
saying that you don’t like getting up early.
Spelling rules
• For most verbs, simply add -ing to the infinitive to make 
the -ing form, e.g. reading, watching.
• For verbs ending in y, don’t change the y to an i  
(as we do in third person singular, present tense),  
e.g. fly – flying NOT fliing.
• For verbs ending in e, drop the e before adding -ing,  
e.g. cycle – cycling.
• Highlight also that there are a few exceptions to the 
rule about dropping the final e before adding -ing. 
These are be, and verbs ending in -ee, e.g. see and agree.
• For verbs ending in consonant + one vowel + 
consonant, double the final consonant and add -ing, 
e.g. running, swimming. We don’t double x, e.g. boxing, 
or w, e.g. snowing.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 8.14 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 8B on p.107 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers. For a, get Sts to write the answers on the 
board or elicit how to spell each verb. For b, get Sts to 
read the full sentences. 
a
1 meeting   2 stopping   3 buying   4 going   5 crying   
6 writing   7 running   8 cycling   9 getting   10 driving   
11 sitting   12 using   13 putting   14 having   15  finishing
b
1 She likes cooking.
2 Do you like travelling?
3 I love shopping for presents.
4 They don’t like watching TV.
5 Does your father like playing chess?
6 George doesn’t like doing exercise.
7 My mother loves reading detective novels.
8 We don’t like flying.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 94@@
94
d Focus on the title of the tweets again.
 Tell Sts to write their own answer to the questions on a 
piece of paper, but not to put their name on it. Tell them 
that they can write unrelated answers if they like, e.g. I like 
driving alone. I like going to concerts with friends.
 Monitor and help with vocabulary and spelling.
 Collect the answers and shuffle them. Read out each 
answer in turn and then ask the class Who do you think 
it is? Elicit from the class the name of the student who 
wrote it.
EXTRA IDEA  With a small class, you could number the 
answers and stick them on the wall for Sts to read and guess 
the name of the student who wrote each one. Then check 
answers to find out who guessed the most correctly.
5 r VIDEO LISTENING
a Focus on the photograph and tell Sts that they’re going 
to watch a video about a choir. Model and drill the 
pronunciation /ˈkwaɪə/ and elicit that it means a group of 
people who sing together. Play the video once for Sts just 
to watch, and ask them if they like the song.
Cultural notes
Scarborough Fair
Scarborough Fair is an old English folk song. It dates from 
the early eighteenth century, and is about a man and a 
woman who used to be lovers. The song can have many 
verses, but only three are performed in this video. The 
singer tells somebody who is going to Scarborough to say 
hello to his old lover, and to give her a series of impossible 
tasks which she must perform if she wants to be with 
him again – making a shirt with no seams or stitching, 
and finding an acre of land between the sea and the 
beach. The implication is that they will never be together 
again. In some versions the woman also gives the man 
impossible tasks to perform.
Many artists have performed this song, most famously 
Simon and Garfunkel in 1966, whose version appeared 
on the soundtrack of the film The Graduate in the 
following year.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video., 
e.g rehearsal. You may want to explain the lyrics of the song 
as well – these have subtitles onscreen if you’re using the 
Classroom Presentation Tool or Class DVD. Otherwise, the 
video script is available on the Teacher’s Resource Centre.
Singing in a choir
I = interviewer, F = Freddie, S = Steph, A = Alex, T = Tegan, N = Nell
I This is a choir. They are called the Oxford Gargoyles. A gargoyle is 
a type of statue. You see them on a lot of old buildings in Oxford 
and other cities. 
Today the Oxford Gargoyles have a rehearsal. They have a new 
song to practise, an old English folk song called Scarborough Fair. 
Let’s find out more about the choir and the people in it. How 
many people are in the choir?
F There are thirteen people in the choir. 
I Are you all students?
S Yes, we’re all students at Oxford University.
I What do you study? 
S I study music.
A I study music.
T I study music.
c Focus on the task. In the examples highlight the use of 
What about you? to return the question and the use of  
Me too! in the answer.
 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Activities on p.128. 
You could demonstrate the activity by telling Sts whether 
you like / love or don’t like / hate the first three or four 
activities. 
 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to talk about 
the rest of the activities. Monitor and make a note of any 
difficulties Sts are having.
 Highlight any general mistakes on the board.
 Get some feedback from various pairs.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
4 READING & WRITING
a Focus on the instructions and the title of the tweets. Make 
sure Sts understand the meaning of alone. 
 Give Sts time to read the tweets and complete the 
activities. Point out that the first one (cooking) has been 
done for them.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the tweets the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
b e 8.17 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
 Check answers.
1 eating  2 travelling  3 shopping  4 dancing  5 watching 
6 running  7 going  8 driving  9 listening  10 singing
e 8.17
Chris
I like cooking alone. I don’t like having other people in the kitchen. 
But I like eating with friends, especially when I’m out. I don’t like 
being alone in a restaurant.
Sarah
I don’t like travelling alone – I prefer going on holiday with friends. 
But they need to be the right friends!
Mike
I like shopping with friends. When I go alone, I usually buy things 
that look horrible on me. I need a second opinion!
Greta 
I love dancing alone at home to really old music from the seventies, 
like ABBA. But I never dance with other people at parties because I 
know I’m a terrible dancer.
Veronica
I like watching films with friends. When the film finishes, we can talk 
about it, and I like having someone with me, so we can be happy or 
frightened together!
Becca
I like running alone. It helps me to concentrate and it’s very peaceful! 
But I prefer going for walks with other people because I like walking 
and talking.
Andy
I like driving alone. I love listening to my favourite music in the car 
and singing very loudly – but with the windows closed, of course!
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
 Finally, tell Sts to tick two people they agree with.  
NB Some of the people like doing two different things, 
but Sts can tick the person even if they only like doing 
one of the things.
c Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare who they ticked.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 95@@
95
N I study languages, specifically French and Italian.
I How often do you practise? 
N We practise twice a week – on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
I How long do you practise for?
S Each rehearsal is three hours long.
I How often do you give concerts?
T We usually give concerts once a month.
I Where do you give concerts?
N We give concerts in lots of different locations. We give concerts in 
bars and in theatres and in churches.
I What kind of music do you like singing?
S I like singing lots of different types of music, especially jazz and 
opera.
I Do you think everybody can sing?
F I think everyone can sing because everyone can talk.
T I think everybody can learn how to sing.
A I think everyone apart from my dad can sing. Yes.
I Why do you like singing?
F I love music and I love being able to make music with my own 
body, my own voice, without needing any extra tools.
N I enjoy singing a lot because I think it’s a really fun thing to do. 
And it’s also a very social activity, so you can do it with anyone, 
with any of your friends, and you can do it at any time, or in any 
place.
S I like singing because I feel happy when I sing.
I Do you prefer singing solo or with a group?
T I definitely prefer singing in a group because I like singing with 
my friends and I think it’s really fun to be able to sing together.
A It’s nice to sing solos, but it is more pressure as well.
b Give Sts time to read the twelve sentences.
 Then play the video again for Sts to complete each space 
with one word. Pause after each question and answer(s) to 
give Sts time to write.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  First put Sts in pairs and ask them to try 
to compete some of the sentences from memory. Then play 
the video again.
 1 Oxford  2 13  3 students  4 Nell  5 Wednesdays, 
Saturdays   6 three  7 month  8 bars  9 jazz  10 talk   
11 happy  12 group
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 8.18 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 8B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 96@@
96
 7&8 Revise and Check
e 8.19
1
I = interviewer, S = Spencer
I What do you usually do in the evening after school?
S Um, I usually go to sports practices, and finish homework, and 
have dinner and things.
2
I = interviewer, S = Sahil
I What kind of films do you like?
S Normally action movies or comedy.
I Do you usually watch films at home or at the cinema?
S Depends. If it’s a good action movie, I like to go out and watch.
3
I = interviewer, S = Susan
I When’s your birthday?
S My birthday is on the fifth of April.
I What do you usually do on your birthday?
S Go out for a meal with family and friends.
4
I = interviewer, N = Nell
I Do you drive to work?
K Yes, I do.
I Can you park near where you work?
K Yes, there’s a car park at my office. 
5
I = interviewer, R = Richard
I What do you like doing at the weekend?
R Er, I like cycling, walking, um socializing, cooking.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.34.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 a  2 b  3 a  4 b  5 a  6 a  7 b  8 b   
9 a  10 b  11 a  12 a  13 b  14 b  15 a
VOCABULARY
a
1 play  2 pay  3 walk, ski  4 meet, go   
5 go, swim  6 do, play
b
1 seventh  2 twelfth  3 twentieth  4 thirty-first   
5 March  6 May  7 July  8 November
c
1 cooking  2 camping  3 travelling  4 flying   
5 painting  6 running  7 swimming
PRONUNCIATION
a 
1 /θ/ thumb  2 /ŋ/ singer  3 /aʊ/ owl   
4 / uː/ boot  5 /ʊ/ bull
c
1 thirtieth  2 January  3 July  4 seventeenth  5 single
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
1 St George’s Market
2 The Titanic museum
3 World-class golf
b Sts should tick: 2, 3, 5, and 7.
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 a  2 b  3 a  4 c  5 b
Revise and Check 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 97@@
97
 9A Everything’s fine!
 G  present continuous
 V  common verb phrases 2: travelling
 P  sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts learn a new verb form, the present 
continuous, used to talk about actions happening now.
The lesson begins with a presentation of the new 
grammar through a phone call between a woman who 
is on a business trip and her husband at home. Then, in 
Pronunciation, Sts practise sentence rhythm in present 
continuous sentences. In Vocabulary, Sts learn common verb 
phrases related to travel, and then they listen to some short 
travel-related conversations. In Reading, Sts read and match 
messages sent between two people trying to meet at the 
cinema. The lesson ends with a Communication activity in 
which Sts describe pictures to each other.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar present continuous p.152 
Communicative Guess what I’m doing! p191 
(instructions p.166) 
Vocabulary Common verb phrases 2: travelling p.223 
(instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook 9A
Online Practice 9A
 OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write these phrases on the board:
1 ST
 IN A HOTEL 
2 D
 YOUR HOMEWORK
3 R
 A BOOK
4 W
 A FILM ON TV
5 M
 DINNER
Then get Sts to complete the phrases with the correct verb.
Check answers.
1 stay in a hotel   2 do your homework   3 read a book   
 4 watch a film on TV   5 make dinner
Make sure Sts understand the meaning of all the phrases. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
1 GRAMMAR present continuous
a e 9.1 Books open. Focus on the pictures, the phone 
conversation, and the instructions. Elicit where everyone 
is in each picture (the grandmother and girl are in the living 
room, Tony is in the kitchen, two boys are in the bedroom, 
Carol is in a hotel room). 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen, and underline the three things that Tony says 
that aren’t true.
 Check answers.
1 She’s doing her homework.
2 They’re reading.
3 I’m making dinner.
e 9.1
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.54
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arise.
b Focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to read all the 
highlighted verbs in the phone conversation and then 
circle a or b in the rule.
 Check the answer.
b (now)
c Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.108. 
Grammar notes
present continuous (be + verb + -ing)
Highlight that when we talk about activities we are doing 
right now, we need to use the present continuous, not 
the present simple, e.g. I’m watching TV now. NOT I watch 
TV now.
Other typical mistakes include: incorrect word order,  
e.g. You’re working now? What you are doing?, or leaving 
out the verb be, e.g. I working now.
 !  You may want to point out to Sts that some verbs, 
e.g. like, love, want, and need, are not usually used in the 
present continuous. They are normally used in the present 
simple, e.g. I like this music. NOT I’m liking this music.
Spelling rules
Highlight that the spelling rules for the -ing form in the 
present continuous are the same as those Sts learned for 
activities, e.g. camping, travelling, in 8B (see the Grammar 
notes in 8B on p.92).
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 9.2 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the Word order box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 9A on p.109 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 98@@
98
a
1 I can’t talk now. I’m driving.
2 You’re doing the wrong exercise!
3 She’s working at home today.
4 He’s playing football.
5 We’re studying for an exam.
6 They’re swimming in the river.
b
1 A Excuse me! You’re sitting in my seat.
2 A Dad isn’t watching this programme. He’s sleeping.
3 A Hello! What are you doing here?
 
B I’m shopping. It’s Jim’s birthday tomorrow.
4 A I’m going to the gym now. Do you want to come with me?
 
B Great idea. I’m not working today!
5 A Is Alice doing her homework?
 
B No, she isn’t. She’s playing computer games.
6 A Do you want my newspaper? I’m not reading it.
 
B No, thanks. I’m watching a film on my laptop.
7 B No, my brother’s over there. He’s talking to his friends.
8 A Are you having a good time in Rio?
 
B Yes, we are. We’re having a great time!
9 B Sorry, she’s talking to her mother on Skype. Who is it?
 
A It’s Yuko, from English class. I’m phoning about tonight’s 
homework.
10 A Are you getting up now? You’re late for school!
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d e 9.3 Explain to Sts that they are going to hear some 
sounds that represent things that Tony is doing. They have 
to use the present continuous to describe the actions.
 Play the audio for the sound effect for 1, then pause the 
audio and focus on the example.
 Now play each sound effect, and then pause the audio to 
give Sts time to write their answers.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, then play the audio 
again, pausing after each sound effect, and elicit answers.
2 He’s watching (football on) TV.
3 He’s drinking (Coke, a beer, etc.).
4 He’s playing a video game.
5 He’s having a shower.
6 He’s going to bed.
e 9.3
(Sound effects of the following:)
1 man reading story to children ‘Once upon a time there was a 
wizard…’
2 man watching football on TV
3 man opening a can, pouring into glass
4 man playing a video game
5 man having a shower
6 man going to bed 
e Focus on the instructions and example. Get Sts to write 
the names of people in their family, and as they write 
the names, tell them to think about what the people are 
doing now. If they don’t know, tell them to guess.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  Give Sts time to write their sentences. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner about 
the people on their lists.
 Get some feedback from various Sts and find out if any of 
the people are doing the same thing.
EXTRA IDEA  Sts can do this by asking and answering 
questions with their partner. Model a conversation like this 
one and write it on the board for Sts to refer to: 
A (looking at B’s list of names)  Who’s Maria? 
B She’s my mother. 
A What’s she doing now? 
B I think she’s working.
2 PRONUNCIATION sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that words that carry the important 
information are said more strongly than others, e.g. in 
‘What are you doing?’  ‘I’m making dinner.’ (The underlined 
words are the ones which communicate the message.)
To pronounce well, with a good rhythm, Sts need to stress 
these words more strongly and pronounce unstressed 
words less strongly. Obviously, the ability to do this will 
improve with time and is not something Sts can pick up 
immediately.
Being aware of the way important words are stressed 
in English will also help Sts with understanding English, 
as these are the words they need to listen out for when 
listening.
a e 9.4 Focus on the conversation and remind Sts that the 
words in bigger bold print are stressed. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 9.4
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.55
 Now play it again, pausing after each question or 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat. 
b Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversation 
in 1a.
 Make sure they swap roles. Monitor and help.
 You could get some pairs to perform the conversation for 
the class.
c Focus on the instructions and the two speech bubbles 
with the questions.
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Get Sts A to ask Sts B about 
pictures 1–3 and Sts B to ask Sts A about pictures 4–6.
 Check by getting different pairs to ask and answer about 
each picture.
1 She’s eating.
2 They’re cooking
3 He’s listening to music.
4 She’s reading.
5 They’re playing tennis.
6 He’s doing housework. / cleaning the window.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 99@@
99
3
W Good morning. How can I help you?
M I need a car for three days.
W What kind of car are you looking for?
M A small car. It’s just for me.
W Automatic or manual?
M Manual, please.
W Can I see your driving licence?
M Yes, here you are.
4
M Is that a number thirteen?
W Yes. I think it is. No, it’s a twenty-three. 
M Another twenty-three? I don’t believe it! That’s the third one. And 
no thirteen… 
W Another one’s coming now. Let’s see. Yes. That’s a thirteen.
M At last!
 Now play it again, pausing after each conversation to give 
Sts time to write. Tell Sts they should use verb phrases 
they have just learned in the Vocabulary Bank Common 
verb phrases 2: Travelling.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 The man and the woman are buying presents.
2 The woman is packing (the suitcase).
3 The man is renting a car.
4 The man and the woman are waiting for a bus.
d Focus on sentences 1–4. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
time to think about what the correct words are, but tell 
them not to write them yet. 
 Play the audio again, pausing after each conversation to 
give Sts time to circle the answer.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 Johnny’s present is a football shirt and Jessica’s is a bag.
2 Their hotel has a swimming pool.
3 The man is interested in a small manual car for three days.
4 The first bus is a number 23. They are waiting for a 
number 13.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.90, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
4 READING
a Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the situation. Tell Sts that Mike and Lina are friends who 
are going to the cinema, but they are not together now, 
so they are texting / messaging each other. 
 Make it clear that Mike’s messages 1–5 are in the correct 
order and that Lina answers each one of the messages, 
so Sts should write the letter of Lina’s responses next to 
Mike’s messages. Give Sts time to read Mike’s messages 
and then match them to Lina’s answers.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the messages the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
b e 9.7 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
1 B  2 D  3 C  4 A  5 E
3 VOCABULARY & LISTENING common verb  
 phrases 2: travelling
a Focus on the instructions and do this as a whole-class 
activity.
1 staying  2 phoning 
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Common verb 
phrases 2 on p.126.
 e 9.5 Focus on 2 Travelling. Play the audio for Sts 
to listen and repeat the verb phrases in chorus. Pause 
the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress and 
the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 9.5
See Travelling in Student’s Book on p.126
 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the verb 
phrases and look at the questions What’s she / he doing? 
and What are they doing? Model and drill the questions 
in chorus and individually. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
time to ask and answer questions about the photos. 
Monitor and help, correcting pronunciation where 
necessary.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  Before putting Sts in pairs to ask and 
answer about the photos, get them to cover the verb 
phrases, look at the photos, and say the verbs or verb 
phrases. They could do this individually or with a partner.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c e 9.6 Focus on the instructions and sentences 1–4. You 
could point out that in 1 and 2 the auxiliary is already 
there for Sts. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 9.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.90)
W = woman, M = man
1
W Oh look! An Inter Milan football shirt. It’s perfect for Johnny!
M Yes, good idea. Oh…it’s very expensive.
W Football shirts are always expensive. OK. What can we get for 
Jessica?
M She likes football, too.
W Yes, but she never wears football shirts. What about this bag? 
M I don’t know. Does she like bags?
W She loves bags…
2
W Tom, do we need swimming things?
M I can look at their website. Can you see my camera?
W Yes, here it is. Do you want me to put the camera in the suitcase 
or in your bag?
M In the suitcase, please. OK, here’s the page. Yes, it has a swimming 
pool.
W Great.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 100@@
100
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 9.9 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 9A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
e 9.7
M = Mike, L = Lina
1B
M Hi. I’m just leaving the house now. 
L Me too. I’m walking to the bus stop. Are you getting the bus, too?
2D
M No, I’m not. I’m cycling. See you in twenty minutes?
L OK. See you then.
3C
M Where are you? I’m at the cinema, but I can’t see you. I’m waiting 
outside. 
L Sorry, we’re in a lot of traffic. There in five minutes.
4A
M It’s really cold outside. I’m going in.
L I’m arriving at the cinema now. Where are you?
5E
M I’m standing near the box office. I’m wearing a black jacket. Can 
you see me? 
L Yes, I can! Can you see me? I’m walking towards you now!
c Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to find the 
words or phrases for definitions 1–5.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
d e 9.8 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
1 bus stop  2 outside  3 traffic  4 box office  5 towards
e 9.8
1 bus stop
2 outside
3 a lot of traffic
4 box office
5 to walk towards somebody
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
5 SPEAKING
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to sit face to face if 
possible. Tell them to go to Communication The same 
or different?, A on p.80 and B on p.84.
 Go over the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. 
 When they have finished, get them to describe some of 
the pictures.
1 D (In A the woman is renting a car; in B she’s renting a bike.)
2 D (In A the man is packing his suitcase; in B he’s carrying it.)
3 S 
4 D (In A the boys are waiting for a bus; in B they’re waiting for a 
train.)
5 D (In A the woman is wearing a sunhat and she isn’t wearing 
sunglasses; in B she isn’t wearing a sunhat, but she is wearing 
sunglasses.)
6 S 
7 D (In A the couple are leaving the hotel; in B they’re going 
into the hotel.)
8 D (In A the girl is buying a T-shirt; in B she’s buying an umbrella.)
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 101@@
101
 9B Working undercover
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Because he wants to know more about his workers and 
problems in his company.
e 9.10
See Undercover Boss in Student’s Book on p.56
c e 9.11 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of summary. Model and drill pronunciation.
 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–8 and make sure they 
understand them.
 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to read and listen at the same time.
 Give Sts time to read the text again if necessary and mark 
1–8 T (true) or F (false).
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the summary the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1 T  2 F  3 T  4 T  5 F  6 F  7 F  8 F
e 9.11
See Episode 1 summary in Student’s Book on p.56
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences. 
Check answers.
2 On Monday, David is washing the dishes in the kitchen.
5 On Tuesday, the workers are repairing things in the rooms for 
the hotel inspector.
6 On Wednesday, David is serving breakfast.
7 The workers only have a quarter of an hour / 15 minutes to 
clean rooms.
8 David thinks that cleaning rooms is difficult / tiring.
d Focus on the question and elicit some ideas from the 
class.
 Tell Sts to go to Communication Undercover Boss on 
p.85 to check their ideas.
 Give Sts time to read what David does on the Friday. To 
check comprehension, you could ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Does David do the cleaning on Friday? Does he tell the 
workers who he is? Who gets more money? Does David think 
going undercover is good?, etc.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B. 
e Focus on the question and elicit opinions from the class.
 G  present continuous or present simple?
 V  clothes
 P  /ɜː/, other vowel sounds
Lesson plan
This lesson helps Sts understand the difference between the 
present continuous and the present simple.
The lesson begins with a reading activity based on an 
episode of the TV programme Undercover Boss (where a boss 
works ‘undercover’ to check on his workers). This leads into 
the grammar presentation. In Vocabulary & Pronunciation, 
Sts learn some common items of clothing and practise the 
/ɜː/ sound. They then listen to a student who is doing work 
experience in a clothes shop. Finally, the new grammar and 
vocabulary are pulled together in a speaking activity where 
Sts talk about the clothes they are wearing at the moment 
and the clothes they wear in different seasons and for 
particular occasions.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar present continuous or present simple? p.153 
Communicative A board game p.192 (instructions p.166) 
Vocabulary Clothes p.224 (instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook 9B
Online Practice 9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board JOBS IN A HOTEL.
Elicit from Sts different jobs and write them on the board, 
e.g. RECEPTIONIST, WAITER / WAITRESS, CHEF, CLEANER, etc.
Then ask what the word is for the person in charge of the 
hotel and elicit the manager. Model and drill pronunciation 
of all the jobs.
1 READING
a Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit some ideas for 
the two questions from the class, but don’t tell Sts if they 
are correct.
b e 9.10 Focus on the instructions. Now focus on the title, 
Undercover Boss, and tell Sts this is a TV show. Explain / 
Elicit the meaning of the title. Highlight that boss is an 
informal way of saying the person who is in charge of a 
group of workers or an organization.
!  Don’t ask Sts their opinion of this kind of show, as they will 
do this later in the lesson.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time.
 Give Sts time to answer the question.
 Check the answer. You might want to explain what a hotel 
chain is.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 102@@
102
 Now focus on the exercises for 9B on p.109 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner. 
Tell Sts to refer to the spelling rules in Grammar Bank 8B 
if they are not sure how to spell the -ing forms.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read out the full sentences.
a
1 B No. I’m working at home today.
2 A Are you doing your homework?
 
B I don’t have any homework today. I’m playing a  
video game.
3 My wife is a nurse. She works in a children’s hospital.
4 We’re on holiday in France. We’re staying in a nice little hotel.
5 A Hi. Can you talk or are you driving?
 
B I’m not driving, but I can’t talk now. I’m having lunch with 
my boss.
6 It always rains a lot here in the winter.
7 I usually have toast for breakfast, but today I’m having cereal.
b
1 Oh no! It’s raining and I don’t have my umbrella.
2 My father and I have dinner together every week.
3 Louise and Carl are on holiday this week. They’re skiing in 
Switzerland
4 A Hi, Sam. Are you watching the football match on TV?
 
B No, I’m doing my French homework.
5 I always get up late, and I never have time for breakfast.
6 My sister is travelling in Thailand at the moment.
7 What time do you usually go to bed?
8 Look. That’s my brother over there. Can you see him? He’s 
wearing a blue hat.
9 A Hello, Nick. Where are you going?
 
B To the gym. I always go on Tuesdays.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3 VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
 clothes; /ɜː/, other vowel sounds
a Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to match the 
words and pictures.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 a T-shirt  2 jeans  3 a suit  4 a hat  5 a jacket
b Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Clothes on p.129.
Vocabulary notes
Some clothes words only exist in the plural, e.g. jeans, 
shorts, and trousers. These words cannot be used with a, 
e.g. NOT a trousers. Other words for clothes, e.g. socks and 
shoes, are usually plural, but can be used in the singular.
 e 9.14 Focus on a. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat the words in chorus. Pause the audio as necessary. 
Highlight the word stress and the pronunciation of the 
more difficult words. Give further practice as necessary, 
modelling and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using 
the audio, and getting choral and individual responses.
e 9.14
See Clothes in Student’s Book on p.129
2 GRAMMAR present continuous or present  
 simple?
a Focus on the instructions and the two sentences. You 
could explain / elicit the meaning of the noun a suit  
/suːt/. Model and drill pronunciation.
 Give Sts time to complete the sentences with the 
two verbs in either the present simple or the present 
continuous. Point out that the first one (works) has been 
done for them.
b e 9.12 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers and elicit which verb form is used in 
each one.
2 ’s working (present continuous)
3 wears (present simple)
4 ’s wearing (present continuous)
e 9.12
He usually works in an office, but today he’s working in a hotel.
He usually wears a suit, but today he’s wearing jeans and a T-shirt.
c Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to look at the completed 
sentences in a to help them.
 Check answers.
Use the present simple to talk about every day.
Use the present continuous to talk about today / now.
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to look at the completed sentences 
in a again and elicit why each verb form is used in the 
completed gaps.
1 works (present simple because it’s usual)
2 ’s working (present continuous because it’s just today, not 
usual)
3 wears (present simple because it’s usual)
4 ’s wearing (present continuous because it’s just today, not 
usual)
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.108.
Grammar notes
present continuous or present simple?
It is important to make clear that there is a definite 
distinction in the use of the two present forms in English, 
which may (or may not) exist in your Sts’ own language(s). 
In English, you have to use the present continuous 
(not the present simple) to talk about things which are 
happening at the moment of speaking, e.g. Hello! What 
are you doing? NOT Hello! What do you do?
You have to use the present simple (not the present 
continuous) for habitual actions, e.g. I live in Berlin. NOT I’m 
living in Berlin. 
If you know your Sts’ L1, you might want to make some 
comparisons.
NB The use of the present continuous with a future 
meaning is taught in Pre-intermediate.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 9.13 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 103@@
103
e 9.16
egg /e/ dress, sweater
boot /uː/ shoes, suit
cat /æ/ cap, hat, jacket
phone /əʊ/ coat
owl /aʊ/ trousers
tree /iː/ jeans
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
f Focus on the sentences. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
practise saying them.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before putting Sts in pairs to practise saying 
the sentences, model and drill them.
4 LISTENING & SPEAKING
a Focus on the instructions. You could tell Sts in their L1 that 
the expression work experience is widely used to mean 
work for young people – often students – who want to 
experience a professional working environment. Most 
students do work experience for one or two weeks in a 
year and do not get paid. 
 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
b e 9.17 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the task. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
 Check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
She is positive.
e 9.17
(script in Student’s Book on pp.90–91)
I = interviewer, S = Sandra
I Hi, Sandra. Tell us a bit about your experience. Where are you 
working?
S I’m working in a clothes shop called FatFace. 
I What kind of clothes does FatFace have?
S Er, well, clothes for men and women, informal clothes, trousers, 
T-shirts, sweaters – things like that.
I What do you do every day?
S Well, er, I help the customers to find the clothes that they’re 
looking for. It’s a big shop and it has a lot of things. People 
sometimes can’t see the things that they want.
I Do you like working there?
S Yes, I love it. The people are really nice to me. I’m making a lot of 
new friends. 
I Is there anything you don’t like?
S Well, we can’t sit down: we’re standing up all the time. So that’s 
quite hard. 
I But in general, you’re happy?
S Oh yes. And when my two weeks finish, they say I can work  
here on Saturdays! That’s great for me. I really like working in  
a clothes shop.
I What do you wear at work?
S We wear clothes from the shop.
I Are the clothes that you’re wearing today from FatFace?
S Yes, they are!
c Focus on the instructions and questions 1–6. Give Sts time 
to read them.
 Now focus on b. Get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photos, and say the words. They could do this individually 
or with a partner.
 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to ask 
and answer questions about their classmates’ clothing. 
Monitor and help, correcting pronunciation where 
necessary.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
Pronunciation notes
/ɜː/
Remind Sts that the two dots in /ɜː/ mean that this sound 
is long.
Point out that this sound is a longer version of the /ə/ 
sound that Sts focused on in 4A.
er, ir, and ur are usually pronounced /ɜː/, e.g. verb, first, 
nurse.
or is usually pronounced /ɜː/ after the letter w – the most 
common examples are work, word, and world. However, 
note that or after other letters is usually pronounced /ɔː/, 
e.g. forty, airport.
You could also remind Sts that when er and or are 
unstressed, e.g. at the end of many job words, they are 
pronounced /ə/ (the schwa), e.g. waiter, doctor.
c e 9.15 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 9.15
See words and sound in Student’s Book on p.57
 Focus on the sound picture bird. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound). 
 Now focus on the words after bird. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ɜː/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after the 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
d Focus on the six sound pictures and elicit the sounds:  
egg /e/, boot /uː/, cat /æ/, etc.
 Give Sts time to put the clothes words in the list in the 
correct column.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
e e 9.16 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 104@@
104
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and answer the 
questions. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 Clothes for men and women, informal clothes, trousers, 
T-shirts, sweaters
2 She helps the customers to find the clothes that they’re 
looking for.
3 The people are really nice to her. She’s making a lot of new 
friends.
4 They can’t sit down.
5 She can work there on Saturdays.
6 From the shop / FatFace
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.90–91, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
d Go through questions 1–3 with the class, checking Sts 
understand the lexis, e.g. summer.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions, 
giving as much information as possible.
 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Do a quick review of colours by pointing to 
various items around the class and asking What colour is it?
EXTRA SUPPORT  Answer some of the questions yourself 
before putting Sts in pairs.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 9.18 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 9B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 105@@
105
Practical English
e 9.19
R = Rob, A = Alan, B = barman
1
R Hey, Alan. Would you like to come to the match with me on 
Sunday? It’s Norwich against Chelsea, and I have two tickets.
A Wow! What time’s the match?
R It’s at four o’clock. 
A Yeah, I’d love to. Thanks.
R Would you like to meet for lunch first? 
A Sorry, I can’t. It’s my mum’s birthday, and I need to have lunch 
with her. But I can meet you there.
R Great. Let’s meet at half past three at the entrance to the Tube 
station.
A Fine. See you there.
2
A They are playing really badly. I hope the second half is better.
R Me too. I know they can win. Would you like a burger?
A No, thanks. I’m not very hungry. 
R How about a coffee?
A Yeah, great.
***
R Um, a burger and a water, please.
A And I’d like a coffee.
B Milk and sugar?
A Yes, please.
R Come on!
b Get Sts to uncover the conversations. Point out the 
Glossary and go through it with the class.
 Tell Sts to read the conversations and think about what 
the missing words might be.
 Now play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the gaps. Pause after each conversation to 
give Sts time to write.
 Check answers.
1 match   2 Saturday   3 four o’clock   4 lunch   5 birthday   
6 3.30   7 know   8 burger   9 hungry   10 coffee   11 water   
12 coffee   13 Milk
 Go through the conversations line by line and focus on 
any new or unfamiliar expressions, e.g. It’s Norwich against 
Chelsea, etc. You may want to point out that the w is silent 
in Norwich.
 Remind Sts of the use of Wow! to express surprise or 
happiness.
 Point out to Sts that native speakers often use yeah 
instead of yes, e.g. when Alan accepts the invitation, he 
says Yeah, I’d love to. 
c Focus on the question and do it as a whole-class activity. 
Would you like…? means Do you want…? and I’d like… means  
I want…, but both are more polite.
 Now focus on the Would you like…? box and go through 
it with the class.
Function inviting and offering: Would you like…?
 P  sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
In this Practical English lesson, Sts learn to make invitations 
and offers using Would you like…?, and to accept or decline 
these politely. These skills are presented in the context of 
informal social conversations in which Rob invites a friend 
to a football match, and once there offers to buy food and 
a drink. In Pronunciation, Sts practise making invitations 
and offers using Would you like…?, with a focus on sentence 
rhythm. Continuing the theme of invitations, Sts then watch 
or listen to Jenny meeting her ex-boyfriend in the street. 
In Speaking & Writing, Sts practise inviting each other to a 
party, as well as accepting and declining an invitation – they 
do this first orally and then in writing.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative Would you like to…? p.193 
(instructions p.167)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 5 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 5 
Can you remember? 1–9
Online Prac tice Practical English 5 
         Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Say you have two tickets for something that you think 
many of your Sts would like to do (e.g. a football match or a 
concert involving a well-known singer or group).
Invite individual Sts using Would you like to come with me to 
(a X concert) on Saturday? and teach the answers I’d love to. 
Thanks. / I’m sorry, I can’t. I’m busy on Saturday. 
Write these on the board, and model and drill pronunciation.
Finally, when you have invited several people, write the 
question on the board, and model and drill pronunciation.
1 r INVITING AND OFFERING
a e 9.19 Books open. Focus on the task and get Sts to 
cover the conversations and focus on the photos.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and number the photos.
 Check answers.
1 B   2 A   3 C
 5 
Practical English Would you like to come?
EPISODE
PE5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 106@@
106
***
S Jenny, I’d like to ask you something.
J Yes?
S There’s an exhibition of Picasso at the MOMA next week. I know 
you love Picasso. Would you like to come with me?
J Ah, listen, Steve. I’m really busy at work at the moment. Next 
week isn’t a good week for me.
S Sure. No problem. Maybe we can meet one evening – when you 
have more time – and have dinner or see a show?
J Listen, Steve. I don’t think it’s a good idea. But thanks. Oh, look at 
the time! I need to go. Let’s ask for the check.
b Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–5. Make sure they understand all the lexis in 
the options.
 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen and 
circle the correct answer.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 well   2 starting to rain   3 an hour   4 can’t   5 isn’t
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
4 r USEFUL PHRASES
 e 9.22 Focus on the phrases and make sure Sts 
understand what each one means.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 9.22
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.59
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs and ask them to write 
a short conversation, using some of the Useful phrases. 
When they have finished, get a few pairs to act out their 
conversation for the class. 
5 SPEAKING & WRITING
a e 9.23 Focus on the instructions. Before playing the 
audio, you might want to check Sts know the meaning of 
busy. Model and drill its pronunciation.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 9.23
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.59
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations. Make sure they swap roles.
b Focus on the instructions. Highlight that Sts should 
use the conversation in 5a as a model to role-play a 
conversation using their own ideas. 
2 PRONUNCIATION sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Good sentence rhythm depends on stressing the 
important words in a sentence and linking some words 
together. Here Sts get intensive practice of asking Would 
you like…? questions with good rhythm.
a e 9.20 Focus on the two questions and tell Sts that they 
are going to ‘build’ them bit by bit. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just 
to listen. Remind Sts that the words in bold are stressed 
more strongly.
e 9.20
See words in Student’s Book on p.59
 Now play the audio, pausing at the end of each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Check that Sts are linking would and 
you. If Sts are having problems, model the words yourself 
for them to repeat.
b Focus on the instructions and speech bubbles. Elicit the 
eight questions from the class. Then model and drill them. 
 Now ask one of the questions with Would you like a…? to 
elicit the two possible answers Yes, please. / No, thank you.
 Then ask one of the questions with Would you like to go 
to a…? to elicit the two possible answers Yes, I’d love to. / 
Sorry, I can’t.
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to ask about the first 
photos in each group. Sts then take turns asking each 
other about the things in the photos and responding.
 Monitor and help.
 Get some pairs to perform for the class.
c Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversations 
in 1b. The person playing Rob should read the 
barman’s line.
 Make sure they swap roles.
 You could get a pair to perform the conversations for the 
class.
3 r MEETING AN OLD FRIEND
a e 9.21 Focus on the instructions and question, and 
make sure Sts understand ex-boyfriend.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the question. Play again as 
necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
He invites her to have a coffee.
He invites her to a Picasso exhibition. 
He invites her to have dinner or see a show.
e 9.21
(script in Student’s Book on p.91)
S = Steve, J = Jenny
S Hi, Jenny. What a surprise!
J Hi, Steve. 
S How are you? You’re looking great.
J Thanks. I’m well. How about you?
S I’m OK. Hey, it’s starting to rain. Would you like a coffee?
J Oh, thanks, Steve, but I have a meeting in an hour.
S Oh, come on, Jenny. I’d like to talk to you.
J OK. A quick coffee.
PE5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 107@@
107
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to role-play their 
own conversations. Monitor and help as needed.
 Make sure they swap roles.
c Tell Sts they need to invite their classmates to their party. 
When they accept an invitation, tell them to make sure 
they make a note of whose party they are going to 
and when, so they don’t accept two invitations on the 
same day.
 Now get Sts to stand up and move around the classroom, 
inviting as many people as possible to their party.
 Monitor and help as needed.
 Ask a few Sts when their party is and how many people 
are coming.
d Ask Sts to go to Writing An email on p.87. 
 Focus on a and get Sts to read the email and answer the 
question.
 Check the answer.
Lucy invites Kate to (have) dinner at her house.
 Now focus on b and get Sts to read Kate’s email and 
choose the correct phrases.
 Check answers.
I’m sorry, but I can’t come
Maybe see you at the weekend?
 Focus on the Emails box in c and go through it with the 
class.
 Focus on the instructions for d and put Sts in pairs. 
Highlight that the invitations have to include the day 
and time.
 Sts write their emails inviting their partner. Monitor and 
help as needed. Make sure Sts are including all of the 
information.
 Now focus on e and get Sts to exchange their invitation 
with their partner. When Sts have read the invitation, they 
should write a reply, accepting or declining the invitation.
 Now focus on f and get Sts to give their reply to their 
partner.
 Get some feedback from various pairs and find out what 
kind of invitations Sts made (i.e. to the cinema, to a party, 
for coffee, etc.) and what kind of excuses they used if they 
declined.
PE5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 108@@
10A
108
 10A A room with a view
 G  there’s a… / there are some…
 V  hotels, in, on, under
 P  /ɪə/ and /eə/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is hotels. 
At the start of the lesson, Sts read tourist information 
about Scotland and Loch Ness. They then learn vocabulary 
related to hotel rooms and hotels. Then the new grammar 
(there’s a… and there are some…) is presented through a 
conversation between a couple on holiday and a hotel 
receptionist. The receptionist is showing the couple their 
room in a real hotel (whose website Sts can visit) next to 
Loch Ness. They talk about the things that there are or 
aren’t in the hotel and area, and they ask about the famous 
monster. In Pronunciation, Sts practise the sounds /ɪə/ and  
/eə/. In Vocabulary & Speaking, Sts learn the prepositions in, 
on, and under. Then there is a speaking activity in which Sts 
use prepositions to describe the location of objects in hotel 
rooms.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar there’s a… / there are some… p.154 
Communicative My hotel p.194 (instructions p.167) 
Vocabulary Draw it! p.225 (instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook 10A
Online Practice 10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts what they know about Scotland, e.g. Where is 
Scotland? What’s the capital city? What’s Scotland famous for?
1 READING & VOCABULARY hotels
a e 10.1 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the 
questions. Before playing the audio, you could elicit from 
the class what they know about Scotland.
 Now play the audio for Sts to read and listen at the same 
time. You could point out that the speaker has a Scottish 
accent.
 Either put Sts in pairs to answer the questions, or do it as a 
whole-class activity. 
 If Sts worked in pairs, elicit some answers. Also ask if Sts 
have heard of Loch Ness. Elicit / Explain that an inn is a 
small hotel.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the tourist information 
the first time, check whether you need to pre-teach any 
vocabulary.
e 10.1
See text in Student’s Book on p.60
b Get Sts to look at the photo of the hotel bedroom and 
number the words in the list to match the items in 
the room.
 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation, especially 
mirror /ˈmɪrə/.
1 a picture   2 a window   3 a bed   4 a chair   5 a mirror
c Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Hotels on p.130.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that:
• the letter h in hotel, as with most words beginning 
with h, is pronounced /h/ (it is not silent, as in some 
languages).
• the letters ow are pronounced /aʊ/ in towel, but /əʊ/ in 
pillow.
• the p in cupboard is silent.
 e 10.2 Look at 1 In a hotel room and focus on a. Play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the words in chorus. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 10.2
See In a hotel room in Student’s Book on p.130
 Remind Sts that we usually use the with bathroom and 
floor because it is clear which one you are talking about.
 Focus on b and get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
picture, and say the words. They could do this individually 
or with a partner. Remind them to use a or the.
 Monitor and help. Make a note of any pronunciation 
problems Sts are having. Write the words on the board 
and model and drill the ones that they find difficult.
 e 10.3 Look at 2 In a hotel and focus on a. Play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat the words in chorus. 
Pause the audio as necessary. Highlight the word stress 
and the pronunciation of the more difficult words. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
e 10.3
See In a hotel in Student’s Book on p.130
 Highlight pronunciation, especially the /ɑː/ sound in spa, 
bar, garden, and car park.
 Focus on b and get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
picture, and say the words. They could do this individually 
or with a partner.
 Focus on the ground floor box and go through it with the 
class. In some countries, e.g. the USA, people refer to the 
ground floor of a building as the first floor. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 109@@
10A
109
 Highlight that floor has two different meanings – the part 
of the room below your feet and the different levels in a 
building.
 Finally, focus on c and the speech bubbles. Look at the 
drawing of the hotel and highlight that we use ordinal 
numbers to talk about the floors of a hotel. Model and 
drill the ground floor, the first floor, the second floor, etc. 
in chorus and individually. Highlight that we use the 
preposition on to talk about the floors of a building.
 Demonstrate the activity by asking a student Where’s the 
bar? (It’s on the second floor.) Elicit a question from the 
same student and answer the question yourself. 
 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to ask and 
answer questions about the hotel. Monitor and help. 
Make a note of any problems they are having and correct 
any mistakes on the board.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2 GRAMMAR there’s a… / there are some…
a e 10.4 Focus on the lesson title, A room with a view, and 
elicit / explain the meaning (= a room where you can see 
beautiful things outside).
 Now focus on the instructions and the words in the list. 
Model and drill the pronunciation of wi-fi /ˈwaɪ faɪ/.  
Point out that the first one (a lift) has been done for Sts. 
You could point out to Sts that the hotel is the one they 
read about in 1a. Get Sts to cover the conversation on p.61 
and focus on the list of items.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the task. Play again as necessary. You 
may want to point out that the receptionist speaks with a 
Scottish accent.
 Check answers by asking Is there (a good view)? / Are there 
(shops near)? and getting Sts to just say Yes or No. 
f a good view   f TV   f wi-fi   g a restaurant   f a bar   
g shops near
e 10.4
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.61
b Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
that they are circling a or b in 1–3 and answering the 
question in the instructions. Get Sts to uncover the 
conversation. 
 Play the audio again for Sts to read and listen at the 
same time.
 Give Sts time to look at 1–3 and circle the correct 
answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you may want to elicit a 
translation of There’s / There are at this point.
 Check answers.
1 a   2 b   3 b
You make questions by changing the order.  
(There is… 
 Is there…?, There are… 
 Are there…?)
You make negatives with isn’t and aren’t.
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose. You 
could point out that cases, in line 8, is an abbreviation 
of suitcases, which Sts saw in the Vocabulary Bank 
Common verb phrases 2: travelling.
c e 10.5 Focus on the task and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts to listen and answer the first 
two questions.
 Check answers to the first two questions and elicit 
opinions for the third question.
They see something in the loch.
Louisa takes photos with her phone.
e 10.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.91)
E = Eric, L = Louisa
E Louisa, time to get up. 
L OK. What time is it?
E It’s half past seven. Breakfast is at eight. 
L Is it a nice day?
E Let’s see. Louisa, quick! Come here! Look at that!
L What is it?
E Look. Over there.
L Where? 
E There. In the loch. There! Can’t you see? There’s something in the 
loch. It’s moving. Can you see it now?
L Yes. What is it?
E I don’t know. Quick, take a photo with your phone.
L I can’t see it now. Can you?
E No. I can’t. I can’t see anything now. Let’s see those photos, Louisa. 
Wow! I don’t believe it. Look at that…
 Elicit opinions to the final question as a whole-class 
activity. You could find out, with a show of hands, how 
many Sts believe in the Loch Ness monster.
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.110. 
Grammar notes
there’s a… / there are some…
Sts may have trouble remembering that there is is used 
with singular nouns and there are with plural nouns.
Highlight that:
• there is contracts to there’s, but we write there are NOT 
there’re.
• there is isn’t contracted in short answers, i.e. Yes, there is. 
NOT Yes, there’s.
• negative sentences are formed with the negative of be, 
i.e. isn’t and aren’t.
• questions are formed by inverting there and is / are,  
e.g. There is 
 Is there…? and There are 
 Are there…?
When giving a list of things, we use There is if the first 
word in the list is singular, e.g. There’s a bed, a table, and 
two chairs.
some and any
Highlight that we use some in positive plural sentences, 
e.g. There are some pictures.
We use any in negative plural sentences and questions, 
e.g. There aren’t any towels, Are there any pillows?
NB The use of some and any with uncountable nouns,  
e.g. There’s some bread, is not taught here. This grammar 
point is taught in English File Elementary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 110@@
10A
110
3 PRONUNCIATION /ɪə/ and /eə/
Pronunciation notes
You could point out that /ɪə/ and /eə/ are diphthongs, i.e. 
two sounds, if you think this will help Sts.
The letters eer are always pronounced /ɪə/, e.g. beer.
The letters ere and ear are sometimes pronounced /ɪə/, 
e.g. here and near, but are also sometimes pronounced  
/eə/, e.g. there and wear. Sts need to learn these common 
examples by heart.
a e 10.7 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 10.7
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.61
 Focus on the sound picture ear. Play the audio to model 
and drill the word and the sound (pause after the sound). 
 Now focus on the words after ear. Remind Sts that the 
pink letters are the /ɪə/ sound. Play the audio, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for chair /eə/.
 Play the audio again from the beginning, pausing after 
each group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
 Focus on the Same spelling, different sound box and 
go through it with the class. There is no easy rule here, so 
Sts will have to learn and remember how these words are 
pronounced.
b e 10.8 Focus on the words in the list and tell Sts that the 
pink letters are either /ɪə/ or /eə/. Play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 10.8
See words in Student’s Book on p.61
 Now play it again for Sts, pausing after each word for Sts 
to put it in the correct row in a.
c e 10.9 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
e 10.9
ear /ɪə/  beer dear  idea  really we’re  year
chair /eə/ airport repair their where 
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before putting Sts in pairs, model and drill 
the sentences.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 10.6 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the information box and go through it with the 
class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 10A on p.111 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 Are there any free tables in the restaurant?
2 There aren’t any lifts. Would you like rooms on the ground 
floor?
3 There’s a bath in the bathroom. It’s very big.
4 Is there a gym? I want to do some exercise.
5 There isn’t a remote control for the TV. Can you ask reception 
for one?
6 There are some very ugly pictures in this room.
7 Is there a meeting room in the hotel?
8 There are some tables in the garden if you want to eat 
outside.
9 There isn’t a car park, but we can help you park your car.
 10 Are there any clean towels?
b
1 There aren’t any cars in the car park.
2 There are some pillows in the cupboard.
3 There’s a sauna in the spa.
4 Are there any chairs in the garden?
5 Is there a TV in the bar?
6 There isn’t a table in the bedroom.
7 There aren’t any windows in my room.
8 There are some shops in the hotel.
9 There are some nice T-shirts in the gift shop.
 10 Are there any restaurants in the village?
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e Put Sts in groups of three and tell them to practise the 
conversation in 2b. 
 Make sure Sts swap roles.
 You could get some pairs to perform the role-play for the 
class.
f Focus on the examples. Highlight that Sts can write a 
singular + sentence if there is one of something (There’s 
a…), and a plural + sentence with either a number or 
some (There are two / some…). With – sentences, they 
should be singular when there is normally only one of 
something, e.g. There isn’t a TV, but plural when there are 
usually more than one, e.g. There aren’t any windows.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to write a + or – sentence 
with There’s a… / There are some… / There aren’t any… for 
each noun. Monitor and help if necessary.
 Elicit some sentences from individual Sts.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to do this orally.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 111@@
10A
111
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 10.10 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 10A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
4 VOCABULARY & SPEAKING in, on, under
a Focus on the pictures of the boxes and balls. Give Sts time 
to write the correct preposition under each picture.
 Check answers.
1 on   2 under   3 in
 Highlight, with examples and demonstrations, the 
difference between on and in. In is used when something 
is inside a closed or semi-closed space (e.g. My phone is 
in my pocket. The book is in the drawer.) whereas on is used 
when something is on the surface of something else (e.g. 
The picture is on the wall. The book is on the table.).
EXTRA IDEA  You could practise these prepositions further by 
placing an object, e.g. your phone, in different places in the 
classroom and asking Where’s my phone? (e.g. It’s on the table, 
It’s under the chair, It’s in your bag, etc.).
b Focus on the six pictures. In each one, the remote control 
is in a different place.
 Focus on the speech bubbles and picture 1. Model and 
drill the question and answer in chorus and individually.
 Get a pair of Sts to demonstrate the activity.
 Then put Sts in pairs and give them time to ask and 
answer the questions.
 Monitor and help.
 Check answers.
2 It’s on the bed.
3 It’s in the cup.
4 It’s under the bed.
5 It’s under a towel.
6 It’s in the suitcase (under a T-shirt).
c Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to go to 
Communication Is there a TV? Where is it?, A on p.80 
and B on p.84.
 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts are clear 
about what they have to do. Establish that Sts A are 
going to first ask Sts B questions about picture 1. For each 
object, if B answers Yes, there is / are, A then has to ask 
Where is it? / Where are they? and draw the object(s) in the 
correct place or write the word there.
 Demonstrate by taking the role of A and asking one of the 
Bs Is there a coat? and eliciting Yes, there is. Then ask Where 
is it? and elicit It’s on the chair. Then tell all Sts A to draw a 
coat on the chair.
 Get Sts A to continue with the questions, and then they 
swap roles.
 As soon as a pair has finished, tell them to compare their 
pictures.
EXTRA IDEA  You could get fast finishers to write sentences 
about their picture, e.g. There’s a laptop on the bed. There are 
some keys on the table, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 112@@
112
 10B Where were you?
b e 10.11 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that they 
are going to listen to the interview between the detective 
and Jason Brown. If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, 
explain to Sts that we say yesterday morning / afternoon / 
evening, but last night.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just  
to listen.
e 10.11
D = detective, J = Jason
D Where were you at seven o’clock last night?
J I was at home.
D You weren’t at home. Your wife says you were out. She was at 
home alone.
J Oh yes, I remember now. I was in a pub.
D Were you alone?
J No, I wasn’t. I was with a friend, Kevin Smith. You can ask him.
 Now play it again, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to complete the gaps. This is the first time Sts have 
seen was and were, but they should be able to guess the 
meaning from context.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
1 seven  2 home  3 home  4 wife   5 pub   6 alone   
7 friend 
c Focus on the headings of the chart and the two columns. 
Then give Sts time to complete the chart.
 Check answers.
1 was  2 weren’t  3 Were  4 wasn’t
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.110. 
Grammar notes
past simple: be
Was is the past of am and is. Were is the past of are. Like is 
and are, was and were can be used to describe permanent 
and temporary states, e.g. I was a teacher. / I was at home 
last night.
Was and were are used exactly like is and are, i.e. they are 
inverted to make questions (e.g. he was 
 was he?), and 
not (n’t) is added to make negatives (wasn’t, weren’t).
The past simple is used to talk about finished time, 
especially with past time expressions, e.g. last night 
and last week. It is used to refer to both the near and 
distant past.
 !  Highlight that past time expressions do not have an 
article, i.e. last week NOT the last week.
 !  Some Sts tend to remember was and forget were.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 10.12 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 G  past simple: be
 V  in, on, at
 P  was and were, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The grammar (was / were) is presented in an interview 
between a detective and a suspected bank robber. Sts then 
listen to the same detective interviewing the suspect’s 
friend and they find out if the suspect is guilty or not. The 
vocabulary focus in the lesson is on prepositions with places, 
in, on, and at (e.g. in bed, on a bus, at school). In Pronunciation 
& Speaking, Sts practise the strong and weak forms of 
was and were, and sentence rhythm. Then the grammar, 
pronunciation, and vocabulary are brought together when 
Sts ask and answer questions about where they were at 
various times the previous day. Finally, Sts watch a video 
about buildings with an interesting history. If you are not 
able to watch the video in class, make sure you get Sts to 
watch it at home and do the exercises.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar past simple: be p.155 
Communicative Where were you yesterday? p.195 
(instructions p.167)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Buildings with a past
For students
Workbook 10B
Online Practice 10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts What day is it today? and elicit the full date onto the 
board, e.g. TUESDAY 5TH MARCH.
Then write the previous day and date on the board and ask 
Sts Is this today? and elicit / teach yesterday, and write it on 
the board.
Then under YESTERDAY, write 10 A.M., 3 P.M., and 7 P.M. and 
elicit yesterday morning, yesterday afternoon, and yesterday 
evening.
Finally, write 10 P.M. Sts will probably say yesterday night. Tell 
them that with night, we say last night NOT yesterday night.
1 GRAMMAR past simple: be
a Books open. Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the meaning of robbery, bank, and a suspect. 
Model and drill pronunciation. 
 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
1 Jason  2 a detective
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 113@@
113
1 taxi driver  2 14  3 at school  4 taxi  5 Black Horse   
6 Street   7 wife   8 Jason’s wife
e 10.14
(See script in Student’s Book on p.91)
D = detective, K = Kevin
D Interview with Kevin Smith at eight p.m. on Tuesday the 
fourteenth of November. Are you Kevin Smith?
K Yes, I am.
D What do you do, Kevin?
K I’m a taxi driver.
D And where do you live?
K At fourteen Market Street.
D Do you know the suspect, Jason Brown?
K Yes, I know him. He’s my friend. We were at school together.
D Where were you yesterday afternoon at five o’clock?
K Yesterday at five o’clock…I was in my taxi. I was in my taxi all 
afternoon.
D And at seven o’clock? Where were you then?
K I was in a pub. The Black Horse.
D Where is it, exactly?
K In South Street. Near the station.
D Were you alone?
K No, I was with Jason.
D Were you only with Jason?
K Er, no. My wife was there. And Jason’s wife.
D Jason’s wife? She was with you?
K Er, yes.
D Are you sure?
K Yes…no…I can’t remember.
D You can’t remember who you were with yesterday? Very 
interesting…
b Focus on the instructions and play the audio again.
 Ask the question to the class.
Because he says Jason’s wife was at the pub, but she was 
at home.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.91, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
3 VOCABULARY in, on, at
Vocabulary notes
Explain that the best way to learn prepositions is by 
remembering them in phrases, e.g. at home, in the office. 
However, the following are some simple guidelines Sts 
can use.
• Use at for set phrases, e.g. home, school, work, university. 
• Use in for towns, countries, rooms, buildings, and bed. 
• Use on for transportation with bus, train, plane, and ship, 
but use in with cars.
 !  With many buildings, e.g. restaurant, pub, cinema, we 
can also use at to say where you were.
a Focus on the instructions and sentences.
 Get Sts to complete the gaps. Remind Sts that we say 
yesterday morning / afternoon / evening, but last night.
 Check answers.
1 in  2 at
 Focus on the Past time expressions box and go through 
it with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 10B on p.111 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 Were you at school yesterday?
2 James wasn’t very well yesterday.
3 We were on the plane at 4.00.
4 Were they in class yesterday?
5 You weren’t very hungry this morning.
6 I was in a meeting until 7.00 last night.
7 Was your sister in London last week?
8 It was a terrible film.
9 I wasn’t at home last weekend.
 10 Sarah and Emma were tired this morning.
b
1 B I was at work all evening.
 
A No, you weren’t. You were with Miriam!
 
B No, I wasn’t!
2 A Was Freddie Mercury an actor?
 
B No, he wasn’t. He was a singer with Queen.
3 A Were you in Milan yesterday?
 
B No, we weren’t. We were in Rome.
4 A Was the film good?
 
B No, it wasn’t. It was very slow!
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e e 10.13 Focus on the instructions and the example. 
Play the first sentence, pausing after the prompt (She’s 
a teacher.) for Sts to say the past form in chorus. Now 
continue playing the audio for Sts to hear the answer.
 Play the rest of the audio, pausing after each prompt for 
Sts to make the sentence in the past. 
e 10.13
1 She’s a teacher. (pause) She was a teacher.
2 Is he an actor? (pause) Was he an actor?
3 We aren’t very happy. (pause) We weren’t very happy.
4 It isn’t expensive. (pause) It wasn’t expensive.
5 They’re terrible. (pause) They were terrible.
6 Are you a student? (pause) Were you a student?
7 I’m not tired. (pause) I wasn’t tired.
8 You’re in my class. (pause) You were in my class.
 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
2 LISTENING
a e 10.14 Focus on the instructions. Then give Sts time to 
read the information about Kevin.
 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gaps.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 114@@
114
e 10.16
(Times and sound effects of the following:)
1 six o’clock in the morning: woman snoring
2 eight o’clock in the morning: train and announcement for the 
Gatwick Express train
3 eleven o’clock in the morning: pilot’s announcement and plane 
taking off
4 three o’clock in the afternoon: hotel receptionist 
5 five o’clock in the afternoon: street noises
6 seven o’clock in the evening: restaurant noises
7 eleven o’clock at night: snoring
4 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING was and  
 were, sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Native speakers use two different pronunciations of was 
and were, depending on whether they are stressed or not, 
i.e. they can have a strong or weak pronunciation.
Was and were always have a strong pronunciation in 
short answers and negatives, and can have a strong 
pronunciation in yes / no questions, e.g. Was he at home 
last night? The pronunciation is /wɒz/ and /wɜː/.
Was and were tend to have a weak pronunciation in + 
sentences and are pronounced /wəz/ and /wə/, e.g. He 
was a teacher /wəz/, They were waitresses /wə/.
It is useful for Sts at this level to be aware of these 
differences, as it will help them to understand spoken 
English.
a e 10.17 Focus on the conversation and play the audio 
once the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
 You could point out that was and were are not usually 
stressed in the positive.
e 10.17
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.63
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
Give more practice as necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
the conversation.
b Focus on the questions and elicit the first one (Where were 
you yesterday at 7.00 in the morning?).
 Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you the first 
two questions. 
 In pairs, Sts ask and answer the questions. Monitor and 
help, making note of any problems.
 Get feedback by asking individual Sts to tell the class a 
sentence about their partner, e.g. Maria was in the kitchen 
yesterday at 7.00 in the morning. You could also find out if 
any Sts were in the same place at the same time.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Give Sts time, in pairs, to practise making 
the questions first.
b Write IN, ON, and AT on the board. Highlight that we often 
use these prepositions with places.
 Focus on the chart. Explain that all of the words in each 
column use the same preposition. 
 Get Sts to complete the gaps at the top of the chart 
with in, on, or at. They should be able to do this, as they 
have seen examples of these prepositions earlier in the 
Student’s Book.
c e 10.15 Play the audio for Sts to check answers and 
repeat the sentences.
1 at  2 in  3 on 
e 10.15
Where were you yesterday at seven p.m.?
1 I was at home. 
 
I was at work.
 
I was at school.
 
I was at university.
2 I was in bed. 
 
I was in the kitchen.
 
I was in my car.
 
I was in London. 
 
I was in the park.
 
I was in the street.
 
I was in a restaurant.
 
I was in a pub. 
 
I was in a museum.
 
I was in a shopping centre.
 
I was in a hotel.
3 I was on a bus.
 
I was on a train.
 
I was on a plane.
d Focus on the instructions and the example. Demonstrate 
the activity by saying a word from the chart. Elicit the 
correct prepositional phrase. Repeat with two or three 
more words.
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to look at the chart and 
Sts B to close their books. Sts A test Sts B on the phrases.
 After a few minutes, get them to swap roles.
e e 10.16 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
know the meaning of prison. Explain that Sts are going to 
hear sound effects on the audio that will tell them where 
Jason’s wife was yesterday at the times in the exercise. 
They have to complete the sentences with she was and 
the place.
 Play the audio, pausing after the first sound effect, and get 
Sts to look at the example.
 Then play the next sound effect and pause the audio. Ask 
Where was she at eight o’clock? (She was on a train.) Get Sts 
to write it.
 Continue playing the audio, pausing after each sound 
effect for Sts to write their answers.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again, pausing after each sound effect to elicit 
answers from individual Sts.
3 she was on a plane
4 she was in a hotel
5 she was in the street
6 she was in a restaurant
7 she was in bed
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 115@@
115
c Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA  Ask Sts if there are any buildings in their town 
or city which have a different past. If you know of any 
buildings with a past in the town or city where you are 
teaching, you could tell the class.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 10.18 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 10B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases. 
5 r VIDEO LISTENING
a Focus on the task and go through the Glossary with the 
class. Model and drill pronunciation of the words.
 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the questions.
 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
The buildings are in Oxford. 
Today they are a hotel. 
In 1808 they were a bank.
Buildings with a past
Hi! I’m Greg. Welcome to Oxford. I’m visiting the Old Bank Hotel. It’s 
an unusual hotel in the centre of the city. 
The Old Bank is in the High Street, in the centre of Oxford. Today it’s 
a luxury hotel, but these buildings – from number ninety-two to 
number ninety-four – have a very interesting history.
In the sixteenth century, they were part of Christ Church College.
In the eighteenth century, they were different shops.
And we know that in eighteen-oh-eight the buildings were one 
business – a bank.
There was a bank here for almost two hundred years, but today it’s a 
famous Oxford hotel. Would you like to go in and look? Let’s go.
The Old Bank Hotel has a beautiful reception and a fantastic 
restaurant.
There are forty-two bedrooms and they’re all very comfortable. They 
have great views of Oxford’s famous colleges.
This room has a large bed, two chairs, a table, a television, and a 
cupboard.
It has a beautiful marble bathroom, too.
But there are other rooms that visitors to the hotel don’t usually see. 
These secret rooms are here in the cellar, under the hotel.
These are the old bank vaults. When the hotel was a bank, all the 
money was here.
The rooms were small and the doors weren’t easy to open!
They were very, very strong, and on each one, there was a large lock.
Today, these old vaults are storerooms.
The hotel keeps its wine collection in here, so it’s very, very safe!
Ninety-two to ninety-four High Street is a part of Oxford’s history. 
And today, if you want to visit Oxford, the Old Bank is a fantastic 
place to see!
b Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–9. 
 Play the video again for Sts to watch and mark each 
sentence T (true) or F (false).
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
 Check answers.
1 T   2 F   3 F   4 T   5 F   6 T   7 F   8 T   9 T
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to correct the False sentences 
(playing the video again if necessary). Correct the answers.
2 In the 16th century, they were part of Christ Church College.
3 In the 18th century, they were shops.
5 The hotel has 42 bedrooms.
7 The secret rooms were for keeping money.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 116@@
116
 9&10 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 a  2 c  3 c  4 b  5 b
e 10.19
1
I = interviewer, A = Anna
I What are you doing in Oxford today?
A I’m here visiting a friend and just looking around.
2
I = interviewer, Ia = Iain
I What clothes do you usually wear for work?
Ia I wear semi-formal clothes, so a shirt and trousers, but I don’t  
wear a tie.
3
I = interviewer, J = Jayna
I Would you like to live in England?
J Yes.
I Why?
J The history of the place, and just, um, it really is a beautiful 
country.
4
I = interviewer, S = Sandra
I Are you staying in a hotel?
S Yes.
I Do you like it?
S Yes, I like it very much.
I Why?
S It’s situated near the river, it’s really nice and cosy, they serve  
pints in the evening, so we’re fine.
5
I = interviewer, S = Spencer
I Where were you at ten o’clock last night?
S At ten o’clock last night I was in my hotel room.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.34.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 b   2 a   3 b   4 a   5 a   6 a   7 b   8 b   9 b   10 a   
11 b   12 a   13 b   14 a   15 b
VOCABULARY
a
1 waiting   2 phoning  3  carrying   4 arriving   5 wearing
b
1 dress   2 jacket   3 shirt   4 skirt   5 suit   6 trousers   
7 hat
c
1 Reception   2 lift  3 gift shop   4 bathroom   5 car park
d
1 under   2 on   3 on   4 under   5 in
e
1 in   2 on   3 at
PRONUNCIATION
a
1 /ɜː/ bird   2 /e/ egg   3 /eə/ chair   4 /ɪə/ ear   5 /eɪ/ train
c
1 travel   2 arrive   3 restaurant   4 cupboard   5 reception
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
F 1  C 2  A 3  E 4  D 5  B 6
b
1 There’s a balcony.
2 feeling a bit nervous
3 We’re having amazing tapas in a bar.
4 We’re now lying on our bed.
Revise and Check 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 117@@
11A
117
 11A A new life in the USA
 G  past simple: regular verbs
 V  regular verbs
 P  regular past simple endings
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is a family who move from London 
in the UK to North Carolina in the USA for a year.
The grammar is presented in a short text and listening 
about their move. Sts then focus closely on the different 
pronunciations of the -ed ending. They practise the grammar 
and pronunciation in a speaking activity. The lesson finishes 
with a reading and a listening about the family’s year in the 
USA, and Sts talk about people they know who have lived or 
studied abroad.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar past simple: regular verbs p.156 
Communicative Find someone who… p.196  
(instructions p.167)
For students
Workbook 11A
Online Practice 11A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following flow chart on the board:
WOULD YOU LIKE TO LIVE ABROAD FOR A YEAR?
|
|
YES
NO
|
|
WHERE? WHY?
WHY NOT?
Elicit the meaning of abroad (= in another country) and its 
pronunciation (/əˈbrɔːd/).
Then put Sts in pairs and get them to ask each other the 
questions. 
Get some feedback and find out which countries Sts would 
like to go to.
1 GRAMMAR past simple: regular verbs
a e 11.1 Books open. Focus on the instructions and go 
through sentences 1–3. Make sure the two options are 
clear in each case.
 Focus on the text and, if you didn’t do the Optional  
lead-in, elicit / explain the meaning of abroad. Model  
and drill its pronunciation.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen at the same time. If Sts ask about the -ed ending 
on the verbs, e.g. wanted, asked, ask them if they think this 
is the present or the past (the past).
e 11.1
See text in Student’s Book on p.66
 Now give Sts time to choose a or b in 1–3.
 Check answers.
1 a  2 b  3 b
 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
b e 11.2 Focus on the six photos and elicit what Sts 
can see. 
 Now focus on the sentences and establish that they are 
all in the past simple and that all the words with yellow 
highlighting are regular verbs. Deal with any vocabulary 
problems.
 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to try and match the 
sentences to photos A–F. Monitor and help.
 Check answers.
1 F  2 C  3 D  4 E  5 A  6 B
e 11.2
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.66
c Focus on the instructions and then elicit the past simple 
of the first sentence (booked). Give Sts time to write 
the other past simple forms. They can look back at the 
sentences in b to help them.
 Check answers by copying the present and past forms on 
the board.
We arrived in North Carolina.
They didn’t want to sleep.
 Get Sts to look at the verbs again and ask them what 
letters they add to a verb to make the + past form for 
regular verbs.
To make a + past form, add -ed or -d (if the verb ends in e).
 Now ask them how the − form is made.
To make a − past form, use didn’t + infinitive.
d Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11A on p.112. 
Grammar notes
past simple: regular verbs
The past simple is used for finished actions and states in 
the past, however distant or recent. For example, we can 
say I phoned you yesterday and I phoned you earlier today. 
This may be different in your Sts’ L1.
The past simple of regular verbs is very easy. There is no 
third person change. The basic rule is to add -ed to the 
infinitive.
Negative sentences use the auxiliary did + not (didn’t) + 
the infinitive.
Questions use the formula (Wh-) + did + subject + 
infinitive. In other words, they follow the same pattern as 
questions in the present simple: (Qu) + A + S + I. 
For information on the acronyms QuASI and ASI, see  
the Grammar notes in 7A.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 118@@
11A
118
Most verbs in English are regular, although some of the 
most common verbs happen to be irregular, e.g. go, have 
(see 11B).
Spelling rules
The basic rule for forming the past tense in positive 
sentences with regular verbs is add -ed (e.g. worked) or -d 
with verbs ending in e (e.g. lived).
Highlight that you do not add -ed / -d to regular past 
verbs in questions and negatives.
Typical mistakes: Did you worked yesterday? I didn’t lived in 
London.
The spelling rule in the Grammar Bank for doubling the 
final consonant is slightly simplified. If a verb has two 
or more syllables, the final consonant is only doubled 
if the verb is stressed on the last syllable, e.g. control > 
controlled. Travel is an exception. This is why listened and 
opened don’t double the final consonant.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 11.3 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercises for 11A on p.113 and get Sts 
to do them individually or in pairs. If Sts do the exercises 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. Get 
them to spell any verbs where the spelling in the past 
changes.
a
1 They worked in a bank.
2 He finished work late.
3 We lived in Brazil.
4 I carried a big bag.
5 She walked to work.
6 The train stopped in Barcelona.
7 We played tennis.
8 You talked a lot!
9 I relaxed at the weekend.
 10 He waited for the bus.
 11 They travelled by train.
12 She needed a new coat.
b
1 A Where did you park the car?
 
B I parked it near the restaurant.
2 A Did you finish your homework?
 
B No, I didn’t finish it. It was very difficult.
3 A What did you study at university?
 
B I studied economics.
4 A Did you like the concert?
 
B No, I didn’t like it very much. The singers were terrible.
5 A Did you watch TV last night?
 
B Yes, we watched a very good programme.
6 A Did you close the door when you went out?
 
B Of course I closed it!
7 A Did you cry at the end of the film?
 
B Yes, I cried a lot!
8 A What time did you arrive in Tokyo?
 
B We arrived very late, about 1.00 a.m.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11A.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e Focus on the instructions, the question prompts, and the 
example. 
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. One student could ask the first three and the 
other student the next three.
 Get some feedback from the class.
2 Did Duke University offer Dominic a job?
 
No, they didn’t. / No, it didn’t.
3 Did they invite their friends to their house?
 
No, they didn’t.
4 Did the children want to sleep on the plane?
 
No, they didn’t.
5 Did Sacha play with Lego on the plane?
 
Yes, he did.
6 Did Elena play with Sacha?
 
No, she didn’t.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to answer using short answers, 
and then where possible, expand their answers, e.g. for 2,  
No, they didn’t. They offered Miriam a job.
2 PRONUNCIATION regular past simple endings
Pronunciation notes
The regular past simple ending -ed can be pronounced in 
three different ways:
1 -ed is pronounced /d/ with verbs which end in a 
voiced* sound, e.g. arrive 
 arrived, learn 
 learned
2 -ed is pronounced /t/ with verbs which end in an 
unvoiced* sound: /k/, /p/, /f/, /s/, /ʃ/, /tʃ/,  
e.g. talk 
 talked, finish 
 finished, watch 
 watched
3 -ed is pronounced /ɪd/ after verbs ending in the sound 
/d/ or /t/, e.g. want 
 wanted, need 
 needed
*  For an explanation of voiced and unvoiced sounds, see 
the Pronunciation notes in 3A on p.37.
In practice, the difference between /d/ and /t/ is very 
small, and at this level, we recommend you do not spend 
too much time on this. However, the difference between  
/ɪd/ and the other two is significant (it is an extra syllable) 
and Sts sometimes tend to add the /ɪd/ ending to all 
regular verbs. Highlight this difference, emphasizing that 
the -e in -ed is only pronounced when there is a t or a d 
before it, e.g. waited, ended, and make sure you always 
correct Sts when they add the extra syllable to verbs from 
groups 1 and 2.
a e 11.4 Explain that there are three different ways of 
pronouncing -ed: /d/, /t/, and /ɪd/.
 Focus on the exercise and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts just to listen.
e 11.4
See sounds and sentences in Student’s Book on p.67
 Focus on the first sound picture, dog. Play the audio to 
model and drill the word and sound (pause after the 
sound). 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 119@@
11A
119
c Focus on the instructions and examples. Get Sts to change 
partners. Explain that they are now going to ask questions 
about the previous partners, using the phrases in the 
chart and giving short answers.
 Tell Sts that they must first tell their new partner who they 
worked with in a and b.
 Get Sts to ask and answer the questions with their new 
partner. Monitor and check that Sts are using the infinitive 
of the main verb in the question.
4 READING & LISTENING
!  If you do 4 Reading & Listening in a later class than 
when you did 1 Grammar, you may want to revise the 
first part of Dominic’s story before you start. Elicit the six 
sentences that are in 1b, encouraging Sts to pronounce the 
-ed endings correctly.
a e 11.6 Sts are now going to read part of the blog 
Dominic wrote when he and his family got back to the UK. 
Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what a blog is. 
Tell them not to worry about the gap in the title.
 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to read and listen at the same time.
 Give Sts time to read the blog again if necessary and 
answer the two questions. Remind them that when they 
read, they should try to focus on the words they know, 
and try to guess the meaning of new words.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the blog the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
They liked their house and Sacha liked his school.
They missed their friends and family; they didn’t like the food; 
they needed to rent a car. 
e 11.6
See blog in Student’s Book on p.67
 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
b e 11.7 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the rest of the 
blog and must complete the gap in the title of the blog in 
a with either the UK or the USA. You could get Sts to guess 
and, with of show of hands, find out what they think.
 Play the audio once the whole way through and then 
check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
the USA
 Now focus on the two example sentences after dog. Play 
the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to listen and 
repeat.
 Now repeat the same process for tie /t/ and the /ɪd/ 
sound.
 Point out that /d/ and /t/ are very similar, but /ɪd/ is very 
different (see Pronunciation notes). Remind Sts that we 
pronounce -ed as /ɪd/ when the preceding letter is a d or 
a t. Stress that this is the only time that -ed is a separate 
syllable. 
 Give further practice as necessary.
 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b e 11.5 Focus on the instructions. Ask Sts to look at the 
sentences in 1b and say which have verbs with the final  
/ɪd/ sound (1 rented and 3 invited). 
 Then play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the 
sentences. Tell them to focus on pronouncing the past 
forms correctly.
e 11.5
See sentences in 1b in Student’s Book on p.66
c Now put Sts in pairs. Tell them to cover the sentences, 
look at the photos, and take turns saying the sentences to 
tell Dominic’s story.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Do this as a whole-class activity. Get Sts 
to cover the sentences, and then ask a volunteer What 
happened in this photo? If the student makes a mistake, 
encourage the class to help. Continue with the other photos 
until Sts have retold the whole story.
3 SPEAKING
a Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of last night and last weekend. Give Sts time to 
read the phrases and then deal with any new vocabulary. 
 Focus on the examples and point out the extra 
information given in the first example.
 Demonstrate the activity by saying a few true positive and 
negative sentences about yourself, using the phrases,  
e.g. I didn’t listen to the radio this morning in my car. I walked 
to work this morning. I didn’t arrive late. I arrived 30 minutes 
early.
 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to think of true 
sentences about themselves with the phrases. Remind 
them to add extra information where possible.  
Monitor and check that Sts A are now saying both positive 
and negative sentences. Remind Sts B to tick and cross 
the phrases, depending on whether their partner did the 
activity – explain that they will be using this information in 
the next activity. Also make sure that Sts A are saying the 
sentences and not writing them. 
b Sts now swap roles, and Sts B tell their partner their 
positive and negative sentences. Sts A tick and cross the 
phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 120@@
11A
120
e 11.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.91)
Miriam really liked her job – it was very interesting. I worked from 
home, so I was with the children a lot, and I loved it. In general, life 
was good. It was quite cheap – cheaper than in the UK. We joined a 
sports club, where the children learned to swim, and I played a lot of 
tennis – one of my favourite sports.
The people in Durham were very friendly. They often invited us to 
their homes. It was easy to meet people at the sports club, or at 
the university, where Miriam worked. And there were so many new 
places to see! At weekends we visited some of the beautiful national 
parks. They were very different from English parks! In one park, there 
was a sign saying Don’t disturb the snakes – Sacha loved it!
I also remember a trip to a country music festival at a blueberry farm. 
It was fantastic. First, we listened to the music, and then we picked a 
lot of blueberries – they’re Elena’s favourite fruit. But after that trip, 
she didn’t want to eat a blueberry for at least two weeks!
We stayed in Durham for a year. After that, we returned to England 
because my wife’s job finished. But we loved our life in the USA, and 
we’re thinking of going back there in maybe two or three years.
c Give Sts time to read sentences 1–9, and make sure they 
understand them, e.g. the verb return. 
 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to correct the information.
 Play again if necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 Miriam was very happy at work.
2 Dominic worked from home.
3 Life in the USA was (quite) cheap.
4 The children learned to swim.
5 The people in Durham were very friendly.
6 The National Parks were very different.
7 At the blueberry farm they listened to country music.
8 They stayed in Durham for one year.
9 They returned to England because Miriam’s job finished.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.91, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d Do this as a whole-class activity.
 If your Sts are at secondary school or university, you could 
ask them if they would like to study in another country. 
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 11.8 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 11A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 121@@
121
 11B How was your day?
e 11.9
1 get a flight, get a taxi, get up early
2 have breakfast, have a coffee, have dinner, have lunch,  
have a nice day, have a shower
3 go to bed, go home, go out, go to school 
4 do homework, do housework, do sport, do yoga
EXTRA SUPPORT  You could play the audio again for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Tell Sts to cover the verbs and get them to 
test themselves on the verbs. 
c Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) test Sts B (book 
closed). Tell Sts A to read a word or phrase from the list in 
a and Sts B must say the verb phrase. 
 Make sure Sts then swap roles.
2 LISTENING
a e 11.10 Focus on the task. Highlight that Ben is a 
businessman and that Linda is his daughter. Ask Where 
was Ben? (In Paris), Where’s he now? (At home).
 Focus on the list of places and check that Sts can 
remember what they mean. 
 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to cover the 
conversation.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and tick the places where Linda says she was during 
the day. Play the audio again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Ask Was Linda at school? (No, she wasn’t.), Was she 
at home? (Yes, she was.), etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Sts should tick: at home, in a museum, in a café
e 11.10
B = Ben, L = Linda
B Hi. I’m back. Linda! What are you doing at home? 
L Hi, Dad. You’re very early. 
B Yes, I got an early flight. 
L Er, how was your day? 
B My day was fine. But what about your day? Why aren’t you at 
school? 
L We didn’t have classes today. We went to the British Museum 
in the morning. It was great. And then we had lunch in the café 
there.
B Why didn’t you go to school this afternoon?
L We had a free afternoon. I stayed at home.
B What did you do?
L I did my homework. I had a lot of work.
B Good girl. When are your exams?
L They’re next week.
B Where’s your mother?
L She went out. I think she went shopping. 
B What’s that?
L What?
B That noise.
 G  past simple irregular verbs: get, go, have, do
 V  verb phrases with get, go, have, do
 P  sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
This lesson introduces the past simple of the four most 
common irregular verbs in English: get, go, have, and do. 
The lesson begins by revising verb phrases with the four 
verbs. Sts then listen to a conversation between a father 
who arrives back early from a work trip and his teenage 
daughter, who he is surprised to find at home. The grammar 
is presented using extracts from the conversation. In 
Pronunciation & Speaking, Sts focus on sentence rhythm in 
questions and answers in the past, and then interview each 
other about what they did yesterday. Sts then read an article 
about a film, A Life in a Day, which was made using videos 
showing life around the world on one particular day. Finally, 
Sts write a blog post about what they did yesterday, using 
then, after that, and after.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar past simple irregular verbs: get, go, have, 
do p.157 
Communicative Life in a day p.197 (instructions p.168)
For students
Workbook 11B
Online Practice 11B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Test Sts on the verb phrases they know using have and go 
from the 6B Vocabulary Bank A typical day on p.125, like 
this: 
T breakfast   Sts have breakfast 
T work   Sts go to work
Other phrases are: a coffee, lunch, home, shopping, to the gym, 
dinner, to bed.
1 VOCABULARY verb phrases with get, go,  
 have, do
a Books open. Focus on the instructions and the mind 
maps. Point out the examples. 
 Now give Sts time to complete the rest of the verb 
phrases.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b e 11.9 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers by asking individual Sts to read the whole 
phrase.
2 have breakfast, have a coffee, have dinner, have lunch,  
have a nice day, have a shower
3 go to bed, go home, go to school
4 do homework, do housework, do sport, do yoga.
11B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 122@@
122
e 11.12
I got an early flight.
We went to the British Museum.
We had lunch in the café.
I did my homework.
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Highlight that all four verbs are irregular in the past tense 
(i.e. you don’t add -ed – the verbs change their form).
 Highlight too that here did is a main verb, but remind Sts 
that did is also used as an auxiliary verb to make questions 
in the past simple, e.g. Did you go to school?
c Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11B on p.112.
Grammar notes
past simple irregular verbs: get, go, have, do
A number of common verbs are irregular in the past 
simple. The change of form can be just one or two letters, 
e.g. get 
 got, or can be a completely new word,  
e.g. go 
 went.
As with regular verbs, irregular verbs are only irregular in 
positive sentences. In negative sentences, didn’t is used 
with the infinitive (not the past), and questions are formed 
using did + infinitive. 
Some typical mistakes include: Did you went to the cinema? 
I didn’t had breakfast.
As with regular verbs, all forms are the same for all 
persons.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 11.13 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Focus on the did / didn’t box and go through it with Sts.
 Now focus on the exercises for 11B on p.113 and get 
Sts to do them individually or in pairs. If they do them 
individually, get them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1 I had eggs for breakfast this morning.
2 Did she go to Spanish classes last year?
3 We didn’t have lunch at home last week.
4 Mike didn’t go to work by car yesterday.
5 They went to school by bus yesterday.
6 What time did you get up this morning?
7 Did you do sport or exercise last weekend?
8 You didn’t do the housework yesterday.
9 I didn’t get up early this morning.
b
1 A What did you have for lunch today?
 
B I had fish.
2 A Did you do the housework?
 
B No, but I did my English homework.
3 A Where did you go last night?
 
B I didn’t go out. I stayed at home.
4 A What time did the children get up?
 
B They got up very late. They were tired.
5 A What did you have for breakfast?
 
B I didn’t have breakfast. I wasn’t hungry. I just had a coffee.
6 A Did Pedro go to judo last week?
 
B He went on Monday, but he didn’t go on Wednesday 
because he wasn’t very well.
b Tell Sts to uncover the conversation. Focus on the 
conversation and the instructions. Tell Sts they are going 
to listen to the conversation again and they need to 
complete the gaps. Give them time to see if they can 
remember any of the missing words.
 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete the 
gaps. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
 Check answers by playing the audio again, pausing after 
each answer, and writing the words on the board.
1 home  2 flight  3 classes  4 British  5 lunch   
6 free  7 homework  8 week  9 mother  10 shopping
 Go through the conversation with Sts and elicit / explain 
any new words or phrases. Also explain / elicit that:
• got is the past of get
• went is the past of go
• had is the past of have
•  did is the past of do, and do is used both as a main verb 
and as an auxiliary
c e 11.11 Focus on the instructions and the question. 
Make sure Sts understand the word noise.
 Elicit some ideas from Sts, but don’t tell them if they are 
correct or not.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
The noise is a boy (Dylan) in Linda’s room.
e 11.11
B = Ben, L = Linda, D = Dylan
B And who are you?
L Um, Dad, this is Dylan.
B What are you doing here, Dylan?
D Well, er…you see…Linda and I wanted to do our homework 
together.
B Oh, did you? And what kind of homework was it, exactly?
3 GRAMMAR past simple irregular verbs: get, go,  
 have, do
a Focus on the chart. Highlight that the phrases in the left-
hand column are in the present simple and the sentences 
in the right-hand column are in the past simple.
 Focus on the conversation in 2b and elicit the word 
missing from the first gapped sentence in the chart (got).
 Give Sts time to complete all the sentences in the chart.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b e 11.12 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
past simple
We went to the British Museum.
We had lunch in the café.
I did my homework.
11B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 123@@
123
5 READING
a Focus on the instructions. You could remind Sts that 
Ridley Scott directed three of the films in the Alien series, 
which they saw in 7B. 
 Read the introduction with the class (up to 24th July). 
Elicit / Explain any new vocabulary, e.g. life (and the 
irregular plural lives), to film.
 Ask the question to the class.
They filmed their lives.
b e 11.15 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts 
know the meaning of caption. Give Sts time to look at the 
photos. Remind Sts that when they read, they should try 
to focus on the words they know and guess the meaning 
of new words.
 Play the audio for Sts to read and listen at the same time.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
e 11.15
See article in Student’s Book on p.69
 Give Sts time to read the article again if necessary and 
complete the captions.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 shaved  2 cleaned shoes  3 arrived, Kathmandu   
4 did, skydive  5 got married
c Focus on the instructions and two questions. Elicit / 
Explain that normal refers to things people usually or 
often do and that unusual means ‘not usual’.
 Give Sts time to read the article again and then answer 
the questions. You could ask Sts to make two lists, headed 
Normal and Unusual.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Note that shaving is a normal activity for most 
men, but shaving for the first time is special. If Sts have 
different answers, get them to explain.
 Deal with any other new vocabulary, e.g. thousands, 
incredible, etc. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
tricky words.
d Focus on the instructions and get Sts to cover the article. 
You could get Sts to do this in pairs, or you could call out 
each verb and get the class to tell you the past simple.
 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
do 
 did  get up 
 got up  go 
 went  have 
 had   
open 
 opened  wash 
 washed  work 
 worked
e Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
each gap with a verb from d.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1 got up  2 opened  3 did  4 worked  5 went, had   
6 washed
EXTRA SUPPORT  Write the past tense of the verbs in d on 
the board to help Sts.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11B.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
EXTRA IDEA  Get Sts to practise the conversation in 2b on 
p.68, with one student taking the part of Ben (the father) 
and the other student the part of Linda, and then swapping 
roles. You could rehearse the conversation before you start, 
with Sts repeating the conversation after you or the audio.
4 PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING sentence  
 rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that in English the words that carry the 
important information are said more strongly than others, 
e.g. in What did you do last night?, What, do, and last night 
are stressed more strongly than did and you.
For more information on sentence rhythm, see the 
Pronunciation notes in 3B.
a e 11.14 Focus on the instructions and the four questions 
and answers. 
 Play the audio once the whole way though for Sts just  
to listen.
e 11.14
See questions and answers in Student’s Book on p.69
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat the 
questions and answers, copying the rhythm. Encourage 
them to pronounce the bigger bold words more strongly 
than the other words.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to 
practise the questions and answers. Make sure they swap 
roles.
b Tell Sts to go to Communication Your day on p.81. 
 Focus on the instructions in a and the example. Explain 
that Sts have to use the prompts to make questions in 
the past. Point out that there are both Wh- and yes / no 
questions, e.g. What time did you get up yesterday? and  
Did you have a shower?
 Elicit three or four example questions from the class. 
Check that Sts understand what information the questions 
are asking for. Model and drill the pronunciation of some 
or all of the questions, encouraging Sts to use good 
rhythm by stressing the important words in the sentence, 
as in the previous pronunciation exercise.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Elicit all the questions in the past before Sts 
interview each other. You could get them to interview you 
first.
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to take turns interviewing 
each other. They write their partner’s answers in the Your 
partner column.
 Monitor and check that Sts are using correct question 
format. Make notes of any problems to focus on later.
 Then focus on b. Put Sts in new pairs and get them to tell 
their new partner three things about their first partner.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11B.
11B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 124@@
124
6 WRITING a blog post
 Tell Sts to go to Writing A blog post on p.87.
a Focus on the instructions and read the title and the first 
sentence of the blog. You might want to pre-teach the 
word colleague. Model and drill pronunciation. 
 Give Sts time to read the blog post and complete the task. 
Point out that the first one (I got up at 6.30...) has been 
done for them.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2 Then I had a shower and had breakfast. I didn’t eat… 
3 After that, I went to my new office. I got a taxi, because…
4 When I arrived, the boss introduced me… 
5 I didn’t go out for lunch – I had a sandwich in the office…
6 I went home at 5.30. I had a pizza for dinner… 
7 I went to bed early, at 9.30. I was really tired, but…
b Focus on the Showing the order of events box and go 
through it with the class. Elicit / Explain that we use these 
words to show the order in which things happen.
 Highlight that Then and After have the same meaning. 
After must be followed by a noun, e.g. After lunch. You 
can’t use after by itself. A typical mistake is: We had lunch. 
After, we went shopping. It should be After lunch / After that, 
we went shopping.
c Explain that Sts are going to write a blog post about their 
day yesterday.
 Write this sentence on the board: 
YESTERDAY WAS A 
 DAY FOR ME.  
Ask a few Sts what word they would put in the gap. 
Suggest words like normal, unusual, interesting, big.
 Tell Sts to use this sentence to begin their blog and make 
it true for their day. Then they should explain what they 
did, using time-order words to put the events in order. 
Make sure Sts understand that they don’t have to say 
everything they did, just the most interesting or important 
events in their day. 
 Get Sts to work individually to write their blog posts. 
Monitor and help as needed. If short of time, you could set 
this for homework.
 Check that Sts are using Then, After that, etc. and telling 
events in the order they happened.
EXTRA IDEA  If you have corrected their blogs, you could 
get Sts to ‘post’ them by putting them on the wall in the 
classroom. Then get Sts to walk around the room and read 
each other’s blogs.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11B.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 11.16 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 11B. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
11B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 125@@
125
EPISODE
 Now play it again, pausing after each item for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Give further practice as necessary, modelling 
and drilling the pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, 
and getting choral and individual responses. 
 Highlight that:
•  opposite means face to face, and is used mainly for 
people or buildings.
•  some prepositions of place are one word, e.g. opposite, 
between, but others are two, e.g. next to.
•  on the corner can be followed by of + street name, e.g. 
on the corner of Oxford Street.
EXTRA IDEA  You could give more practice with next to, 
opposite, and between by asking questions about things 
or people in the classroom, e.g. Who’s sitting next to Silvio? 
What’s between my desk and the window?
b e 11.18 Focus on the instructions and the map. Give Sts 
time to read the names of the buildings and the streets.
 Demonstrate the activity by choosing a place and 
describing its position yourself, e.g. It’s on the corner, next to 
the bookshop, for Sts to say the place (the supermarket).
 Play the audio. Pause after the man asks for the place he is 
looking for, and elicit what it is (a coffee shop). Make sure 
Sts are clear they have to write coffee shop on the map in 
one of the labels A–D. 
 Now play the rest of the first conversation and elicit the 
answer (The coffee shop is building D).
 Play the rest of the audio, pausing after each conversation 
to give Sts time to write the name of the place in the label. 
 Check answers by playing the audio and pausing after 
each conversation.
B Chinese restaurant  A phone shop  C park
e 11.18
M = man, W = woman
1
M Excuse me?
W Yes?
M Is there a coffee shop near here?
W Yes, there’s one in South Street. It’s next to the cinema, on the 
right.
M Thanks.
2
M Excuse me. Is there a Chinese restaurant near here?
W Yes, there’s one in King Street, between the bank and the gym.
M Thank you.
3
M Excuse me. Is there a phone shop near here?
W Yes, there’s one in North Street, next to the hotel, on the left.
M Thanks.
4
M Excuse me. Where’s the park?
W It’s in London Road, opposite the gym.
M Oh, great. Thank you.
Function asking for and giving directions
 V  prepositions of place
 P  sentence rhythm and polite intonation
Lesson plan
In this Practical English lesson, Sts learn how to understand 
and give simple directions in the street. They begin by 
learning six new prepositions of place and some very basic 
language for directions, which is practised through a role-
play. The focus is more on asking for and understanding 
directions than giving directions, as the latter is quite 
challenging for Sts at this level. Sts watch or listen to Rob 
asking for directions, and then to a conversation with Jenny 
in which she explains where her hotel is and how to get 
there.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Communicative Where are you? p.198  
(instructions p.168)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Practical English Episode 6 
Quick Test 11 
File 11 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 6 
Can you remember? 1–11
Online Practice  Practical English 6 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the prompt phrase PLACES IN A TOWN on the board.  
Give Sts two minutes in pairs to brainstorm words for places 
in a town, e.g. school, bank, museum, etc.
Elicit words from the pair with the longest list and write 
them on the board. Tell the other Sts to listen and check the 
words on their list.
Continue eliciting more words from different pairs. Try to 
elicit all the words for the places in the map on p.70.
1 VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
 prepositions of place; sentence rhythm and polite  
 intonation
a e 11.17 Books open. Focus on the prepositions of place 
and the phrases.
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 11.17
See words and phrases in Student’s Book on p.70
 6 
Practical English Is there a bank near here?
PE6
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 126@@
126
b e 11.21 Focus on the instructions and the question. Elicit / 
Explain the meaning of cash machine.
 Tell Sts to cover the conversation and look at the map. 
Make sure Sts know where Rob is standing, and play the 
video / audio twice for them to follow the directions to 
the cash machine. 
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
Bank B
e 11.21
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.71
 Now tell Sts to uncover the conversation and go through 
it line by line. You could play it again for Sts to read and 
listen at the same time. Highlight:
• the difference between Turn left and It’s on the left.
•  responding to Thanks very much / Thanks with You’re 
welcome.
c Play the conversation in b again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversation.
 Monitor and help as needed. Make sure Sts swap roles.
d e 11.22 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand why Rob needs to find another bank. Remind 
Sts that Rob is now standing outside Bank B.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the question. Play again as 
necessary.
 Check the answer.
Bank C
e 11.22
(script in Student’s Book on p.91)
R = Rob, M = man
R Oh ****. I don’t believe it. Excuse me, this cash machine isn’t 
working. Is there another one near here?
M Yeah, there’s one in HSBC. Go straight on; turn right. Go straight 
on for a bit, and it’s on the left.
R Thanks.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
e Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Excuse me. Can you help me?, A on 
p.81 and B on p.85.
 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read their 
roles and look at their maps. Explain that they each have 
to ask for directions to three places and then label the 
buildings.
 Tell Sts A to start by asking Sts B for directions to the bus 
station. You could point out to Sts A that they can’t see a 
bus station on their map and to Sts B that they can see 
one. Monitor and make a note of any problems Sts are 
having.
Pronunciation notes
Intonation
Intonation is the way in which we say something in 
English, using a rise or fall in the movement of our voice. 
Through our intonation, we can ‘sound’ polite, rude, 
happy, angry, interested, bored, etc. You can make Sts 
appreciate the importance of intonation by speaking like 
a robot, i.e. with no intonation. Encourage Sts to practise 
polite intonation by copying the audio.
c e 11.19 Focus on the instructions and the map again. 
Model and drill the street names.
 Now focus on the conversation and remind Sts that the 
bigger words in bold are pronounced more strongly. Also 
highlight that the speakers use polite intonation with 
a wide voice range. Play the audio once the whole way 
through for Sts to listen to the rhythm and intonation.
e 11.19
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.70
 Highlight the use of Excuse me /ɪksˈkjuːz miː/ in the 
conversation as a polite way of attracting a stranger’s 
attention (we don’t use Please! or Sorry!). Also point out 
that polite intonation in English tends to be higher than 
normal intonation.
 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line, for 
Sts to listen and repeat, encouraging them to copy the 
rhythm and intonation on the audio.
d Go through the instructions and focus on the example in 
the speech bubbles. 
 Model and drill the question Is there a bank near here?  
Then say other places on the map for Sts to substitute, e.g.  
T gym  Sts Is there a gym near here?
 Demonstrate the activity by asking one student about 
a place and eliciting an answer, e.g. Excuse me. Is there a 
bank near here? (Yes, there’s one in King Street, next to the 
Chinese restaurant.)
 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions 
about the places on the map. Monitor and help.
2 r ASKING FOR & GIVING DIRECTIONS
a e 11.20 Focus on the pictures and directions, and give 
Sts time to match them.
 Then play the audio once for Sts to listen and check.
 Check answers.
e 11.20
1 C Go straight on.  2 A Turn right.  3 B Turn left.
 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling the 
pronunciation yourself, or using the audio, and getting 
choral and individual responses.
 Use gestures to elicit the phrases, e.g. go straight on, turn 
right, and turn left. 
PE6
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 127@@
127
4 r USEFUL PHRASES
 e 11.24 Focus on the phrases and make sure Sts 
understand what each one means.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen.
e 11.24
See Useful phrases in Student’s Book on p.71
 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
 Give further practice as necessary, modelling and drilling 
the pronunciation yourself, or using the video / audio, and 
getting choral and individual responses.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs and ask them to write 
a short conversation, using some of the Useful phrases. 
When they have finished, get a few pairs to act out their  
role-play for the class. 
 Tell Sts to swap roles when Sts A have written their first 
label. Now Sts B ask Sts A for directions to the university. 
Monitor and help, making a note of any general problems 
Sts are having, and deal with these on the board at the end.
 When they have finished asking for their places, get Sts to 
compare maps to check their labels.
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 6.
3 r WHERE’S JENNY’S HOTEL?
a e 11.23 Focus on the instructions and question.
 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the question.
 Check the answer.
To check she got his email about the hotel
e 11.23
(script in Student’s Book on p.91)
R = Rob, J = Jenny
J Hello?
R Hi, Jennifer?
J Yes?
R This is Rob Walker from London24seven. I’m phoning to check you 
got the email I sent you.
J Er, what was it about?
R It was the information about your hotel for next week.
J Just a second. Yes, here it is. Hotel Indigo, London Street. Where is 
it, exactly?
R It’s very near Paddington Station. You can get the Heathrow 
Express train from the airport to the station. It only takes about 
fifteen minutes.
J OK, that’s great. Can I walk to the hotel from the station?
R Yes, it’s very near. Can you see it on the map?
J Er, yes, I have it now.
R Turn left when you leave the station. Then go straight on for a bit, 
and turn right into London Street. The hotel’s opposite Norfolk 
Square.
J Great.
R I can come to the hotel in the morning on your first day. We can 
walk to the office together.
J OK. See you then.
R Bye.
J Bye.
b Focus on the instructions and Jenny’s notes about her 
hotel. Give Sts time to read them. Point out that the first 
one (Indigo) has been done for them.
 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen and 
complete the task. Play again as necessary.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2 London  3 Station  4 airport  5 15  6 left  7 straight on 
8 right  9 opposite
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
EXTRA IDEA  As this is the last episode of Rob and Jenny 
on the video, if your Sts have enjoyed it, you might want to 
ask them what they think happens when Jenny comes to 
London, and tell them that they can find out in English File 
Elementary!
PE6
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 128@@
128
12A
12A Strangers on a train
 G  past simple: regular and irregular verbs
 V  regular and irregular verbs
 P  irregular verbs
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts revise the past simple (regular and irregular 
verbs) and learn some more irregular verbs in the context 
of a short story with a surprise ending about two strangers 
who meet on a train. In Vocabulary & Pronunciation, Sts 
learn some new high-frequency irregular verbs. Then Sts 
read and listen to the first two parts of the story. In Grammar, 
they revise the past simple of regular and irregular verbs, 
including the past of the verb be, and retell Parts 1 and 2 
of the story. Then Sts watch a video of Parts 3, 4, and 5 of 
the story. This final section of the story is on video. If you 
are unable to show the video in the class, there is also an 
audio version on the Class Audio. However, you can tell Sts to 
watch the video in Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar past simple: regular and irregular verbs p.158 
Communicative Past tense questions p.199  
(instructions p.168)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video Strangers on a train
For students
Workbook 12A
Online Practice 12A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
This lead-in will help Sts do questions 1a, 1b, and 1c of the 
Verbs quiz. Tell Sts that you’re going to read out ten regular 
verbs, and they must write them down in the past simple. 
Give an example: say arrive, and write ARRIVED on the board. 
Now read out the following verbs, pausing after each one to 
give Sts time to write down the past simple: ask, exchange, 
finish, look, move, phone, start, stop, talk, wait.
You could ask Sts to compare their spelling with a partner. 
Don’t check the spelling of the verbs yet – Sts do this in 1a 
and 1b of the Verbs quiz.
1 VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION regular  
 and irregular verbs
Pronunciation notes
Some verbs which are irregular in the past tense have 
quite tricky pronunciation, e.g. buy – bought /bɔːt/, say – 
said /sed/ (NOT /seɪd/), see – saw /sɔː/, tell – told /təʊld/.
As these verbs are very high frequency, it is worth 
spending some time on making sure Sts can pronounce 
the past simple forms correctly.
a Books open. Focus on the Verbs quiz and put Sts in pairs 
to do it. If you did the Optional lead-in, point out that 
the verbs are the same and tell Sts to check with the verbs 
they wrote down.
 Check answers.
1
a stop
b arrive, exchange, move, phone
c start, wait
2
buy 
 bought  leave 
 left  say 
 said  see 
 saw   
send 
 sent  sit 
 sat  tell 
 told  write 
 wrote
b e 12.1 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
that they are repeating all the verbs in the two lists in a, 
but in the past tense. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat.
e 12.1
regular verbs: arrived, asked, exchanged, finished, looked, moved, 
opened, phoned, started, stopped, talked, waited
irregular verbs: bought, left, said, saw, sent, sat, told, wrote
 Write BOUGHT on the board and say it /bɔːt/. Ask Sts What 
do you notice about the spelling and pronunciation of this 
word? Elicit that the letters gh are not pronounced: they 
are silent. Highlight also that the pronunciation of said is 
/sed/, NOT /seɪd/.
 Play the audio again, pausing after each verb for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
c e 12.2 Focus on the task and the examples. Tell Sts they 
will hear the infinitive and they must say the past simple.
 Play the first verb, pausing the audio for Sts to say said in 
chorus.
 Play the rest of the audio for Sts to listen and say the past 
simple of the verb.
e 12.2
1 say (pause) said
2 tell (pause) told
3 finish (pause) finished
4 wait (pause) waited
5 buy (pause) bought
6 phone (pause) phoned
7 write (pause) wrote
8 stop (pause) stopped
9 leave (pause) left
 10 send (pause) sent
 11 arrive (pause) arrived
 12 start (pause) started
 13 see (pause) saw
 14 sit (pause) sat
 15 ask (pause) asked
 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 129@@
12A
129
2 READING & LISTENING
 e 12.3 12.4 Pre-teach the following vocabulary to help 
Sts with the story. Draw a train on the board and elicit 
the word train. Now elicit / teach words connected with 
travelling by train, e.g. platform, seat, station, ticket. Write 
them on the board and drill pronunciation.
 Focus on the title of the story, Strangers on a train, and 
elicit / explain that a stranger is a person you don’t know, 
NOT a person from another country (which is foreigner). 
NB The word stranger in English may be similar to the 
word for foreigner in your Sts’ languages. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
 e 12.3 Now focus on Part 1. Tell Sts that they are going 
to read and listen at the same time. 
 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to read 
and listen to Part 1. 
 Focus on questions 1–4 and get Sts to answer them in 
pairs. 
 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the story the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1 He saw her at the station / on the platform.
2 Chanel No. 5
3 (Classical) music
4 To have a (cup of) coffee
e 12.3
See Part 1 in Student’s Book on p.72
 Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words in the story you 
think Sts may not have understood, e.g. blonde, move, full 
(elicit the opposite empty), nice smell, etc.
 e 12.4 Now focus on Part 2. Play the audio for Sts to 
read and listen at the same time.
 Focus on questions 5–8 and give Sts time to answer them 
in pairs.
 Check answers. 
5 She works in property (flats and houses). 
6 He works for Citibank.
7 He lives in Chelsea and she lives near Chelsea.
8 Because she offered to drive him home.
e 12.4
See Part 2 in Student’s Book on p.73
 Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words or phrases you 
think Sts may not have understood, e.g. property, That’s 
interesting, time to go. 
 Tell Sts they will see the rest of the story later in the lesson.
3 GRAMMAR past simple: regular and irregular  
 verbs
a This exercise tests Sts on what they have learned about 
the past simple in English so far. Focus on the task and the 
two conversations.
 Give Sts time to read the conversations and choose the 
correct form.
 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b e 12.5 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
 Check answers. You could get pairs to read the 
conversations out loud.
See verbs in bold in script 12.5
e 12.5
1
A Where did you go on Saturday?
B I went shopping for clothes.
A What did you buy?
B I bought a new jacket.
A Was it expensive?
B No, it wasn’t.
2
A What did you do last night?
B I went to the cinema. I saw a new French film.
A Did you like it?
B No, I didn’t like it very much. It was very slow.
EXTRA IDEA  Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations. Make sure they swap roles. 
c Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12A on p.114. Highlight 
that this Grammar Bank is revision of what they have 
learned about the past simple in recent Files.
Grammar notes
past simple: regular and irregular verbs (revision)
Remind Sts:
• that you don’t use the auxiliaries did / didn’t to make 
questions with the verb be in the past tense, e.g. Were 
you at home last night? NOT Did you be at home last 
night?
• for regular verbs add -ed or -d to the infinitive in 
positive sentences.
• that most verbs are regular (e.g. like, live), but some 
common verbs are irregular and change their form in 
the past simple (e.g. go – went, have – had).
• to use did / didn’t + infinitive to make questions and 
negatives with all verbs except be (and can), e.g. Did you 
like it? Did you go? NOT Did you liked it? Did you went? 
Refer Sts to Regular and irregular verbs on p.133, listing 
the regular and irregular verbs which have been taught in 
the Beginner Student’s Book.
 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e12.6,  
e 12.7, and e 12.8 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
 Then go through the rules with the class.
 Now focus on the exercise for 12A on p.115 and get Sts to 
do it individually or in pairs. If they do it individually, get 
them to compare answers with a partner.
 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
1 rented   2 was   3 did   4 went   5 visited   6 stayed   
7 had   8 were   9 arrived   10 said   11 answered   12 saw   
13 looked   14 was   15 wasn’t   16 did…see   17 asked   
18 Did…talk   19 didn’t speak   20 said   21 told   22 waited   
23 went   24 was   25 had   26 did…leave   27 were   
28 wanted
 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12A.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 130@@
12A
130
e 12.10
D = David, O = Olivia, W = woman
Part 4
D I arrived at the Royal Albert Hall at seven o’clock. I got the tickets, 
and I waited in the bar. But Olivia didn’t arrive. I looked at my 
watch. It was seven forty-five. I looked at my phone. There was a 
message.
O Sorry! In a meeting. Leave my ticket at the box office.
D I left her ticket at the box office and went to my seat. The 
concert started, but Olivia didn’t arrive. When the concert 
finished, I phoned her, but her phone was off. 
W The number you are dialling is currently unavailable. 
D I was very angry. I left the concert hall and went home. I opened 
the door of my flat and turned on the light…
 Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words you think Sts may 
not have understood, e.g. the use of get in got the tickets, 
angry, turn on.
c e 12.11 Focus on the question.
 Now play the Part 5 video / audio for Sts to watch or 
listen and find out what happened.
 Get them to compare with a partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
 Check the answer to question 6 in b. 
(He saw that) there was no TV and there weren’t any pictures. His 
laptop wasn’t in his bedroom. 
e 12.11
Part 5
D I opened the door of my flat and turned on the light. Oh no! My 
flat looked very different. There was no TV, and there weren’t any 
pictures. I went into my bedroom. My laptop wasn’t there. But 
there was a nice smell: Chanel Number Five.
 Now ask Sts Who do you think took the things from his flat? 
(Olivia), How did he know? (Because there was a smell of 
Chanel No. 5 perfume).
 Finally, elicit whether Sts think the ending of the story is 
good or not.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
EXTRA IDEA  You could give Sts extra listening practice by 
getting them to close their books and listen to (not read) the 
whole story on audio.
WORDS AND PHRASES TO LEARN
 e 12.12 Tell Sts to go to p.132 and focus on the Words 
and phrases to learn for 12A. Make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of each word or phrase. If necessary, remind 
them of the context in which the words and phrases 
came up in the lesson. If you speak your Sts’ L1, you might 
like to elicit a translation for the words / phrases for Sts to 
write down. Play the audio, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. You may also like to ask Sts to test each other 
on the phrases.
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d Focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to look at the 
photos in 2 and the questions in d.
 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to retell Parts 1 and 2 of the 
story Strangers on a train. Monitor and help if necessary.
 Elicit the story from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Get Sts to write the answers to the 
questions to help them retell Parts 1 and 2 of the story.
4 r VIDEO LISTENING
 This final section of the story is available on video or audio. 
a e 12.9 Tell Sts they are going to watch or listen to  
Parts 3–5 of Strangers on a train. 
 Focus on questions 1–3 and give Sts time to read them.
 Play the Part 3 video / audio for Sts to watch or listen.
 Give Sts time to answer questions 1–3 in pairs.
 Check answers. 
1 She had a BMW.
2 She had two tickets for a Beethoven concert at the Royal 
Albert Hall.
3 She wanted to meet him in the bar at 7.30.
e 12.9
D = David, O = Olivia
Part 3
D Olivia’s car was in the station car park. 
 
‘Nice car,’ I said.
 
It was a big BMW. She was a very fast driver. She stopped outside 
my flat. We said goodbye, and exchanged phone numbers. The 
next morning there was a message from Olivia. She wrote:
O I really want to see you again! Friday?
D On Friday morning, Olivia phoned me. Hello.
O I have two tickets for a Beethoven concert tonight at the Royal 
Albert Hall! Can you get them from the box office at seven fifteen? 
We can meet in the bar at seven thirty. The concert starts at eight.
 Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words you think Sts may 
not have understood. Point out the photo of the Royal 
Albert Hall and tell Sts that it is a famous concert hall in 
London.
b e 12.10 Now focus on questions 1–6 and give Sts time 
to read them.
 Play the Part 4 video / audio for Sts to watch or listen.
 Give Sts time to answer the questions in pairs.
 Check answers. For questions 5 and 6, elicit opinions, but 
don’t tell Sts if they are correct or not.
1 He arrived at 7.00.
2 He got a message from Olivia. He left her ticket at the box 
office and sat down in his seat.
3 He phoned Olivia.
4 He left the concert hall and went home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 131@@
131
12B
 12B Revise the past
 Groups that finish fast can look back through the squares, 
taking turns to do the ones that were not landed on in 
the game.
 If there’s time, you could check answers to some of the 
questions.
4 have a good day   
be tired   
do sport   
be hungry   
do / have homework   
have lunch
5 hated, wanted
9 do housework   
get up in the morning   
have a nice evening   
wait for a bus 
 10 decided, needed
 14 go – went
 15 said
 19 buy (new clothes) – bought   
say (‘sorry’ to somebody) – said   
see (a film) – saw
 20 changed – played   
answered – parked   
relaxed – travelled
 24 drink (dinner)   
eat (a coffee)   
travel (new shoes)
 25 liked
 29 send (a message) – sent   
use (a laptop) – used  
write (an email) – wrote
 30 worked
EXTRA SUPPORT  If you would like to end the last lesson 
without the Student’s Book, there are two Communicative 
photocopiable activities
 G  past simple revision
 V  revision of past verb forms
 P  revision of vowel sounds
Lesson plan
This lesson is a board game which gives oral revision of 
the past simple. There are 30 questions, which revise the 
grammar of the past simple, along with related aspects of 
vocabulary and pronunciation.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar past simple revision p.159 
Communicative A holiday in Venice p.200  
(instructions p.169) 
Revision questions p.201 (instructions p.169)
For students
Workbook 12B
Online Practice 12B
 Books open. 
 Tell Sts they are going to do an activity which revises the 
past tense.
 Focus on the rules on p.75 and go through them with the 
class. Make sure Sts understand each rule.
 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group 
a dice. Tell them to choose an item to move around the 
board, e.g. a coin, a rubber, etc. Tell each group to only use 
one copy of the game on pp.74–75.
EXTRA IDEA  If you don’t have any dice, use coins instead. Tell 
Sts what the two sides of a coin are called, heads and tails. 
Then write on the board: HEADS = MOVE ONE SQUARE,  
TAILS = MOVE TWO SQUARES.  
As a demonstration, ask a confident student to toss the 
coin and move that number of squares from the start. Get 
another member of their group to read out the question. 
The student who tossed the coin then answers the question. 
Ask the rest of the group Was that OK? to encourage Sts to 
listen to and evaluate what the others in their group say. If 
the rest of the group say no, ask them what the problem is. 
If they are happy with the performance, pass the coin to the 
next student. Tell all groups to start in the same way.
 Monitor as the groups play, but don’t interfere unless 
you hear Sts fail to pick up on a serious error. You could 
make notes on errors to deal with later in class if you like. 
Encourage Sts to answer the questions in as much detail 
as they can – other Sts in the group can ask questions for 
more information.
 Sts continue to play until one student reaches the finish 
and is the winner. They must throw the exact number 
needed to land on the finish. If, for example, they need a 
one, but throw a three, they must move to the finish and 
then two back, to number 28. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 132@@
132
 11&12 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1 a   2 b   3 a   4 c   5 a
e 12.13
1
I = interviewer, S = Sophie
I What did you do last weekend
S Last weekend it was my birthday, so I went out for a meal with 
friends, and it was very sunny as well, so we went for a walk 
afterwards.
2
I = interviewer, J = Jayna
I Where did you go for your last holiday?
J I went to Japan for Christmas.
3
I = interviewer, R = Rozie
I When was the last time you went to a restaurant?
R The last time I went to a restaurant er, was over the weekend. I 
went to Sweetwater, in er, it’s a French restaurant in Brooklyn.
I Did you enjoy the meal?
R I loved it. It was great.
4
I = interviewer, C = Chimi
I Are you good at giving directions?
C No, I’m not. I am the worst person to ask for directions. I myself 
am not good at finding places or following directions, so I pretty 
much am not good at it.
5
I = interviewer, S = Susan
I Is there a good café near here?
S Yes, there is. It’s just along on the right.
For instructions on how to use these pages. see p.34.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 11&12 
Quick Test 12 
File 12 Test 
Progress Test 7–12 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1 b   2 a   3 b   4 a   5 b   6 a   7 a   8 b   9 a   10 b   
11 a   12 b   13 b   14 a   15 b
VOCABULARY
a
1 next to   2 between   3 on…corner   4 on…left   
5 on…right
b
ask, asked
buy, bought
carry, carried
change, changed
cry, cried
do, did
have, had
help, helped
leave, left
miss, missed
need, needed
open, opened
say, said
send, sent
sit, sat
start, started
stay, stayed
study, studied
talk, talked
tell, told
write, wrote
PRONUNCIATION
a
1 /ɒ/ clock   2 /s/ snake   3 /z/ zebra   4 /d/ dog   5 /t/ tie
c
1 opposite   2 between   3 decide   4 university   
5 exchange
CAN YOU understand this text?
a Amman, Wadi Rum, Petra
b
1 F (She spent three months in Jordan.)
2 T
3 F (She studied Arabic.)
4 T
5 F (She went to the desert and Petra.)
6 F (The countryside was beautiful.)
7 F (They were very friendly.)
8 T
Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 133@@
  
Photocopiable activities
133
• Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
• Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
• We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
• When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
• If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
• If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
• These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
• If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
• You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
• All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
• Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
• Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
• change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
• change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
• change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
• reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
• There is a Grammar activity for each main (A and B) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
• There is a Communicative activity for each main (A and 
B) lesson of the Student’s Book.
• There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
All the photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC). It is also available on the 
Classroom Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display 
the worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. 
This will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the 
activities, and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
• The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
• Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
• All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
• If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
• All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
136
  
Complete the conversation with I or you.
 a
  
Complete the conversation with am, ’m, are, or ’re.
 b
  
Complete the conversation.
 c
1A GRAMMAR verb be (singular): I and you
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
Miranda Hi, 1 I’m Miranda. Are 2
 Monica?
Sally 
No, 3
 ’m not, 4
 ’m Sally.
Miranda Nice to meet 5
 !
Student 
Excuse me, 1 am I in room 2?
Receptionist What’s your name?
Student 
I 2
 Caroline.
Receptionist 
3
 you Caroline Herzog?
Student 
No, I 4
 not. I 5
 Caroline 
Fuchs.
Receptionist You 6
 in room 3.
Student 
Thank you.
Charlotte Are 1 you Paolo Galli?
Paolo 
Yes, I 2
 .
Charlotte Hi, 3
 ’m Charlotte from the Dover 
School of English.
Paolo 
Oh, hello!
Charlotte Nice to meet 4
 .
170
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A COMMUNICATIVE Are you…?
You’re 
Katy Perry
Find… Ed Sheeran
 
Tom Hanks
You’re 
Ed Sheeran
Find… Denzel Washington
 
Katy Perry
You’re 
Beyoncé
Find… Kit Harington
 
Cameron Diaz
You’re 
Cameron Diaz
Find… Meryl Streep
 
Sergio Agüero
You’re 
Denzel Washington
Find… Shakira
 
Emilia Clarke
You’re 
Kit Harington
Find… Tom Hanks
 
Penelope Cruz
You’re 
Meryl Streep
Find… Russell Crowe
 
Beyoncé
You’re 
Jennifer Lopez
Find… Daniel Radcliffe
 
Nicole Kidman
You’re 
Penelope Cruz
Find… Jennifer Lopez
 
Russell Crowe
You’re 
Antonio Banderas
Find… Ben Affleck
 
Shakira
You’re 
Daniel Radcliffe
Find… Emilia Clarke
 
Margot Robbie
You’re 
Shakira
Find… Margot Robbie
 
Ed Sheeran
You’re 
Ben Affleck
Find… Nicole Kidman
 
Selena Gomez
You’re 
Russell Crowe
Find… Penelope Cruz
 
Kit Harington
You’re 
Tom Hanks
Find… Cameron Diaz
 
Antonio Banderas
You’re 
Nicole Kidman
Find… Katy Perry
 
Denzel Washington
You’re 
Margot Robbie
Find… Selena Gomez
 
Daniel Radcliffe
You’re 
Selena Gomez
Find… Sergio Agüero
 
Jennifer Lopez
You’re 
Sergio Agüero
Find… Beyoncé
 
Meryl Streep
You’re 
Emilia Clarke
Find… Antonio Banderas
 
Ben Affleck
209
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B VOCABULARY Countries
  
Look at the map. With a partner write the names of the countries on the map.
Egypt England France Germany Italy Poland Russia Spain Switzerland Turkey
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the names of the countries. Look at the map and say the names of the countries.
6
8
10
9
7
4
2
1
3
5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 134@@
134
Grammar activity answers
5A present simple + and −: I, you, we, they
 
 3 don’t like  4 have  5 don’t go  6 go  7 don’t have   
8 don’t understand  9 don’t eat  10 drink  11 eat   
12 don’t eat
5B present simple ? : I, you, we, they
a  2 live  3 work  4 Do…go  5 don’t have  6 go  7 Do…read 
8 don’t read  9 read  10 do…do  11 have  12 watch
b  2 Do you live  3 Do you have children?  4 Do they work?   
5 Do you speak French?
6A present simple: he, she, it
 
 3 doesn’t drink  4 goes  5 studies  6 doesn’t eat  7 listens   
8 works  9 has  10 doesn’t go  11 likes  12 doesn’t watch
6B adverbs of frequency
a  2 sometimes  3 never  4 usually  5 always
b  7 usually finishes  8 sometimes goes   
9 sometimes watches  10  never goes  11 usually has
7A  word order in questions: be and present 
simple
 
 2 What’s your surname?
 
3 How do you spell it?
 
4 Do you always take…?
 
5 Where do you work?
 
6 Are you a teacher?
 
7 Do you like your job?
 
8 What time do you finish work?
 
9 What do you do at the weekend?
 10 Where do you go?
 11 What music do you like?
7B imperatives; object pronouns: me, him, etc.
a  2 it  3 me  4 them  5 her  6 us  7 him  8 you
b 2 Close  3 Phone  4 sit  5 Relax  6 Don’t speak  7 Open   
 
8 Don’t drink
8A can / can’t
a  2 can’t  3 Can  4 can’t  5 can  6 Can
b 2 Can…help  3 can study  4 can’t pay  5 Can…swim   
 
6 can watch
8B like, love, hate + verb + -ing
 
 2 loves cooking
 
3 doesn’t like cycling
 
4 hates waiting
 
5 loves doing
 
6 like camping
 
7 doesn’t like swimming
 
8 hates flying
 
9 loves reading
 10 like playing
 11 don’t like running
 12 loves doing
1A  verb be (singular): I and you
a  2 you  3 I  4 I  5 you
b  2 ’m / am  3 Are  4 ’m / am  5 ’m / am  6 ’re / are
c 2 am  3 I  4 you
1B verb be (singular): he, she, it
 
 2 Is  3 isn’t  4 he  5 is  6 he  7 isn’t  8 ’s   
9 Where  10 Is  11 it  12 Is  13 isn’t  14 It   
15 Is  16 isn’t  17 ’s  18 is  19 from  20 she   
21 isn’t  22 Is  23 is  24 Is  25 isn’t  26 ’s
2A verb be (plural): we, you, they
a  2 Are; ’re  3 aren’t; ’re  4 Are; aren’t; ’re  5 Are; ’re   
6 Are; aren’t; ’re  7 are; aren’t  8 Are; aren’t; ’re
b  3 No, they aren’t. They’re American. / They’re from America.   
4 Yes, they are.
 
5 No, they aren’t. They’re Egyptian. / They are from Egypt.
 
6 Yes, they are.
 
7 No, they aren’t. They’re early.
 
8 No, they aren’t. They’re Scottish. / They are from Scotland.
2B Wh- and How questions with be
 
 2 Who is he?
 
3 How old is he?
 
4 What’s your first name?
 
5 What’s your surname?
 
6 How do you spell it?   
 
7 How old are you?
 
8 What’s your address?
 
9 What’s your postcode?
 10 What’s your home phone number?
 11 What’s your mobile number?
3A singular and plural nouns; a / an
a 3 chairs  4 a photo  5 an umbrella  6 bags
b  3 What are they? They’re watches.
 
4 What is it? It’s a newspaper.
 
5 What are they? They’re dictionaries.
 
6 What is it? It’s a camera.
 
7 What is it? It’s a wallet.
 
8 What are they? They’re (mobile) phones.
3B this / that / these / those
 
 2 That  3 these  4 this   
5 these  6 these  7 that   
8 this  9 This  10 That  11 these
4A possessive adjectives; possessive ’s
a  2 your  3 his  4 our  5 my  6 their  7 its  8 my
b  2 Sarah’s cat  3 Pablo’s sister  4 Mr White’s room
4B adjectives
a  2 ’s old  3 ’s big  4 is long  5 are cheap  6 ’re slow.
b  2 expensive laptops
 
3 a new coat
 
4 a dirty window
 
5 a small table
 
6 fast cars
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 135@@
135
9A present continuous
a  2 ’re  3 ’re  4 ’s  5 ’m  6 ’re  7 ’s  8 ’s
b 2 What are you doing? I’m doing my homework
 
3 What are they doing? They’re having a party.
 
4 What’s he doing? He’s studying Spanish?
 
5 What are you doing? I’m making lunch.
 
6 What’s she doing? She’s listening to music.
 
7 What’s she doing? She’s relaxing.
 
8 What are you doing? I’m having a shower.
 
9 What are you doing? I’m shopping.
9B present continuous or present simple?
 
 3 wears  4 Are…wearing  5 are…watching  6 watch   
7 ’s playing  8 plays  9 walks  10 ’re walking   
11 are…doing  12 do…do  13 leave  14 is leaving   
15 go  16 ’s…going
10A there’s a… / there are some…
a 3 There are some pillows.
 
4 There’s a shower.
 
5 There aren’t any lamps.
 
6 There isn’t a bath.
 
7 There are some towels.
 
8 There isn’t a cupboard.
b 3 Is there a gym? No, there isn’t.
 
4 Is there a gift shop? Yes, there is.
 
5 Is there a swimming pool? Yes, there is.
 
6 Are there any lifts? No, there aren’t.
 
7 Is there a garden? Yes, there is.
 
8 Is there a good view? No, there isn’t.
 
9 Are there any toilets? Yes, there are.
10B past simple: be
 
 2 wasn’t  3 were  4 was  5 was  6 wasn’t  7 was   
8 was  9 Was  10 wasn’t  11 was  12 Was  13 was   
14 were  15 was  16 weren’t  17 were
11A past simple: regular verbs
a  2 They travelled to Costa Rica.
 
3 They stayed in a hotel in the jungle.
 
4 They arrived at the hotel in a small boat.
 
5 They carried their bags to the hotel.
 
6 They didn’t check their phones.
 
7 They walked in the jungle with a guide.
 
8 They didn’t watch TV (in the evening).
 
9 They relaxed on the beach (every day).
 10 They enjoyed their holiday very much.
11B past simple irregular verbs: do, get, go, have
 
 2 went  3 did…do  4 went  5 had  6 did…have  7 had   
8 Did…go  9 got  10 got up  11 Did…have  12 didn’t have 
13 Did…get up  14 didn’t do  15 Did…go  16 got
12A past simple: regular and irregular verbs
 
 2 left  3 didn’t have  4 were  5 saw  6 opened   
7 phoned  8 said  9 phoned  10 gave  11 did…do   
12 talked  13 told  14 worked  15 did…get  16 bought   
17 went  18 was  19 went  20 had  21 sent  22 invited   
23 did…go  24 went  25 had
12B past simple revision
 
 3 stayed  4 did…do  5 went  6 had  7 wrote   
8 Did…watch  9 saw  10 Was  11 lived  12 Did…learn   
13 left  14 did…go  15 rented  16 had  17 got  18 Were   
19 phoned  20 didn’t answer  21 wasn’t  22 didn’t have   
23 sent  24 wanted  25 weren’t  26 stayed  27 bought   
28 didn’t see  29 didn’t go  30 was
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 136@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
136
  
Complete the conversation with I or you.
 a
  
Complete the conversation with am, ’m, are, or ’re.
 b
  
Complete the conversation.
 c
1A GRAMMAR verb be (singular): I and you
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
Miranda Hi, 1 I’m Miranda. Are 2
 Monica?
Sally 
No, 3
 ’m not, 4
 ’m Sally.
Miranda Nice to meet 5
 !
Student 
Excuse me, 1 am I in room 2?
Receptionist What’s your name?
Student 
I 2
 Caroline.
Receptionist 
3
 you Caroline Herzog?
Student 
No, I 4
 not. I 5
 Caroline 
Fuchs.
Receptionist You 6
 in room 3.
Student 
Thank you.
Charlotte Are 1 you Paolo Galli?
Paolo 
Yes, I 2
 .
Charlotte Hi, 3
 ’m Charlotte from the Dover 
School of English.
Paolo 
Oh, hello!
Charlotte Nice to meet 4
 .
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 137@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
137
  
Complete the conversations. Use contractions where possible.
 
1B GRAMMAR verb be (singular): he, she, it
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
A 
1 Where ’s Michael Fassbender from? 2
 he 
from the UK?
B No, he 3
 .
A Is 4
 from Germany?
B Yes, he 5
 .
A Where in Germany? Is 6
 from Berlin?
B No, he 7
 . He 8
 from Heidelberg.
A Where 18
 Cate Blanchett 19
?  
Is 20
 from the United States?
B No, she 21
 .
A 
22
 she from Australia?
B Yes, she 23
 .
A Where in Australia? 24
 she from Sydney?
B No, she 25
 . She 26
 from Melbourne.
A 
9
’s paella from? 10
 it from Spain?
B Yes, 11
 is.
A 
12
 it from Barcelona?
B No, it 13
 . 14
’s from Valencia.
A 
15
 guacamole from Spain, too?
B No, it 16
 . It 17
 from Mexico!
paella
guacamole
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 138@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
138
2A GRAMMAR verb be (plural): we, you, they
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with the correct form of be. Use contractions  
where possible.
 a
  
Look at the pictures. Write + or − short answers. If the answer is − , write the correct sentence.
1 Are they in Mexico? 
No, they aren’t. They’re in Brazil.
2 Are the cars Spanish? 
Yes, they are.
3 Are the women Japanese? 
4 Are they on business? 
5 Are they from Turkey? 
6 Are they in room 9? 
7 Are they late? 
8 Are they from Scotland? 
 b
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions in b about the pictures.
1
3
7
2
4
6
8
We ’re in Rio de Janeiro. 
 they Italian? 
No, they 
 Spanish.
 they on holiday? 
No, they 
 . They 
 on business. 
Are you Japanese? 
No, we 
 . We 
 American.
No, you 
 . You’re early.
 we in room 10?
No, you 
 in room 10. You  
 in room 9.
Sorry, 
 we late?
 they English? 
No, they 
 . They 
 Scottish. 
5
 they Turkish? 
No, they 
 Egyptian.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 139@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
139
2B GRAMMAR Wh- and How questions with be
  
Put the words in the correct order to make questions.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
1
Gill 
Hi Anna!
Anna Hello Gill. 1 How are you?  
(you / how / are)
Gill 
I’m fine, thanks. 2
 ?  
(he / who / is)
Anna He’s Sammy, my little boy.
Gill 
3
 ?  
(old / is / how / he)
Anna He’s one.
Gill 
He’s very nice.
2
Woman 
4
 ?  
(your / first / what’s / name)
Boy 
Henry.
Woman OK. 5
 ?  
(what’s / surname / your)
Boy 
Schultz.
Woman 
6
 ?  
(spell / do / how / it / you)
Boy 
S-C-H-U-L-T-Z.
Woman Oh, yes. 7
 ?  
(you / old / are / how)
Boy 
I’m 18.
Woman OK. That’s fine.
3
Woman 1 
8
 ?  
(your / address / what’s)
Woman 2 It’s 72 London Road, Liverpool.
Woman 1 
9
 ?  
(postcode / what’s / your)
Woman 2 It’s L2 7BC.
Woman 1 Thank you. 10
 ?  
(home / what’s / phone / your / number)
Woman 2 It’s 0151 496 0878.
Woman 1 OK. 11
 ?  
(mobile / your / number / what’s)
Woman 2 It’s 00700 900666
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 140@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
140
3A GRAMMAR singular and plural nouns; a / an
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the answers. Be careful with a / an.
 a
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the questions and answers in a and b.
  
Look at the pictures. Write questions and answers.
 b
What is it? It’s a coat.
What is it? It’s 
 .
What are they?
They’re pens.
What is it?
It’s a piece of paper.
What are they? They’re keys.
What is it? It’s 
 .
What are they? They’re 
 .
What are they? They’re 
 .
1
1
5
2
6
3
7
4
8
4
2
5
3
6
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 141@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
141
3B GRAMMAR this / that / these / those
  
Complete the conversations. Use this, that, these, or those.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
1
David Sally, is 1 this your laptop?
Sally 
No, it isn’t.
David Where’s your laptop?
Sally 
2
’s my laptop – over there on 
the table.
David And the keys? Are 3
 your keys?
Sally 
Yes, they are. Thanks.
2
Paul 
Is 4
 mug from Switzerland?
Jane No, it’s from France.
Paul 
And 5
 chocolates? Are 6
 
from Switzerland?
Jane Yes, they are. And 7
 picture is 
from Switzerland, too.
3
Woman Excuse me. Is 8
 the bus to 
Glasgow?
Driver 
No, ma’am. 9
 is the bus to 
Liverpool.
Woman Oh, no! Where’s the bus to Glasgow?
Driver 
10
’s the bus to Glasgow over 
there – number 41. Are 11
 
your bags?
Woman Yes, they are.
Driver 
Here, let me help you.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 142@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
142
4A GRAMMAR possessive adjectives; possessive ’s
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with my, your, his, her, its, our, or their.
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
  
Complete the sentences with the name and possessive ’s.
1 This is Amelia’s husband. His name’s Nick. (husband / Amelia)
2 Look! It’s 
 ! Over there! (cat / Sarah)
3 Rosa is 
 . She’s in my class. (sister / Pablo)
4 This is 
 . He’s the German teacher. (room / Mr White)
 b
1
3
5
7
2
4
6
8
That’s Josh and 
 wife.
Where are 
 sunglasses?
It’s a great book. Now 
what’s 
 name?
Look, I think these are 
 keys.
That’s Mr Green. He’s 
 French teacher.
Where are 
 coats?
Is this 
 bag?
Where’s my umbrella?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 143@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
143
4B GRAMMAR adjectives
  
Complete the sentences for the pictures. Use the correct form of be and an adjective from the list.
big cheap long old short slow
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and b. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
1 
He’s short.
1 
She’s a beautiful woman.
4 
Ana’s surname 
 .
4 
It’s 
 .
2 
It 
 .
2 
They’re 
 .
5 
These 
 .
5 
It’s 
 .
3 
It 
 .
3 
It’s 
 .
6 
They 
 .
6 
They’re 
 .
  
Complete the sentences for the pictures. Use an adjective and a noun from the lists.
beautiful dirty expensive fast new small
 b
car coat laptop window table woman
£2500.00
£3000.00
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 144@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
144
5A GRAMMAR present simple + and −: I, you, we, they
  
Write a + or a – sentence for each picture. Use the verbs in brackets.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
1 
I don’t have sugar in my 
coffee. (have)
4 
They 
 fast 
food at the weekend. (have)
7 
I 
 lunch at 
home. (have)
10 I 
 water or 
juice. (drink)
11 We 
 a lot of 
rice. (eat)
12 I 
 fish. (eat)
2 
We have tea for breakfast. 
(have)
5 
They 
 to 
school on Saturday. (go)
8 
Can you help me?  
I 
 . (understand)
3 
I 
 cats. (like)
6 
I 
 to English class on 
Tuesday and Thursday. (go)
9 
My children 
 
vegetables. (eat)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 145@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
145
5B GRAMMAR present simple ? : I, you, we, they
  
Complete the conversation. Use the verbs in brackets.
 a
  
Complete the conversation. Write the questions.
 b
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
A 
1 Do you live here in Oxford? (live)
B Yes, I 2
 in Oxford, but  
I 3
 in London. (live; work)
A 
4
 you 
 to work by 
car? (go)
B No, I 5
 a car, I 6
 to work 
by train. (not have; go)
A 
7
 you 
 a newspaper on 
the train? (read)
B I 8
 a newspaper, but  
I 9
 the news on my tablet every 
morning. (not read; read)
A And what 10
 you 
 after 
work? (do)
B In the evening, I 11
 dinner and  
I 12
 TV. (have; watch)
A Good morning, Mr Smith.
B Hello. Nice to meet you.
A 
1 Do you want a coffee?
B Yes, please. Black with no sugar.
A 
2
 in London?
B No, I don’t. I live in Birmingham.
A 
3
B Yes, two. A daughter and a son.  
They’re 20 and 22.
A 
4
B No, they don’t work. They’re students.
A 
5
B No, not French, but I speak Spanish and 
Italian.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 146@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
146
6A GRAMMAR present simple: he, she, it
  
Look at the pictures. Write about Andy and Liz. Use the verbs ( + or – ) in brackets.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Work with a partner. Tell your partner to turn over his / her copy. Ask questions to 
test your partner’s memory.
Does Liz work in a bank? 
 
No, she doesn’t.
Does Andy have a dog? 
 
Yes, he does.
Orange
Juice
French 
II
French 
II
Bonjour!
French 
II
Shefﬁeld University
17:35
1
7
4
10
2
8
5
11
3
9
6
12
Andy
Liz
Andy
1 Andy lives in a house. (live)
2 He doesn’t have a cat. (have)
3 He 
 coffee in the morning. (drink)
4 He 
 to university. (go)
5 He 
 French. (study)
6 He 
 fast food for dinner. (eat)
Liz
7 Liz 
 to music in the car. (listen)
8 She 
 in a hospital. (work)
9 She 
 a sandwich for lunch. (have)
 
10 She 
 home at 5.00. (go)
 
11 She 
 dogs. (like)
 
12 She 
 TV in the evening. (watch)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 147@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
147
6B GRAMMAR adverbs of frequency
  
Complete the sentences with an adverb of frequency (always, never, usually, or sometimes).
 a
  
Complete the sentences with an adverb of frequency and a verb.
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and b. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
He 
 goes to 
work by car.
She always has a coffee at 10.00.
She 
 TV with 
her husband.
She 
 to bed 
before 12.00.
She 
 dinner 
with her friends on Friday night.
He always gets up at 7.30.
He 
 has a 
sandwich for lunch.
She 
 work 
late.
He 
 has breakfast.
He 
 does the 
housework on Sunday.
She 
 to the 
supermarket after work.
3
6
9
1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
always = ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
usually = ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
sometimes = ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
never = ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 148@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
148
7A GRAMMAR word order in questions: be and present simple
  
Put the words in the correct order to make questions.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
1
2
3
Waiter 
Good evening. 1 Do you have a reservation ? 
(have / do / a / reservation / you)
Woman Yes, we do.
Waiter 
2
 ? 
(your / what’s / surname)
Woman It’s Leigh.
Waiter 
3
 ? 
(spell / how / it / you / do)
Woman L - E - I - G - H
Waiter 
Thank you. Your table is by the window.  
Come with me.
Woman 
4
  
the number 10 bus? (always / take / do / you)
Man 
Yes, I do.
Woman 
5
 ?  
(you / where / work / do)
Man 
I work at the university.
Woman 
6
 ? 
(teacher / you / are / a)
Man 
Yes, I am.
Woman 
7
 ?  
(like / your / do / job / you)
Man 
Yes, I do. I love it.
Woman 
8
 ?  
(work / you / what / time / do / finish)
Man 
I usually finish at five o’clock.
Boy 
9
 ?  
(do / do / weekend / what / the / you / at)
Girl 
I usually meet my friends.
Boy 
10
 ?  
(you / do / go / where)
Girl 
To a bar or a club.
Boy 
11
 ?  
(like / music / what / you / do)
Girl 
I like hip hop and R&B.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 149@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
149
1 
 in the park at night!  
Don’t walk
2 
It’s very cold in here. 
 the window, please! 
3 
 me when you arrive in Paris. 
4 
Come in and 
 down. 
5 
 ! You’re on holiday. 
6 
 in Italian! This is an English class. 
7 
 your books, please, and go to page 22. 
8 
 coffee now! It’s 10.00 p.m. 
7B GRAMMAR imperatives; object pronouns: me, him, etc.
  
Complete the sentences with an object pronoun. Write it in the PRONOUN column.
 a
  
Complete the sentences with a  + or –  imperative of a verb from the list. Write it in the 
IMPERATIVE column.
close not drink open phone relax sit not speak not walk
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PRONOUN and IMPERATIVE columns. Say the sentences with the  
missing words.
PRONOUN
IMPERATIVE
1 
I love cats. Do you like 
 ? 
them
2 
This exercise is difficult. I can’t do 
 . 
3 
I always phone my brother but he never phones 
 . 
4 
Where are the car keys? I can’t find 
 . 
5 
Paula is a very good friend. I see 
 every weekend. 
6 
We have a meeting with the manager. He wants to speak to 
 . 
7 
Jack goes to your school. Do you know 
 ? 
8 
You love me, but I don’t love 
 ! 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 150@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
150
8A GRAMMAR can / can’t
  
Complete the sentences with can or can’t.
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and b. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
  
Complete the sentences with can or can’t and a verb from the list.
help   park   pay   study   swim   watch
 b
4 
You 
 use your 
phone here.
1 
You can’t park here!
4 
I’m sorry, but you 
 
with American Express. We 
only take Visa.
5 
 we 
 here 
today?
6 
Finish your dinner and then 
you 
 TV.
2 
I’m sorry. We 
 
come to dinner tonight.
1 
It’s only 90 kilometres. We 
can drive there in an hour.
5 
We 
 have lunch 
in the garden. It’s a 
beautiful day.
2 
 you 
 me 
with my homework?
3 
 you open the 
window, please?
6 
 I help you?
3 
Look! We 
 
French here in the evening.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 151@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
151
8B GRAMMAR like / love / hate + verb + -ing
  
Write sentences with the correct form of like 
, love 
 
, don’t like 
, or hate 
 
 and a verb 
from the list with -ing.
camp cook cycle do (x2) fly play read run swim travel wait
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
They like travelling.
She 
 
for the bus.
She 
 .
They 
 
computer games.
They 
 .
She 
 
yoga.
She 
 .
He 
 
exercise.
He 
 .
He 
 .
They 
 .
She 
 
books in English.
1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
3
6
9
12
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 152@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
152
Me llamo Jack, 
tengo veinte años.
9A GRAMMAR present continuous
  
Complete the sentences with am, are or is. Use contractions when possible.
1 Colin ’s driving to work.
2 We 
 having lunch.
3 You 
 working late today.
4 Pam 
 wearing a hat.
5 I 
 walking to the station.
6 We 
 going shopping now.
7 It 
 raining a lot.
8 Mark 
 having a coffee.
  
Look at the pictures. Write questions and answers with the present continuous.
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in b. Look at the pictures and say the questions and answers.
1
4
2
5
3
6
9
8
7
(he / do?) 
(he / study / Spanish) 
(they / do?)  
What are they doing?
(they / watch / football)  
They’re watching football.
(you / do?) 
(I / make / lunch) 
(you / do?) 
(I / do / my homework) 
(she / do?) 
(She / listen / to music) 
(you / do?) 
(I / shop) 
(you / do?) 
(I / have / a shower) 
(she / do?) 
(she / relax) 
(they / do?) 
(they / have / a party) 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 153@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
153
9B GRAMMAR present continuous or present simple?
  
Write the verb in the present continuous or the present simple in the VERB column.  
Use contractions where possible.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the VERB column. Say the sentences with the correct form.
VERB
 
rain
1 
It usually 
 a lot in the UK. 
rains
2 
Oh no! We can’t play tennis today, it 
 . 
’s raining
 
wear
3 
Peter never 
 trainers. He doesn’t like them. 
4 
 you 
 new glasses? They’re great! 
 
watch
5 
A What 
 the children 
 ? 
 
B The Hobbit. It’s their favourite film!
6 
We sometimes 
 football matches on TV. 
 
play
7 
A Where’s Ben? 
 
B He 
 computer games in his room. 
8 
My sister 
 tennis with my dad every Saturday. 
 
walk
9 
Hannah doesn’t have a car. She 
 to work. 
 
10 
It’s a beautiful day today, so we 
 home. 
 
do
 
11 
A What 
 you 
 ? 
 
B My English homework.
 
12 
A What 
 you 
 ? 
 
B I’m a journalist.
 
leave
 
13 
I never 
 the house without an umbrella. 
 
14 
Hurry up! Our bus 
 ! 
 
go
 
15 
My friend Lucy and I always 
 shopping together. 
 
16 
A Where 
 Andy 
 ? 
 
B To school, I think. It’s 8.30!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 154@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
154
10A GRAMMAR there’s a… / there are some…
  
Write + and – sentences about the hotel room. Use There’s a / There isn’t a or There are some… / 
There aren’t any… .
1 TV 
There isn’t a TV.
2 chairs 
There are some chairs.
3 pillows 
 .
4 shower 
 .
5 lamps 
 .
6 bath 
 .
7 towels 
 .
8 cupboard 
 .
  
Write questions with Is there a…? / Are there any…? Then write short answers.
 a
 b
1 restaurants? 
Are there any restaurants? 
Yes, there are.
2 car park? 
Is there a car park? 
No, there isn’t.
3 gym? 
 ? 
 .
4 gift shop? 
 ? 
 .
5 swimming pool? 
 ? 
 .
6 lifts? 
 ? 
 .
7 garden? 
 ? 
 .
8 good view? 
 ? 
 .
9 toilets? 
 ? 
 .
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences. Look at the picture and say what there is and isn’t in the room 
and the hotel.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 155@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
155
10B GRAMMAR past simple: be
  
Complete the conversations with was, wasn’t, were, or weren’t.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
2
A I think Hugh Jackman 5
 a waiter 
before he was famous.
B No, he 6
 .
A OK, what 7
 he?
B He 8
 an English and Drama teacher.
1
A 
1 Were you at a club last night?
B No, I 2
 .
A Where 3
 you?
B I 4
 at Tom’s house.
3
A 
9
 your mother an actress, too?
B No, she 10
 . She 11
 a nurse.
A 
12
 she tall?
B Yes, she 13
 very tall and beautiful.
4
A Why 14
 you late last night?
B I 15
 at the gym.
A No, you 16
 . You 17
 with 
Annabelle! This is a message from her on 
your mobile!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 156@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
156
11A GRAMMAR past simple: regular verbs
  
Look at the pictures about Adele and Tom’s holiday. Write sentences in the past simple.
1 Adele and Tom wanted a holiday.
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 
10 
They
in the evening.
every day.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Tell the story with a partner.
want a holiday
not watch TV
arrive at the hotel in a 
small boat
carry their bags to  
the hotel
not check their phones
walk in the jungle with  
a guide
travel to Costa Rica
relax on the beach
stay in a hotel in the jungle
enjoy their holiday very much
1
8
4
5
6
7
2
9
3
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 157@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
157
11B GRAMMAR past simple irregular verbs: do, get, go, have
  
Complete the conversations. Use the verbs in brackets in the past simple.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
1
2
A Good morning, Jenny. 1 Did you have a good weekend? (have)
B Yes, I did. We 2
 to a concert on Saturday night. (go) 
What 3
 you 
 at the weekend? (do)
A On Sunday afternoon, we 4
 to a football match with Beth and Dan. (go)  
Then we 5
 dinner at their house. (have)
B What 6
 you 
 for dinner? (have)
A We 7
 Italian food. (have) It was great!
B 
8
 you 
 to bed late? (go)
A Yes, we did. We 9
 the last bus home, and then I 10
 at six  
this morning. (get; get up)
A Hi darling. 11
 you 
 a good day? (have)
B No, I 12
 a good day. (not have) It was terrible!
A Why? 13
 the boys 
 late again? (get up)
B Yes, very late. And they 14
 their homework last night. (not do)
A 
15
 you 
 to the office this morning? (go)
B Yes, but I was late, too. I 16
 an email from my boss about it. (get) He was angry.
A Don’t worry. Tomorrow is Saturday and you can relax.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 158@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
158
12A GRAMMAR past simple: regular and irregular verbs
  
Complete the conversation. Use the past simple of the verbs in brackets.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversation. Then cover the conversation and look at the pictures.  
Tell the story.
Two years ago, the man left his wallet on the train… 
A How 1 did you meet (meet) your wife?
B It’s a long story. Two years ago, I 2
 (leave) my wallet on the train. It 3
 (not have) 
any money in it, but my credit cards 4
 (be) in it.
A Oh no! That’s terrible.
B Yes, but a woman on the train 5
 (see) the wallet and 6
 (open) it. The name of 
the bank was on the credit cards. She 7
 (phone) the bank and 8
 (say) that she 
had my wallet. Then the bank 9
 (phone) me and 10
 (tell) me her number.
A What 11
 you 
 (do) then?
B I 12
 (talk) to the woman on the phone. She 13
 (tell) me that she 14
 
(work) in an office in the city centre.
A How 15
 you 
 (get) the wallet from her?
B The next day I 16
 (buy) some chocolates and flowers and I 17
 (go) to her office. 
She 18
 (be) really nice so we 19
 (go) for a coffee. We 20
 (have) a 
good time.
A That’s great! Then what happened?
B The next day, I 21
 (send) her an email and I 22
 (invite) her out to dinner.
A Where 23
 you 
 (go)?
B We 24
 (go) to a romantic restaurant on the beach and 25
 (have) a great evening.
A And then?
B Well, she’s now my wife!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 159@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
159
12B GRAMMAR past simple revision
  
Put the verbs in the past simple.
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
A I 1 didn’t like that restaurant. (not like)
B Yes, the food 2 was really bad. (be)
A My cousin 3
 with us last weekend. (stay)
B That’s nice! What 4
 you 
 ? (do)
A We 5
 to a museum and we 6
 lunch in the city centre. (go / have)
A Do you have Alan’s phone number?
B Yes, I 7
 it on a piece of paper. Here it is! (write)
A 
8
 you 
 the football match yesterday? (watch)
B Yes, I did. It was great!
A I 9
 a really interesting film last night. (see)
B 
10
 it the film with Scarlett Johansson? It was great! (be)
A I 11
 in Russia when I was little. (live)
B Really? 12
 you 
 to speak Russian? (learn)
A No, I didn’t!
A There you are!
B Sorry! We 13
 the house really late! (leave)
A Where 14
 you 
 last summer? (go)
B We 15
 a lovely house in Spain. And you? (rent)
A How did you get to the airport?
B We 16
 time, so we 17
 a bus. (have / get)
A 
18
 you at home yesterday? I 19
 you, but you 20
. (be / phone / not answer)
B No, I 21
 . I 22
 my phone with me! Sorry! (be / not have)
A Where’s Martin?
B Oh, he 23
 me a text message. He can’t come. (send)
A What did you do last night?
B We 24
 to go to the cinema, but there 25
 any good films, so we 26
 at 
home. (want / not be / stay)
A Is that a new phone?
B Yes! I 27
 it last week. (buy)
A I 28
 you at the concert yesterday. (not see)
B I 29
 . I 30
 in hospital! (not go / be)
 20–28 Really good! You can use the past simple very well.
 10–19  Quite good, but check the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.92) and look at the 
exercises again.
 
0–9  This is difficult for you. Don’t worry! Read the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s 
Book p.110, p112, and p.114). Ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the 
exercise again at home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 160@@
160
1 Salma Hayek (actress) is from Mexico.
2 Mohamed Salah (football player) is from Egypt.
3 Ken Watanabe (actor) is from Japan.
4 Roger Federer (tennis player) is from Switzerland.
5 Vanessa Paradis (singer, actress, and model) is from France.
6 Dariusz Michalczewski (boxer) is from Poland.
7 Pedro Almodóvar (film director) is from Spain.
8 Anna Netrebko (opera singer) is from Russia.
9 Donatella Versace (fashion designer) is from Italy.
 10 Emma Watson (actress) is from England.
 11 Orhan Pamuk (writer) is from Turkey.
 12 Gisele Bündchen (model) is from Brazil.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  To help Sts if you think they don’t know the 
famous people, write the countries in random order on the 
board or tell them to go to Vocabulary Bank Countries and 
nationalities on p.117.
PE1 Who are you??
A mingle activity
Sts take on a new identity and practise asking for personal 
information and spelling names. Copy enough worksheets 
for each student to have one card. Prepare a card for yourself 
to use as an example.
LANGUAGE
Good morning / afternoon / evening.
What’s your first name? 
Christophe.
How do you spell it? 
C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E.
What’s your surname?
Where are you from? 
I’m from (Rennes) in (France).
• Tell Sts that they are going to temporarily change their 
identity. Give out one card to each student.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Demonstrate the activity by using a card that you have 
created for yourself, with a different identity. Get Sts to 
ask you the questions and then answer them with the 
information on your card. Choose a name that Sts will 
have to ask how to spell in order to make spelling part of 
the task.
• Tell Sts that they are going to walk around the room and 
meet some ‘new’ people. When they meet someone, they 
must ask for their first and surnames and where they are 
from. They should ask people to spell their names and 
the towns they are from, and should write down the 
information. Give them a target number of people they 
should meet, e.g. four or five, or set a time limit, e.g. ten 
minutes.
• When you are sure Sts understand what they have to do, 
get them to stand up and talk to each other.
• To follow up, ask a few Sts about one of the new people 
they met, e.g. What’s his name? How do you spell his 
surname? Where is he from?
1A Are you...?
A mingle activity
Sts have to find two famous partners. Copy and cut up one 
worksheet per 20 Sts.
LANGUAGE
Excuse me, are you…? 
Yes, I am. / No, I’m not. Sorry!
Hi / Hello. I’m… 
Nice to meet you.
• Give each student one card. If you have more than 20 Sts, 
copy the sheet twice and have some characters repeated. 
For smaller groups, tell Sts that they might only find ONE 
of the two famous people.
• Tell Sts they are the first famous person on their card. 
They must find the other two famous people and then 
introduce themselves.
• Demonstrate the activity with a strong student and make 
sure Sts understand what they have to do. Tell Sts not to 
worry about pronouncing the names correctly.
• Tell Sts to stand up and begin the activity.
• As some Sts might find their two people very quickly, you 
could set a time limit, e.g. five minutes. In a smaller class, 
you could give out unused cards to Sts who finish early.
 EXTRA IDEA  Put on some lively music in the background 
while Sts do the activity. 
If your Sts don’t know each other, write all their names on the 
board. Tell Sts to look at the board and then find two Sts in 
the class.
1B Where are they from?
A pairwork activity
Sts ask where famous people are from. Copy one worksheet 
per student or pair.
LANGUAGE
Where’s she from? 
She’s from Italy.
Where’s he from? 
He’s from Italy. 
I don’t know.
• Quickly revise countries in Vocabulary Bank Countries 
and nationalities on p.117.
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheet.
• Revise the questions and answers from Language. Check 
that Sts can remember how to say I don’t know.
• Focus on photo 1 and ask the question Where’s she from? 
Elicit answers and establish that the correct answer is She’s 
from Mexico.
• Tell Sts to guess if they don’t know where the people 
are from.
• Sts now do the activity in pairs, taking turns pointing at 
one of the photos and asking where the person is from.
• When Sts have finished, check answers, telling Sts the 
people’s nationalities if they don’t know or couldn’t guess.
Communicative activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 161@@
161
3 k  4 n  5 a  6 j  7 m  8 b  9 f  10 i  11 d  12 h 
13 l  14 c
• Tell Sts they now have to memorize as many answers as 
they can. Set a time limit, e.g. one or two minutes.
• When the time is up, get Sts to fold the sheet on the 
dotted line, so that responses a–n are not visible.
• Tell Sts they will now have to remember the original 
responses to 3–14 and write these in the blank column. 
Demonstrate by asking the class to remember number 3 
(It’s 01632960057.).
• Set a time limit, then if Sts worked individually, get them 
to compare their answers with their partner before 
they unfold their worksheet to see how many they 
remembered correctly.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs. Get Sts B to turn the 
worksheet face down. Sts A say one of the sentences at 
random from 1–7 and Sts B then say the response from 
memory. Sts then swap roles and Sts B read sentences 8–14 
in random order.
3A The same or different?
A pairwork activity
Sts find similarities and differences between two photos. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
A I have one watch in my photo. The same or different?
B Different. I have two. I have three pencils in my photo.
A The same. I have three pencils, too.
• Quickly revise the vocabulary on p.18 of the 
Student’s Book.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Elicit the meaning 
of too.
• Demonstrate the activity by taking the part of student A. 
Say I have one tablet in my bag. Ask a student B The same or 
different? Elicit the response The same. I have one tablet, too. 
Tell Sts to write S (same) in the box next to the tablet.
• Now take the part of student B. Say I have two notebooks 
in my photo. Elicit the response from a student A (Different. 
I have one notebook).
• Sts now do the activity in pairs. Tell them to take turns 
telling each other what they have in their photos. When 
the pairs finish, get them to look at each other’s pictures 
to check their answers.
 ! For some Sts, especially at this level, role-play can be 
quite challenging. Be patient and provide plenty of 
support and examples if this is the case with any of 
your Sts.
2A Match the sentences
A pairwork activity
Sts work in pairs to match questions and answers. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Are you from Spain? 
No, we’re Italian.
Is Anna Russian? 
Yes, she’s from Moscow.
• Write the following questions and answers on the board 
or show them on screen if using CPT:
 1  ARE YOU FROM SPAIN? 
A YES, SHE’S FROM MOSCOW.
 2  IS ANNA RUSSIAN? 
B YES, THEY ARE.
 3  ARE TOM AND PAUL 
C NO, WE’RE ITALIAN. 
FROM ENGLAND?
• Ask Sts to match the questions to the answers. Then check 
answers and draw a line between them (1C, 2A, 3B).
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Ask one pair to demonstrate the activity. A reads the first 
sentence (Excuse me. Are you James?). B reads the correct 
response (No, I’m not. I’m Jason.). Ask A if the response is 
correct.
• Sts A ask their questions first and then Sts swap roles. 
Monitor and ensure that Sts are not looking at each 
other’s worksheets.
• When Sts have finished, check answers.
1 i  2 j  3 f  4 g  5 h  6 e  7 c  8 d  9 a  10 b
 EXTRA IDEA  If some Sts finish early, they can swap cards with 
their partner and repeat the activity.
2B Remember the sentences
A pairwork activity
Sts match and then memorize sentences. Copy one 
worksheet per student or pair.
LANGUAGE
Hi, Lola. This is Paul. 
Nice to meet you.
How old is Karin? 
She’s 38.
• Write the following sentences on the board or show them 
on screen if using CPT:
 1 HI, LOLA. THIS IS PAUL. 
A SHE’S 38.
 2 HOW OLD IS KARIN? 
B NICE TO MEET YOU.
• Cover the responses, A and B, and elicit a possible 
response to 1 and 2. Then uncover the answers and elicit 
which response goes with each sentence, and draw a line 
between them (1B, 2A).
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Point out that 
the first two have been done for them (1g and 2e). Tell Sts 
to match sentences 3–14 in the left-hand column to the 
answers in the right-hand column. Give a time limit, e.g. 
five minutes.
• Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 162@@
162
4A Family tree
A pairwork activity
Sts complete a family tree by asking their partner questions. 
This is a two-page activity. Copy one worksheet (A and B) 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
Who is Will? 
He’s Joe’s brother.
• Tell Sts they are each going to complete a family tree. You 
could demonstrate by drawing a family tree on the board 
with your name and family members in it.
• Erase some of the names on the board and ask Sts, e.g. 
Who’s Maria? Elicit the correct answer (your grandmother, 
your sister…). Continue until your family tree is complete 
again.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
• Tell Sts that they are now going to complete Joe and 
Angela’s family trees. Tell Sts they have to ask and answer 
questions about the people in the lists that they have. 
Focus on the examples.
• Sts A start by asking Sts B questions about the people in 
their list and complete Joe’s family tree. Then they swap 
roles and Sts B complete Angela’s family tree. Monitor and 
make sure Sts are doing the activity correctly.
• Tell Sts to compare family trees (they should be the same).
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  After Sts have completed both family 
trees, get them to ask questions about all the people, e.g. 
Who is Harriet’s brother?, to revise family vocabulary. 
You could also ask Sts to make their own family trees, in class 
or at home. They can then show other Sts and ask questions: 
‘Who is Anna?’  ‘She’s my brother’s wife’.
4B What is it?
A pairwork activity
Sts use adjectives to identify objects. Copy and cut up one 
worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
It’s expensive. 
It’s a watch.
It’s number three. 
It’s an expensive watch.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the sentences 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Revise adjectives by saying an adjective and getting Sts to 
say the opposite, e.g. slow – fast. (See Vocabulary Bank 
Adjectives p.121.)
• Put Sts in pairs, ideally face to face, and give each student 
a set of cards. Ask Sts to shuffle their cards.
• Demonstrate the activity by taking the part of a student. 
Look through your set of cards and choose one, for 
example, card number 3. Say to a student It’s expensive. 
This student should then look through his / her cards 
and find the one that is expensive. Elicit the response 
It’s number three. Point out that Sts can also respond by 
naming the object, e.g. It’s the car. Now get a student to 
choose a card (e.g. the computer) and say It’s slow. You  
then say Number 8 or It’s a computer.
• Sts take turns saying sentences It’s + adjectives. Their 
partner says the number of the card or names the object.
3B What’s this? What are these?
A pairwork activity
Sts ask and answer questions with this and these. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
What’s this? 
It’s a wallet.
What are these? 
They’re pencils.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT, and revise the use of 
this and these.
• Demonstrate the activity by taking the part of student 
A. Point to number 1 and say What are these? Elicit the 
response They are notebooks.
• Now take the part of student B. Elicit the question from  
a student A (What is this?). Say It’s an umbrella.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. Sts 
look at the silhouettes and ask and answer e.g. What are 
these? They’re notebooks.
• Tell Sts A to ask about all their silhouetted objects first. 
Then they swap roles.
• Monitor and help Sts if necessary.
PE2  Can I have an orange juice, 
please?
A role-play activity
Sts role-play ordering food in groups of three. Copy one 
worksheet per group and cut up the menu and role cards.
LANGUAGE
Can I have a cheese sandwich? 
Here you are.
How much is that? 
It’s £5.25.
Anything else? 
 
No, thanks. / Yes, please, a Diet Coke.
• Revise prices by writing a few prices on the board, e.g. 
£5.65, $11.25, €0.50, and elicit the prices (five pounds 
sixty-five, eleven dollars twenty-five cents, fifty cents).
• Explain that they are going to role-play ordering food and 
taking orders in a pub. Write the phrases in Language on 
the board, or show them on screen if using CPT. Model 
the phrases for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in groups of three and give them a menu to share. 
Give one student the role card for the bartender (a person 
who works in a bar). Give the other two Sts the customer 
card to share. Give Sts a few minutes to read their roles.
• Bartenders should let the customers read the menu 
before taking their order. They need a piece of paper to 
take down the orders and later to tell them how much 
it is.
• When the customers have read the menu, tell the 
bartenders to take orders and calculate how much it is.
• You could ask a group or groups to perform in front of  
the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 163@@
163
5B Do you…?
A group board game
Sts move around the board asking and answering present 
simple questions. Copy one worksheet per group of three or 
four Sts. You also need a dice per group and one counter per 
student (e.g. a paper clip, a small coin, etc.).
LANGUAGE
Do you…? 
Yes, I do. / No, I don’t.
• Revise Do you…? questions by asking individual Sts 
questions and getting them to give you short answers, 
e.g. Do you drink tea in the morning? Do you like rock 
music?
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters. Each player 
puts their counter on the START square. Explain the rules 
of the game. Sts take turns to throw the dice and move 
the corresponding number of squares. Sts answer the 
questions in the squares.
• Demonstrate by getting a student to roll the dice, move 
his / her counter, and ask you the question. 
• Sts work in their groups. Sts take turns to roll the dice and 
ask the others in the group to answer the question in the 
square. Monitor and help.
• Sts play the game until the time runs out. The first player 
to reach the FINISH square wins. If a group finishes very 
quickly, tell them to have another go around the board.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  With a strong class you could encourage 
Sts to give more information when they answer a question 
and to react to their partner’s answer, e.g. A Do you like cats? 
B Yes, I do. I have two cats. A What are their names? 
You can make the game longer by giving Sts a coin instead 
of a dice. Tell Sts that the coin will tell them how many 
spaces to move. They toss the coin: heads = move one space, 
tails = move two spaces.
PE3  Time bingo
A group card game
Sts revise the time with bingo cards. Copy and cut up one 
card per pair or per student.
LANGUAGE
(It’s) twenty past three, quarter to six, eleven o’clock.
• Draw a clock on the board and quickly revise the time.
• Put Sts in pairs and give each pair a bingo card.
• Explain that you are going to say some times, and if the 
time is on their card, they must cross it out (ask Sts to cross 
out in PENCIL, so the card can be used again).
• Explain that when a pair has crossed out ALL the times on 
their card they call out Bingo!
• Rehearse the shout, Bingo!
• Start calling out times, repeating them once. Keep a note 
of all the times you call out.
 EXTRA IDEA  When Sts have finished, they could take turns 
saying sentences with the adjective and noun together, e.g.: 
A (points at a picture) What’s number 3? or What is it? 
B It’s an expensive watch.  
Non-cut alternative  Give one worksheet to each student. 
Ask Sts to choose a picture at random and describe it to their 
partner. Make it clear that Sts should choose random pictures 
and not do them in order.
1 It’s fast. / It’s a fast car.
2 It’s tall. / It’s a tall tree.
3 It’s expensive. / It’s an expensive watch.
4 It’s small. / It’s a small key.
5 It’s old. / It’s an old umbrella.
6 It’s big. / It’s a big house.
7 It’s long. / It’s a long name.
8 It’s slow. / It’s a slow computer.
9 It’s new. / It’s a new coat.
 10 It’s cheap. / It’s a cheap car.
 11 It’s easy. / It’s an easy number.
 12 It’s ugly. / It’s an ugly picture.
5A Talk about food
A pairwork activity
Sts answer questions about their tastes and habits in relation 
to food and drink. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
I have orange juice for breakfast. What about you?
Me too.
I don’t have orange juice. I have milk.
• Quickly revise the vocabulary in Vocabulary Bank Food 
and drink on p.122.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. You may also want to 
teach Me neither to agree with a negative sentence. Model 
the sentences and questions for Sts to listen and copy the 
rhythm.
• Give out the worksheets and tell Sts to look at the pictures 
of the food / drink and make sure they know the words. 
Focus on the column on the right with T/F. Tell Sts to 
circle T if the information is true for them or F if it is 
false. Remind Sts of the meaning of a lot of and elicit the 
meaning of every day.
• Now put Sts in pairs and tell them they are going to tell 
each other about their sentences.
• Demonstrate the activity. Focus on the first sentence  
(I have orange juice for breakfast.) and circle T. Say I have 
orange juice for breakfast and then ask What about you? 
Elicit the two possible answers in Language. Now focus 
on sentence 2 and circle F. Say I drink coffee. Highlight that 
if Sts circle F, they need to change the verbs from positive 
to negative or vice versa.
• Sts now take turns telling each other their sentences and 
asking their partners What about you?
• Get feedback by asking a few Sts to report the things they 
have in common: We like chocolate. Our favourite food is 
pasta.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 164@@
164
Times to dictate: 4.15  3.20  6.25  7.50  5.25  7.30   
5.45  10.55  9.35  2.50  11.10  1.05  12.10  8.40
• Ask the winning pair to read back the times and check 
they are correct.
• Play again, giving pairs different cards or getting Sts to rub 
out and swap cards with another pair. Call out the times in 
a different order.
6A  What do they do? Where do 
they work?
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts ask each other about people’s jobs and places of work. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
What does Kate do? 
She’s a nurse.
Where does she work? She works in a children’s hospital.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets.
• Explain that their worksheet has missing information 
which their partner has.
• Focus on the first question prompt on the left (What / do?) 
and elicit the first question for Kate (What does Kate do?).
• Elicit from Sts A the answer (She’s a nurse) and tell Sts B to 
write a nurse in the space.
• Now focus on the second question prompt on the left 
(Where / work?) and elicit the question for Kate (Where does 
Kate work?).
• Elicit the answer from Sts B (She works in a children’s 
hospital.) and tell Sts A to write in a children’s hospital in  
the space.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm. 
• Now ask Sts how they would ask the questions for George 
(What does George do? Where does he work?).
• Sts ask and answer questions. Monitor and check that they 
are spelling and pronouncing the words correctly.
• When Sts have finished, tell them to turn over the sheets 
and ask quick questions round the class to see if they can 
remember people’s jobs and places of work.
6B What do you usually do?
A pairwork activity
Sts tell a partner about things they always, usually, 
sometimes, or never do. Copy one worksheet for each pair 
and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
I usually have cereal for breakfast. What about you?
I always have cereal for breakfast. I love cereal
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or show 
them on screen if using CPT. Model the sentences for Sts 
to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. Give Sts a few minutes to read and 
complete the sentences on their half of the sheet. Monitor 
and answer any questions about vocabulary.
• When Sts are ready, tell them they will now have to say 
their sentences to their partner and ask What about you? 
Demonstrate the activity by giving Sts a couple more 
examples. Say to a student, e.g. I sometimes have breakfast 
in bed on Sunday morning. What about you? Elicit a true 
response from the student. Then say to another student  
I usually read the newspaper in the morning. What about you?
• Sts work in pairs. Monitor and help as needed. Encourage 
Sts to add extra information to their answers as in the 
examples.
• Get feedback by asking a few volunteers to report what 
they have learned about their partner.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  When Sts have finished, you could ask them 
to write three sentences about their partner.
7A Free time questionnaire
A pairwork activity
Sts revise word order in questions by putting the words in 
the correct order and then asking each other about free  
time activities. Copy one worksheet for each pair and cut 
into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Do you usually go out on Saturday night? 
Yes, I do.
Where do you go? I go to the cinema. 
What about 
 
you?
• Quickly revise word order in questions. Write on the 
board: ARE TIRED YOU? and WHERE YOU DO LIVE? and 
elicit what the correct word order is. Then revise the time 
expressions: in the morning / in the evening / at night / at  
the weekend.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Give out the worksheets. Focus 
on a and tell Sts to put the words in 1–8 in the ctorrect 
order to make questions. Point out that the first word in 
each question is given. Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes.
• Monitor and help, making sure Sts have put the words in 
the correct order.
Student A
2 What are your favourite shops?
3 What games do you play on your phone?
4 Do you eat fast food at the weekend?
5 Who do you usually meet at the weekend?
6 Do you have a big breakfast at the weekend?
7 What TV programmes do you watch in the evening?
8 What do you usually do on Saturday morning?
Student B
2 What’s your favourite restaurant?
3 What do you with your friends at the weekend?
4 Are you usually at home on Sunday night?
5 When do you usually have holidays?
6 What do you usually do after dinner?
7 Do you go to the cinema at the weekend?
8 How do you relax in the evenings?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 165@@
165
• Demonstrate the second part of the activity by telling 
a student to ask you a question on his / her worksheet. 
Answer the question as fully as possible and return the 
question with What about you?
• Sts work in their pairs. Encourage Sts to try and give as 
much information as they can when they answer the 
questions and to ask What about you?
• Get feedback from individual Sts.
7B What do you think of…?
A pairwork activity
Sts complete a survey about things / people they like or 
don’t like, then they interview their partner. Copy one 
worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
I like Justin Timberlake. Do you like him?
Yes, I do. I like him a lot.
He’s OK.
No, I don’t like him. He’s awful.
• Write on the board the following sentence with the name 
of an actor / actress you think that your Sts will know, e.g. 
I like Justin Timberlake. Do you like 
 ? Elicit what 
the missing pronoun is (him). Ask a student the question 
and elicit an answer from the Language box. Write the 
sentences from Language on the board, or show them 
on screen if using CPT.
• Give out the worksheets. Give Sts a few minutes to 
complete two or more sentences in each category. Stress 
that they don’t need to fill in all the categories if they can’t, 
but set a minimum number of sentences they have to fill 
in (e.g. five).
• Monitor and help with any vocabulary Sts need.
• Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to interview their 
partner. They must tell their partner about their 
preference, then ask them for their opinion. Demonstrate 
by getting a student to ask you a question from their 
worksheet and answer truthfully.
• Sts take turns to ask and answer questions. Monitor and 
help where necessary.
• Get feedback by asking a few pairs to report how their 
answers are the same or different, e.g. Pierre likes classical 
music, but I don’t like it.
 EXTRA SUPPORT  Elicit all the questions before Sts interview 
each other.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Encourage the student who is answering 
the question to give more information where possible, and 
the student who is asking to try to ask extra questions where 
appropriate.
PE4 Famous birthdays
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts ask and answer questions about the birthdays of famous 
people. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
When is Robert de Niro’s birthday? 
17th August
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Revise dates by writing 
some dates on the board, e.g. 03/01, 28/05, 12/06, 09/03. 
Elicit how to say them: the third of January, the twenty-
eighth of May, the twelfth of June, the ninth of March.
• Write BEYONCÉ on the board. Elicit the question When is 
Beyoncé’s birthday? Write 04/09 on the board and elicit the 
response the fourth of September.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Explain to Sts that they have to find out the birthdays of 
the people on their worksheet if the birthday is not given.
• Demonstrate the activity with two Sts. Have a student 
A look at the first photo and ask a B When is Will Smith’s 
birthday? who responds with the date on the worksheet, 
the twenty-fifth of September.
• Sts take turns asking and answering questions about the 
birthdays. When they have finished, they can compare 
worksheets to confirm their answers.
• Follow up by asking Sts if they found a celebrity birthday 
that is the same as theirs or if they know that their 
birthday is the same as that of another famous person.
8A Can you?
A group board game
Sts move around the board and answer questions using can / 
can’t. Copy one worksheet per group of three or four Sts. You 
also need a dice per group and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
+ I can park here.
– I can’t park here.
? Can I park here?
• Draw a football on the board and cross it out. Ask Sts what 
they think this means. Elicit ideas. If Sts make an incorrect 
guess, say Sorry, try again. When they guess the correct 
answer (You can’t play football here.), say Yes, that’s right. 
Now write 1 PLACE WHERE YOU CAN SPEAK ENGLISH. 
Elicit answers and write the correct ones on the board.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Remind Sts of the word 
order in sentences with can / can’t.
• Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice and enough counters. Each player puts 
their counter on the START square.
• Sts take turns rolling the dice and giving information with 
can / can’t. Monitor and help.
• Sts play the game until the time is up. If a group finishes 
very quickly, encourage them to have another go around 
the board.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  You can make the game longer by giving 
Sts a coin instead of a dice. Tell Sts that the coin will tell them 
how many spaces to move. They toss the coin: heads = move 
one space, tails = move two spaces.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 166@@
166
8B What do you like doing?
A pairwork activity
Sts guess their partner’s opinion of particular activities. Copy 
one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
I like swimming. I think you don’t like swimming.
You’re right. / You’re wrong. I love swimming.
• Write these activities on the board or draw simple 
pictures, e.g. PLAYING TENNIS, COOKING. Choose a good 
student and say, e.g. Mario, I think you like playing tennis. 
Am I right? and teach the answer You’re right. / You’re 
wrong. Continue guessing a few other Sts’ opinions about 
the activities.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the sentences 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Now ask Sts to guess your opinion of playing tennis and 
cooking using I think you love / like / don’t like…, and tell 
them if they are right or wrong.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Sts individually fill in the sentences under each picture, 
first writing if they love / like / don’t like the activity and 
then writing what they think for their partner.
• Sts take turns to read sentences and respond to their 
partner.
• Get feedback to find out who has the most correct guesses.
9A Guess what I’m doing!
A group activity
Sts mime phrases in the present continuous. Copy one sheet 
per group of three of four Sts and cut into cards.
LANGUAGE
Are you…?  
Yes, I am. / No, I’m not.
 
  
Yes, we are. / No, we aren’t.
You’re making coffee. 
That’s right.
• Tell Sts that they are going to act out some phrases in the 
present continuous for their classmates to guess. They 
have to do this without speaking.
• Demonstrate the activity. Put the cards face down on your 
desk and pick a card. Then tell Sts that you are going to 
act out the phrase for the class and they will have to guess 
what you are doing. For example, if you draw the card 
making coffee, you could pretend to be in a kitchen and to 
put some coffee in a cup, add water, and pretend to stir it. 
• Encourage the class to guess. Sts ask questions and you 
answer. Elicit the response You’re making coffee.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the sentences 
and question for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in groups of three or four and give them a set of 
cards face down. If you have a small class, you could do 
this as a whole class activity. Sts take turns to take a card 
and act out what’s on the card until someone in the group 
guesses. Then another student takes a card, etc. You could 
set a time limit for each person, e.g. two minutes.
 EXTRA IDEA  You could make this a competitive game with 
teams. One member of Team 1 takes a card and has for 
example two minutes to try to make his / her team guess 
what is on the card. If they guess within the time limit, Team 
1 gets a point. Then a member of Team 2 takes a card, etc.
 EXTRA IDEA  If you think your Sts will be uncomfortable 
miming the actions, you could change these to a drawing 
activity, with Sts drawing the actions instead of miming.
9B A board game
A pair or group board game
Sts move around the board practising the present simple 
and present continuous. Copy one worksheet per pair or 
per group of three or four Sts. You will also need a coin per 
group and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
What are you doing now? 
I’m driving.
Do you speak English at home? 
No, I don’t. We speak  
 
Spanish.
• Tell Sts that they are going to play a game to practise 
the present simple and present continuous. Write the 
sentences from Language on the board, or show them 
on screen if using CPT. Remind Sts of the difference 
between the present simple and present continuous.
• Put Sts in pairs or groups of three or four. Give each pair 
or group the worksheet. Tell Sts that they will need a coin 
to decide how many spaces to move. They toss the coin: 
heads = move one space, tails = move two spaces.
• Each player puts their counter on the START square. Then 
one student tosses the coin and moves his / her counter 
one or two squares. Sts have to answer the question on 
the square they land on or follow the directions to move 
back or forward one square. In that case, they answer 
the question on the new square. If Sts can answer the 
question, they stay on that square. If they can’t answer it, 
they go back to the previous square.
• Sts take turns to toss the coin, answer questions, and 
move around the board. The first person to reach FINISH is 
the winner.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Encourage the student who is answering 
the question to give extra information and the other Sts in 
the group to ask follow-up questions as appropriate.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 167@@
167
PE5 Would you like to…?
A pairwork activity
Sts ask their partner about things they would like to do in the 
future. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Would you like to travel 
Yes, I would. / No, I wouldn’t. 
around the world? 
Why (not)? 
Because I love travelling. /  
 
Because I don’t like flying.
• Tell Sts they are going to find out what some of their 
classmates would like to do in the future.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
and answers for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. Give 
Sts a minute to read the items and answer any questions 
about vocabulary.
• Demonstrate the activity by getting a student to choose 
a phrase and ask you the question (Would you like to…?). 
Answer with a short answer, Yes, I would or No, I wouldn’t, 
and then indicate that the student should ask Why? or 
Why not? Give a short, simple response that uses words 
and structures Sts have studied.
• Get Sts to ask and answer the questions. Monitor and help 
as necessary. Make sure Sts are asking follow-up questions 
with Why.
• Get feedback by asking a few Sts to report their findings. 
Mario would like to write a book. He wants to write about  
his family.
10A My hotel
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts ask each other about the facilities in two hotels. Copy 
one worksheet per pair and cut it into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Is there a restaurant in the hotel? 
Yes, there is.
Where is it? 
It’s on the first floor.
Are there any bars? 
No, there aren’t.
• Quickly revise the ordinal numbers 1 to 5 by writing the 
numbers on the board or saying them and eliciting the 
ordinal, e.g. one – first. Remind Sts that we use ordinal 
numbers to talk about the floors in a building (first floor, 
second floor, etc.) Remind them also of ground floor.
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm. Remind Sts that we 
usually use any in plural questions with Are there, and a / 
an with singular statements and questions with There is 
and Is there.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
• Focus on a and tell Sts to write one thing from the list of 
facilities on each floor of their hotel. Highlight that they 
have to make choices. They can’t use everything in the list, 
only six facilities. Give them a few minutes to do this.
• Focus on the instructions for b and c. Demonstrate 
the activity with a good student or get two Sts to 
demonstrate the first exchange.
• When Sts have finished, get them to compare their hotels.
10B Where were you yesterday?
A pairwork activity
Sts practise the prepositions on, at, in, and ask each other 
what they were doing at particular times in the past. Copy 
one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Were you at home at ten o’clock 
Yes, I was. /  
last night? 
No, I wasn’t. 
 
What about you?
• Revise prepositions of place, e.g., at work, on the train / bus, 
in the car, at the restaurant (see Student’s Book on p.62).
• Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
and answers for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Make sure they can’t see each other’s sheets. Ask Sts to 
complete the questions with the correct preposition. 
Monitor and correct individual mistakes as necessary.
Student A
1 in  2 in  3 on  4 at  5 in  6 at  7 in
Student B
1 in  2 in  3 on  4 in  5 at  6 in  7 in
• Focus on b. Explain to Sts that they are going ask their 
questions to find out where their partner was at certain 
times.
• Demonstrate the activity by getting a student B to ask the 
first question. (Were you in class last week?) Get student A 
to answer the question (Yes, I was. / No, I wasn’t.). Remind 
Sts to say where they were if they answer No and to give 
extra information if they say Yes. Encourage A to provide 
more information and to then ask What about you?
• Sts work in pairs taking turns to ask each other questions. 
Monitor and help where necessary. 
• Get feedback by asking Sts to tell you where they and 
their partner were at different times.
11A Find someone who…
A class mingle
Sts ask questions to find out who does the things on the 
worksheet. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Did you watch TV last night? 
Yes, I did.
Did you study English last weekend? 
No, I didn’t.
• Practise the questions Sts are going to ask. Write on 
the board 
 WATCH TV LAST NIGHT? 
 STUDY ENGLISH LAST WEEKEND? Tell 
Sts to ask you the questions. Then ask two or three Sts the 
questions. 
• Give each student a copy of the worksheet and focus 
on the Find someone who… column, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
• Focus on the last two questions on the worksheet. Tell Sts 
that for these they should write their own questions. Elicit 
possible questions from the class e.g. 
 
(‘name’) read a book last night. Give Sts time to write their 
own questions. Monitor and help if necessary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 168@@
168
• Ask a student the first question, Did you watch TV last 
night? If the student answers Yes, write his / her name on 
your worksheet. If the answer is No, say Thank you and ask 
another student, continuing until you get a Yes answer.
• Tell Sts to ask their questions in random order. Set a time 
limit. Monitor and help where necessary.
• When time is up, get feedback from the class.
11B Life in a day
A pairwork activity
Sts ask and answer questions to find three things they both 
did yesterday. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
Did you get up at eight o’clock  
this morning? 
Yes, I did.
Did you do exercise yesterday? 
No, I didn’t. 
 
What about you?
• Write these phrases on the board. 
 / GET A BUS TO ENGLISH CLASS TODAY?
 / GET UP LATE LAST SUNDAY?
• Elicit the missing words (Did you) and write the full 
question on the board.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
Tell Sts that have to ask their partner the questions on 
their sheet and tick or cross the answers. Focus on b and 
explain they will try to find things they have in common.
• Demonstrate the activity by getting a student to ask 
you the first question (Did you get up at eight o’clock this 
morning?). Answer the question truthfully.
• Tell Sts to complete the ‘Me’ column first, ticking or 
crossing the things they did or didn’t do. Then Sts take 
turns to ask each other the questions and note down the 
answers.
• Monitor and correct any mistakes.
• When Sts have finished get them, in pairs, to write 
sentences with We… for the things they had in common. 
Get feedback by asking pairs which things they had in 
common, e.g. We got a bus to English class today.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Tell Sts to get their partner to give more 
information, e.g. Did you go shopping with friends last week? 
Yes, I did. I went shopping with Marta and Luisa.
PE6 Where are you?
A pairwork or small group activity
Sts follow directions and use a map to find their way to a 
destination. Make one copy of the map and cut up one copy 
of the direction cards for each pair or group of three.
LANGUAGE
Go straight on.
Turn right. / Turn left.
It’s on the corner of King Street and West Road.
It’s on the right.
• Revise the language for directions by drawing a simple 
map on the board. Write the sentences from Language 
on the board, or show them on screen if using CPT. Model 
the sentences for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs or small groups of three and give them a 
map and a set of direction cards. Focus on the map and 
elicit from the class all the places marked with a symbol 
and write them on the board:
 = BANK 
 = RESTAURANT 
 = SCHOOL 
 = GYM 
 = PHONE SHOP 
 = TRAIN STATION 
 = BOOK SHOP 
 = FACTORY 
 = MUSEUM 
 = HOSPITAL 
 = CAR PARK 
 = SUPERMARKET 
 = HOTEL 
 = PARK 
 = CINEMA
• Demonstrate the activity with the class. Read one of the 
cards and ask Sts to tell you where they are. Read slowly, 
pausing to give Sts time to follow on the map. Make sure 
Sts understand the preposition outside, e.g. You are outside 
the bank. Draw a little diagram on the board to show this. 
If Sts don’t understand something, encourage them to 
ask questions, e.g. Do we turn left or right? Could you repeat 
that, please?
• In their pairs or groups, Sts take turns picking up cards and 
reading the directions aloud for the others to follow. Point 
out that the correct answer is in brackets in bold at the 
end of the directions.
• Monitor and remind Sts to ask questions if they don’t 
understand the directions.
• Get feedback by asking who got all the directions.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  If some pairs or groups finish early, get 
them to make up their own directions to any place on the 
map or to give real directions to a place near the school.
12A Past tense questions
A group board game
Sts move around the board practising the past simple. Copy 
one worksheet per pair or per group of three or four Sts. You 
also need a coin per group and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
Where did you buy your phone? I bought my phone in  
 
the Apple store.
What did you do last weekend? I went to a rock concert.
• Tell Sts that they are going to practise the past simple. 
Write the sentences from Language on the board, or 
show them on screen if using CPT. Model the questions 
and answers for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs or groups of three or four. Give each pair 
or group the worksheet and enough counters. Tell Sts 
that they will need a coin to decide how many spaces to 
move. They toss the coin: heads = move one space, tails = 
move two spaces. Focus on the questions, making sure Sts 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 169@@
169
understand them. Tell Sts that they should try to answer 
with full sentences to practise the past simple.
• Each player puts a counter on the START square. Then one 
student tosses the coin and moves his / her counter one or 
two squares. Sts have to answer the question on the square 
they land on or follow the directions to move back or 
forward one square. In that case, they answer the question 
on the new square. If they can’t answer a question, they go 
back to the previous square that they were on.
• Sts take turns answering questions, and moving along the 
board. The first person to reach the FINISH is the winner.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Encourage the student who is answering 
the question to give extra information and the other Sts in 
the group to ask follow-up questions as appropriate.
12B A holiday in Venice
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts revise the past simple with a story about a holiday. Copy 
one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
They went on holiday to Venice.
He was late.
• Put Sts into pairs and give out the worksheets. 
• Tell Sts that they have some pictures on their sheet that 
tell a story. They also have some sentences. Give them a 
minute to read the sentences.
• Now tell Sts to look at the sentences and number them to 
match the order of the pictures. Monitor and help.
• Check answers.
1 My girlfriend, Sarah, booked a romantic weekend in Venice 
for us.
2 She told me on Friday morning. She wanted to give me a 
surprise.
3 I had a meeting at work that afternoon. I told her: ‘Meet me 
at the airport’. 
4 My meeting finished late. I was very nervous.
5 I got a taxi. The taxi driver wanted to go fast, but there was 
a lot of traffic.
6 I arrived at the airport very late. The gate was closed.
7 Sarah sent me a message. ‘Where are you?’ 
8 I phoned Sarah. She was on the plane. I said ‘Go without 
me’.
9 Sarah went to Venice. She sent me photos of the lovely 
hotel.
 10 She had a great time without me. She bought a lot of new 
clothes - and a T-shirt for me.
• Focus on b. Sts work in pairs, covering the sentences and 
trying to retell the story from the pictures. Monitor and 
help if necessary.
• Get feedback and ask Sts if they liked the story and if they 
have any stories about having problems on holiday.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Sts could write their own stories as 
homework or, if you have the time, in class. They could make 
them up if they have no real anecdotes.
Revision questions
A revision activity
Sts ask each other questions to revise a range of tenses, 
vocabulary, and verb forms from the Student’s Book. 
This could be used as a final ‘pre-test’ revision activity. 
Alternatively, it could be used as an oral exam. Copy and cut 
up one set of cards per pair.
LANGUAGE
Grammar and vocabulary of the course
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Give each pair a set of cards that 
they place face down on the table. Sts take turns to pick 
up the top card and ask their partner about the topic on 
the card, using the prompts.
• Tell Sts to keep the card they have talked about.
• When Sts have finished, and if there is time, they can swap 
cards with their partner.
• Monitor and help where necessary.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE  Make one copy per pair. Give Sts a 
few moments to read through the cards. Then Sts A choose 
a number for sts B. B then talks about what’s on the card 
for that number. They take turns to choose a topic for their 
partner to talk about.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 170@@
170
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A COMMUNICATIVE Are you…?
You’re 
Katy Perry
Find… Ed Sheeran
 
Tom Hanks
You’re 
Ed Sheeran
Find… Denzel Washington
 
Katy Perry
You’re 
Beyoncé
Find… Kit Harington
 
Cameron Diaz
You’re 
Cameron Diaz
Find… Meryl Streep
 
Sergio Agüero
You’re 
Denzel Washington
Find… Shakira
 
Emilia Clarke
You’re 
Kit Harington
Find… Tom Hanks
 
Penelope Cruz
You’re 
Meryl Streep
Find… Russell Crowe
 
Beyoncé
You’re 
Jennifer Lopez
Find… Daniel Radcliffe
 
Nicole Kidman
You’re 
Penelope Cruz
Find… Jennifer Lopez
 
Russell Crowe
You’re 
Antonio Banderas
Find… Ben Affleck
 
Shakira
You’re 
Daniel Radcliffe
Find… Emilia Clarke
 
Margot Robbie
You’re 
Shakira
Find… Margot Robbie
 
Ed Sheeran
You’re 
Ben Affleck
Find… Nicole Kidman
 
Selena Gomez
You’re 
Russell Crowe
Find… Penelope Cruz
 
Kit Harington
You’re 
Tom Hanks
Find… Cameron Diaz
 
Antonio Banderas
You’re 
Nicole Kidman
Find… Katy Perry
 
Denzel Washington
You’re 
Margot Robbie
Find… Selena Gomez
 
Daniel Radcliffe
You’re 
Selena Gomez
Find… Sergio Agüero
 
Jennifer Lopez
You’re 
Sergio Agüero
Find… Beyoncé
 
Meryl Streep
You’re 
Emilia Clarke
Find… Antonio Banderas
 
Ben Affleck
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 171@@
171
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B COMMUNICATIVE Where are they from?
1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
3
6
9
12
Emma Watson
Pedro Almodóvar
Roger Federer
Salma Hayek
Orhan Pamuk
Anna Netrebko
Vanessa Paradis
Mohamed Salah
Gisele Bündchen
Donatella Versace
Dariusz Michalczewski
Ken Watanabe
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 172@@
172
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE1 COMMUNICATIVE Who are you?
First name: 
Christophe
Last name: 
Moreau
From: 
 Rennes, France
First name: 
Katya
Last name: 
Scheider
From: 
 Leipzig, Germany
First name: 
Vicenzo
Last name: 
Giordano
From: 
 Perugia, Italy
First name: 
Aleksandra
Last name: 
Kowalski
From: 
 Poznan, Poland
First name: 
Natalia
Last name: 
Carvalho
From: 
Recife, Brazil
First name: 
Andrey
Last name: 
Soloyov
From: 
 Grozny, Russia
First name: 
Miguel
Last name: 
Vazquez
From: 
 Bilbao, Spain
First name: 
Anthony
Last name: 
Clarke
From: 
 Croydon, England
First name: 
Mathilde
Last name: 
Kessler
From: 
 Lucerne, 
Switzerland
First name: 
Yusuf
Last name: 
Sadik
From: 
 Antalya, Turkey
First name: 
Stephen
Last name: 
Andersen
From: 
 Memphis, USA
First name: 
Nazir
Last name: 
Mostafa
From: 
 Luxor, Egypt
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 173@@
173
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2A COMMUNICATIVE Match the sentences
Student A
Student B
Answers to Student B
1 Excuse me. Are you James?
a We’re from Berlin.
2 Where are Alice and 
Umberto from?
b No, it’s in Japan.
3 Are you here on holiday?
c I’m from Egypt.
4 Is Nike English?
d Yes, she’s from Paris.
5 Are Pablo and Antonio Mexican?
e No, you aren’t.
Answers to Student A
6 Are we late?
f Yes, we are.
7 Where are you from?
g No, it isn’t. It’s American.
8 Is Caroline French?
h No, they aren’t. They’re Spanish.
9 Where are you from in Germany?
i No, I’m not. I’m Jason.
 10 Is Kyoto in China?
j They’re Swiss.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 174@@
174
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B COMMUNICATIVE Remember the sentences
1
Hi Lola. This is Paul.
a
No, she’s single.
2
How old is Karin?
b
My name’s Karl.
3
What’s your phone  
number?
c
It’s Thursday.
4
Nice to meet you.
d
On Monday and Friday.
5
Is she married?
e
She’s 38.
6
How are you?
f
Thanks.
7
See you tomorrow.
g
Nice to meet you.
8
What’s your name?
h
Hi!
9
Have a nice day!
i
I’m from Italy.
10
Where are you from?
j
Fine, thanks.
11
When’s your English  
class?
k
It’s 01632 960 057.
12
Hello!
l
Sorry.
13
My name is Maribel,  
not Maria.
m
Bye!
14
What day is it today?
n
Nice to meet you, too.
g
e
Fold here
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 175@@
175
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3A COMMUNICATIVE The same or different?
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 176@@
176
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3B COMMUNICATIVE What’s this? What are these?
Student A
Student B
What are these?
  
They’re notebooks.
What are these?
  
They’re notebooks.
1
1
5
5
9
9
2
2
6
6
10
10
3
3
7
7
11
11
4
4
8
8
12
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 177@@
177
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE2 COMMUNICATIVE Can I have an orange juice, please?
The Three Kings
Food
Sandwiches (cheese,  
  chicken, or tuna) 
£5.25
Burger 
£8.99
Cheeseburger 
£9.50
Salads (chicken or egg) 
£6.95
Drinks
Coke / Diet Coke 
£2.30
Orange juice 
£2.80
Mineral water 
£1.60
Coffee / Tea 
£2.75
Beer 
£3.45
A You are a bartender.
Welcome the customer and show 
them the menu.
Useful phrases:
Can I help you?
Anything else?
Here you are.
B You are a customer.
Look at the menu and choose 
something to eat and drink.
Useful phrases:
Can I have…?
How much is it?
Here you are.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 178@@
178
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
=
=
 
Look at Angela’s family tree. Answer B’s questions. Relate all the people to Angela.
Who’s Beth?
  
She’s Angela’s sister.
 b
  
Look at Joe’s family tree. Ask B about the people in the list. Complete Joe’s family tree.
Will Alfred Sally Kate Mike Anna
Who’s Will?
  
He’s Joe’s brother.
 a
=
Joe
Will
=
John
4A COMMUNICATIVE Family tree
Student A
=
=
Mary
Lucy
Ruth
Angela
Tom
Adam
Ben
Dan
Amy
Beth
Joe’s  
Family Tree
Angela’s 
Family Tree
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 179@@
179
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
=
=
=
=
=
=
 
Look at Angela’s family tree. Ask A about the people in the list. Complete Angela’s family tree.
Beth Lucy Adam Dan Amy Tom
Who’s Beth?
  
She’s Angela’s sister.
 b
Joe
Will
Kate
Mike
Anna
John
Sally
4A COMMUNICATIVE Family tree
Mary
Ruth
Angela
Alfred
Ben
Beth
Joe’s  
Family Tree
Angela’s 
Family Tree
Student B
  
Look at Joe’s family tree. Answer A’s questions. Relate all the people to Joe.
Who’s Will?
  
He’s Joe’s brother.
 a
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 180@@
180
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4B COMMUNICATIVE What is it?
1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
3
6
9
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 181@@
181
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5A COMMUNICATIVE Talk about food
 
You 
Your friend
   1  I have 
 for breakfast. 
T/F 
   2  I don’t drink
. 
T/F 
   3  I have a 
 for lunch. 
T/F 
   4  I don’t like 
. 
T/F 
   5  My favourite food is 
 
. 
T/F 
   6  I don’t have 
 in tea. 
T/F 
   7  I eat a lot of 
 
. 
T/F 
   8  I like 
 
. 
T/F 
   9  I don’t have 
 on my bread. 
T/F 
  10  I have 
 for breakfast at the weekend. 
T/F 
  11  I drink a lot of 
 every day. 
T/F 
  12  I don’t eat
 
 in the evening. 
T/F 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 182@@
182
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5B COMMUNICATIVE Do you…?
Do 
you…?
want a  
new phone
need new 
clothes
listen to 
music in 
your car
read the 
news on 
your phone
work 
at the 
weekend
live near the 
city centre
watch 
series on 
Netflix
have a 
tablet
drink coffee 
in the 
morning
speak 
three 
languages
eat 
Chinese 
food
study on 
Saturday 
afternoons
watch 
TV in the 
morning
want a new 
house / flat
have 
breakfast 
with your 
family
like oranges
have a 
blue car
speak 
Portuguese
listen to 
rock music
eat fruit 
every day
drink tea in 
the evening
like fish
live in a 
small flat
go to English 
class on 
Tuesdays
START
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 183@@
183
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE3 COMMUNICATIVE Time bingo
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
12
6
1
11
5
7
2
10
4
8
3
9
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 184@@
184
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6A COMMUNICATIVE What do they do? Where do they work?
Student A
Student B
What / do?
Kate
George
Jim
Liz
Julia
Maria
Where / work?
Kate
George
Jim
Liz
Julia
Maria
Where / work?
Kate
George
Jim
Liz
Julia
Maria
What / do?
Kate
George
Jim
Liz
Julia
Maria
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 185@@
185
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6B COMMUNICATIVE What do you usually do?
Student A
  
Complete the sentences with always, usually, sometimes, or never + verb.  
Make the sentences true for you.
1 I 
 
 cereal for breakfast.
2 I 
 
 TV in the evening.
3 I 
 
 a bath in the evening.
4 I 
 
 shopping on Saturday morning.
5 I 
 
 my homework before class.
6 I 
 
 to the radio in the car.
7 I 
 
 lunch in a restaurant.
8 I 
 
 coffee after dinner.
 
Now tell your partner and then ask What about you?
I sometimes have cerial for breakfast. What about you? 
I never have cerial.
 a
 b
  
Complete the sentences with always, usually, sometimes, or never + verb.  
Make the sentences true for you.
1 I 
 
 up late at the weekend.
2 I 
 
 to bed at about eleven o’clock.
3 I 
 
 a shower in the morning.
4 I 
 
 housework in the evening.
5 I 
 
 to the gym after school / work.
6 I 
 
 the newspaper on Sunday.
7 I 
 
 a sandwich for lunch.
8 I 
 
 breakfast in the morning.
 
Now tell your partner and then ask What about you?
I always get up late at the weekend. What about you? 
I usually get up late.
 a
 b
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 186@@
186
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7A COMMUNICATIVE Free time questionnaire
Student A
  
Put the words in order to complete the questions.
1 do usually on holiday go you
 
Where do you usually go on holiday ?
2 shops favourite your are
 
What 
 ?
3 play your phone games on do you
 
What 
 ?
4 fast food at eat you weekend the
 
Do 
 ?
5 do meet you usually the at weekend
 
Who 
 ?
6 have breakfast a big weekend you at the
 
Do 
 ?
7 programmes TV you do in the watch evening
 
What 
 ?
8 usually you do Saturday do on morning
 
What 
 ?
 
Now ask B your questions. Then answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
  
Put the words in order to complete the questions.
1 read weekend the at you
 
Do you read at the weekend ?
2 ’s restaurant favourite your
 
What 
 ?
3 you do with weekend at friends the your
 
What 
 ?
4 you usually are at home on night Sunday 
 
Are 
 ?
5 do usually holidays have you
 
When 
 ?
6 do after dinner usually you do
 
What 
 ?
7 you cinema go the you the weekend at
 
Do 
 ?
8 in evening you relax do the
 
How 
 ?
 
Now answer A’s questions. Then ask A your questions.
 a
 b
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 187@@
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7B COMMUNICATIVE What do you think of…?
I like 
 (male singer).  
Do you like 
 ?
I don’t like 
 (female singer). 
Do you like 
 ?
I like 
 (a group).  
Do you like 
 ?
I listen to 
 (a type of music). 
Do you like 
 ? 
I don’t like 
 (a sport). 
Do you like 
 ?
I often watch 
 (a sport)  
on TV. Do you watch 
 ?
I play 
 (a sport).  
Do you play 
 ?
I really like 
 (sportswoman). 
Do you like 
 ?
Sport
Music
I love 
 s (fruit plural).  
Do you like 
 ?
I don’t like 
 (food).  
Do you like 
 ?
I sometimes eat 
  
(a nationality) food.  
Do you like 
 ?
My favourite drink is 
  
(a drink). Do you drink 
 ?
Food
  
Work with a partner. Complete two sentences (or more) in each category.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 188@@
188
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE4 COMMUNICATIVE Famous birthdays
Student A
Student B
Will Smith 
Will Smith 25/09
Eddie Redmayne 
Eddie Redmayne 06/01
Kanye West 
Kanye West 08/06
Jennifer Lawrence 15/08
Jennifer Lawrence 
Adele 05/05
Adele 
Benedict Cumberbatch 19/07
Benedict Cumberbatch 
Rihanna 
Rihanna 20/02
Leonardo DiCaprio 
Leonardo DiCaprio 11/11
Katy Perry 
Katy Perry 25/10
Jackie Chan 07/04
Jackie Chan 
Taylor Swift 13/12
Taylor Swift 
Lupita Nyong’o 01/03
Lupita Nyong’o 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 189@@
189
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8A COMMUNICATIVE Can you?
Say 2 sports 
you can  
play inside.
Say 1 dish  
you can cook 
with eggs.
Say 2 things 
you can  
buy at a 
supermarket.
Say 3 places 
where you  
can pay with  
a credit card.
Say 2 things 
you can 
have at your 
favourite 
restaurant.
Say 1 place 
where you 
can’t park.
Say 2 things 
you can do  
at the beach.
Say 2 places 
where you 
can’t go in if 
you’re late.
Say 3 things 
you can do 
with your 
phone.
2 places  
you can stay  
when you’re 
on holiday.
Say 2 things 
you can’t do  
in your 
country until 
you’re 18.
What can’t  
you do here?
What does  
the sign say?
In this place 
you can’t…
What can  
you do here?
What does  
the sign say?
What does  
the sign say?
START
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 190@@
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B COMMUNICATIVE What do you like doing?
Student A
 I love / I like / I don’t like + -ing
Student B
 I love / I like / I don’t like + -ing
I 
I think you 
I 
 football on TV.
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
 computer games.
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I 
I think you 
I think you 
 clothes.
I think you 
1
1
4
4
2
2
5
5
3
3
6
6
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 191@@
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9A COMMUNICATIVE Guess what I’m doing!
making 
coffee
listening  
to music
eating  
pasta
cooking an 
omelette
swimming  
in the sea
paying by 
credit card
painting a 
room
parking  
a car
playing a 
video game
taking a 
photo
doing 
housework
waiting for  
a bus
walking  
in the 
mountains
doing yoga
reading a 
book
watching 
football
buying  
a coat
packing a 
suitcase
getting  
a taxi
having a 
shower
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 192@@
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9B COMMUNICATIVE A board game
START
Why are  
you studying 
English?
When do you 
usually do 
your English 
homework?
What colour 
pen are you 
writing with?
What time  
do you start  
work / school?
Go back  
one space.
What do you 
usually have in 
your bag?
Who’s sitting 
on your right?
What do you 
do in your 
free time?
What’s the 
teacher 
doing now?
Move  
forward  
one space.
Think of  
one person  
in your family. 
What’s he / she 
doing now?
What book are 
you reading at 
the moment?
Do you know 
anybody who is 
at university?  
What are they 
studying?
When do you 
usually go  
on holiday?
Go back  
one space.
How do  
you relax on 
holiday?
What do you 
usually do after 
work/school?
What’s the 
person on 
your left 
doing now?
Move  
forward  
one space.
What 
language are 
you speaking 
now?
What language 
do you usually 
speak at home?
How do you 
usually go  
to class?
What are you 
wearing?
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 193@@
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
Student A
Student B
PE5 COMMUNICATIVE Would you like to…?
  
Ask B questions with Would you like to…? 
Then ask Why or Why not?
Would you like to travel around the world?
Why? (Why not?)
 
Answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
  
Answer A’s questions.
 
Ask A questions with Would you like to…? 
Then ask Why or Why not?
Would you like to be a journalist?
Why? (Why not?)
 a
 b
travel around the world
be a journalist
play in a rock band
meet a famous person
write a book
learn Chinese
be in a film
play football for  
Manchester United
work in a restaurant
work for a computer 
company
have a big, fast car
live in a different country
go to painting classes
travel around the world
learn to play a  
musical instrument
have cooking lessons
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 194@@
194
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10A COMMUNICATIVE My hotel
Student A
Student B
  
Choose six things from the list below and write one in the table for each floor of your hotel.
bars gift shop gym reception restaurant spa swimming pool toilets
 
Ask B about his / her hotel: Is there a…? Where is it? Are there any…? Where are they? Write the 
answers in the chart.
  
Answer B’s questions about your hotel. Yes, there is / are. It’s / They’re on the … floor.
 a
 b
 c
  
Choose six things from the list below and write one on each floor of your hotel.
bars gift shop gym reception restaurant spa swimming pool toilets
 
Answer A’s questions about your hotel. Yes, there is / are. It’s / They’re on the … floor.
  
Ask A about his / her hotel: Is there a…? Where is it? Are there any…? Where are they? Write the 
answers in the chart.
 a
 b
 c
Your hotel
Your partner’s hotel
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
G
G
T H E Queen H O T E L
T H E Palace H O T E L
Your hotel
Your partner’s hotel
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
G
G
T H E Palace H O T E L
T H E Queen H O T E L
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 195@@
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10B COMMUNICATIVE Where were you yesterday?
Student A
  
Complete the questions with in, at, or on.
1 Were you 
 the kitchen at eight o’clock yesterday morning?
2 Were you 
 bed yesterday at nine o’clock in the evening?
3 Were you 
 a bus at three o’clock yesterday afternoon?
4 Were you 
 work or school / university yesterday morning?
5 Were you 
 the street at ten o’clock last Friday evening?
6 Were you 
 a friend’s house at the weekend?
7 Were you 
 a café at ten o’clock yesterday morning?
 
Now ask B the questions. Then answer B’s questions. If you say No, I wasn’t, say where you were.  
If you say Yes, I was give more information if you can. Remember to ask What about you?
 a
 b
  
Complete the questions with in, at, or on.
1 Were you 
 class last week? 
2 Were you 
 your town or city at six o’clock yesterday evening?
3 Were you 
 a train at eleven o’clock yesterday morning?
4 Were you 
 a shopping centre last Saturday?
5 Were you 
 home alone last night?
6 Were you 
 bed at nine o’clock yesterday morning?
7 Were you 
 a car at four o’clock yesterday afternoon?
 
Answer A’s questions. If you say No, I wasn’t, say where you were. If you say Yes, I was give more 
information if you can. Remember to ask And what about you? Then ask A your questions.
 a
 b
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 196@@
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
Find someone who... 
Student’s name
1 watched TV last night. 
2 studied English last weekend. 
3 played football yesterday. 
4 cooked dinner yesterday. 
5 walked to class today. 
6 listened to the radio yesterday. 
7 waited for a bus yesterday. 
8 cleaned his / her room last weekend. 
9 talked to their mother this morning. 
 
10 travelled by plane on their last holiday. 
 
11 
 last night. 
 
12 
 yesterday. 
11A COMMUNICATIVE Find someone who…
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 197@@
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
11B COMMUNICATIVE Life in a day
Student A
Student B
  
Ask Student B the questions.
 
 
Me 
My partner
1 / get up at eight o’clock this morning? 
 
2 / have a very long shower this morning? 
 
3 / get a bus to English class today? 
 
4 / do English homework ten minutes before the class? 
 
5 / go to bed very early last night? 
 
6 / get a train yesterday? 
 
7 / have two coffees (or more) yesterday morning? 
 
8 / have lunch at home yesterday? 
 
9 / have breakfast in bed last weekend? 
 
 
10 / go shopping with friends last weekend? 
 
 
How many things did the two of you (you and your partner) do?
 a
 b
  
Ask Student A the questions.
 
 
Me 
My partner
1 / do exercise yesterday? 
 
2 / have cereal for breakfast today? 
 
3 / do your English homework with a friend? 
 
4 / get a bus to work / school yesterday? 
 
5 / have dinner with your family last night? 
 
6 / have a coffee after dinner last night? 
 
7 / get home very late yesterday? 
 
8 / have lunch with a friend on Saturday? 
 
9 / get up late last Sunday? 
 
 
10 / go shopping for food last weekend? 
 
 
How many things did the two of you (you and your partner) do?
 a
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 198@@
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE6 COMMUNICATIVE Where are you?
1 
You are outside the restaurant in Oxford Street. 
Turn left and then turn right into West Road. 
Go straight on. Then left into Park Street. It’s 
the building on the left, opposite the park.  
(the hospital)
5 
You are outside the factory in Park Street. Turn 
left then turn left again into West Road. Go 
straight on. Turn right into King Street. Go 
straight on. It’s on the corner of King Street 
and East Road. (the phone shop)
2 
You are outside the phone shop in East Road. 
Turn left and go straight on. Turn left into Park 
Street. It’s the building on the left next to the 
car park. (the supermarket)
6 
You are outside the museum in West Road. 
Turn left and then turn left again into Park 
Street. Go straight on. Turn right into East 
Road. It’s on the left. (the cinema)
3 
You are outside the bookshop in Oxford 
Street. Turn right and go straight on. Turn right 
into West Road. Go straight on. Turn right into 
London Road. It’s on the right. (the hotel)
7 
You are outside the cinema in East Road. Turn 
right and go straight on in East Road. Turn left 
into King Street. Go straight on. It’s on the left 
after the gym. (the school)
4 
You are outside the hotel. Turn left and go 
straight on. Turn left into East Road. Go 
straight on and turn right into Oxford Street. 
It’s on your left. (the train station)
8 
You are at the supermarket. Turn right and go 
straight on in Park Street. Turn right into West 
Road, go straight on, and then turn left into 
Oxford Street. It’s on the left opposite the 
restaurant. (the bookshop)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 199@@
199
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
What time did you 
get up today?
Where did 
you buy your 
phone?
START
Go back  
one space.
12A COMMUNICATIVE Past tense questions
Did you get a bus 
or a train today? 
Where to?
Where did  
you have dinner 
last night?
What did you  
have for breakfast 
this morning?
Move  
forward  
one space.
Did you watch  
TV last night? 
What did you 
watch?
What time did you 
leave the house 
this morning?
Who did you sit 
next to in the 
last class?
Go back  
one space.
Did you travel  
last month? 
Where did you go?
Who did you 
phone or send 
messages to 
yesterday?
Where did you 
go last night / at 
the weekend?
Move  
forward  
one space.
Did you use 
a computer 
yesterday?  
What for?
When did you 
do your English 
homework?
Where did you  
go on holiday 
last summer?
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 200@@
200
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
12B COMMUNICATIVE A holiday in Venice
  
Look at the picture story. Then number the sentences in the right order.
 a
 
In pairs, cover the sentences. Look at the pictures and tell the story.
 b
1
6
2
7
3
8
4
9
5
10
  She had a great time without 
me. She bought a lot of new 
clothes – and a T-shirt for me.
  My girlfriend, Sarah, booked a romantic 
weekend in Venice for us.
1
  She told me on Friday morning. 
She wanted to give me a surprise.
  I got a taxi. The taxi driver wanted to 
go fast, but there was a lot of traffic.
  I arrived at the airport very late. 
The gate was closed.
  Sarah went to Venice. 
She sent me photos 
of the lovely hotel.
  I had a meeting at work 
that afternoon. I told her: 
‘Meet me at the airport’.
  I phoned Sarah. She was on the 
plane. I said, ‘Go without me’.
  My meeting finished late. 
I was very nervous.
  Sarah sent me a message. 
‘Where are you?’
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 201@@
201
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
COMMUNICATIVE Revision questions
1 Personal information
2 Talk about a friend
What’s your surname?
How do you spell it?
What’s your email address?
What’s your mobile number?
What’s your address?
What’s your postcode?
What’s his / her name?
What does he / she do?
Where does he / she live?
How old is he /she?
Is he / she married?
Does he / she have children?
3 Food and drink
4 What do you do in your free time?
What’s your favourite food and drink?
Is there any food or drink you don’t like?
Which do you prefer – breakfast, lunch,  
or dinner? Why?
What do you usually have for breakfast?
What do you drink when you go out at night?
Do you cook? Do you like it?
How do you relax?
What do you do when you aren’t at work /  
in class?
What do you like doing with your friends?
What sport or exercise do you do?
When do you have free time?
What do you usually do on a Saturday night?
What do you like doing in your summer holiday?
5 Your typical day (Monday to Friday)
6 What can / can’t you do?
What time do you usually get up?  
How do you go to work or school?
Where do you usually have lunch?
What time do you get home in the evening?
What do you do after dinner?
What time do you go to bed?
Say three things you can do in English.
Say three things you can see in this class.
Say three things you can do with a smartphone.
Say two things you can’t do in English class.
Say two things you can’t do on a plane.
7 Talking about the past
8 Times and dates
Were you at home last night?
Were you in bed at 8.00 this morning? 
Did you go out last Saturday night?
Where did you have lunch yesterday?
Where were you at 4.00 yesterday afternoon?
When did you do your English homework?
Where did you go on your last holiday?
What time is it now?
What time does this class finish?
What days do you have English class?
When’s your birthday?
What’s your favourite day of the week?
When does this course finish?
9 Where do you live?
10 Talking about the future
Do you live near here?
Do you live in a house or a flat?
Is it big or small?
Do you like it? Why (not)?
How many bedrooms are there?
Describe your bedroom.
What are you doing after class today?
Are you meeting a friend after class today? 
Where are you having dinner tonight? 
Are you going to bed early tonight?
What are you doing this weekend?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 202@@
202
1B Countries
  
A pairwork activity
Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Country names; numbers 1 to 10
What’s country number 1?
• Revise the country names from the Vocabulary Bank 
Countries and nationalities on p.117. Write the question 
from Language on the board, or show it on screen if 
using CPT. Model it for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Put Sts in pairs and give each pair a worksheet. Set a time 
limit for Sts to label the map with the countries.
• Check answers by getting Sts to say the numbers and the 
countries, e.g. Number three is Switzerland. Follow up by 
asking Sts to find the general location of their country on 
the map if it is not one of the countries on the list.
1 England  2 Germany  3 Switzerland  4 Poland   
5 Russia  6 Spain  7 France  8 Italy  9 Egypt  10 Turkey
• For Activation, get Sts to test themselves or a partner by 
covering the names of the countries, looking at the map, 
and saying the countries.
PE1 Classroom language
  
 A pairwork activity
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Classroom language
• Quickly revise the language for teachers and Sts in 
Vocabulary Bank Classroom language on p.118.  
Then ask Sts to close their books.
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell them 
that they have to fill in the missing word in the speech 
bubbles. Explain that the lines indicate the number of 
letters in each word.
• Demonstrate the activity. Point out that the first one has 
been done for them. Elicit that the teacher wants the Sts 
to sit down and that the missing word is down.
• Set a time limit for Sts to do the activity in pairs.
• Check answers by asking Sts to read the full sentences 
and questions and to spell the missing word.
2 Open  3 page  4 Stand  5 Look  6 Close  7 spell   
8 repeat  9 Sorry  10 Excuse  11 understand  12 know
1A Numbers 0–10 and days
  
A word search puzzle
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words for numbers 0 to 10 and days of the week
• Give out the worksheets and tell Sts they must look for the 
number words from zero to ten and the days of the week. 
The words are either horizontal or vertical. Highlight the 
two examples.
• Focus on b and tell Sts to write the numbers and the days 
in the charts.
• Check answers.
Numbers: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten
Days of the week: Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, 
Saturday, Sunday
• For Activation, put Sts in pairs, A and B. Focus on the 
examples. Tell Sts A to start by saying a number 0–10 or a 
day. Sts B then say the next number or day. Then get them 
to swap roles.
T
H
R
E
E
S
Y
T
S
I
X
T
R
H
J
L
E
A
U
U
G
F
F
W
F
Y
U
E
N
T
Y
E
D
N
R
0
O
N
E
R
F
U
H
S
P
N
I
S
U
H
T
H
U
R
S
D
A
Y
D
T
R
N
V
H
B
D
P
A
T
M
A
E
T
E
N
X
T
A
A
Y
C
O
Y
I
S
N
I
N
E
Y
E
Y
H
N
U
G
W
E
D
N
E
S
D
A
Y
D
F
H
B
E
X
Z
E
R
O
V
V
A
I
T
T
I
N
A
S
E
V
E
N
Y
V
L
S
U
N
D
A
Y
J
S
P
Q
E
F
Vocabulary activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 203@@
203
2B Numbers dictation
  
 A pairwork speaking and listening 
activity
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Numbers 11 to 100
• Revise numbers from 11 to 100 by writing a few numbers 
on the board, e.g. 17, 34, 29, 42, 87, and asking individual 
Sts to say the numbers. Then reverse the activity by asking 
Sts to call out numbers. As they do this, write the numbers 
in numerical form on the board.
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Focus on Your numbers in the chart and point out to Sts 
that the first one has been done for them. Give Sts a few 
minutes to write the numbers on their half of the sheet in 
words. Monitor and correct any mistakes.
• Now focus on Activation. Tell Sts they are going to take 
turns dictating their numbers to their partners. They must 
write the numbers they hear in numerals, not in words. 
Demonstrate by getting a student A to read the second 
number (twenty-three). Then tell Sts B to write the number 
on their worksheet (23).
• Sts work in pairs to dictate numbers and write their 
partner’s numbers. When they have finished, they should 
compare their sheets to make sure they wrote the correct 
numbers and have spelled them correctly. Monitor while 
Sts are doing this, make notes of any problems, and 
review these later with the whole class.
3A Things
  
A pairwork information gap activity
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Words for things in the classroom and small things
What’s number 1? 
It’s a window.
Is number 2 a board? 
Yes, it is. / No, it isn’t.
How do you spell it?
• Revise a few of the words for things in the classroom 
(Vocabulary Bank The Classroom p.118) and small things 
(Vocabulary Bank Small things p.119) by walking around 
and pointing at or holding up a variety of objects and 
asking What’s this?
• Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, so they can’t 
see each other’s worksheets. Give out the worksheets. 
• Give Sts a minute to look at the photo and read the list of 
words.
• Give Sts a few minutes individually to write the missing 
words.
• Tell Sts that they are now going to check their answers 
with their partner. Demonstrate the activity with a good 
student. Take the part of student A and ask a student B  
What’s number 2? to get the answer It’s a board. Get a 
student B to ask you What’s number 3? And answer  
2A Nationalities and languages
  
A gapfill and matching activity
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words for countries, nationalities and languages
• Quickly revise countries and nationalities in Vocabulary 
Bank Countries and nationalities on p.117. Then ask Sts 
to close their books.
• Give out the worksheets. Focus on a and point out that 
the first one (Brazilian) has been done for them. 
• Get Sts to work individually or in pairs to complete the 
chart. If Sts work individually, get them to check their 
answers in pairs. Remind Sts to use capital letters for the 
first letter and lower case for the rest. Monitor and help 
where necessary. Check answers.
China – Chinese  The USA – American  Egypt – Egyptian   
Spain – Spanish  Turkey – Turkish  Switzerland – Swiss   
Russia – Russian  Japan – Japanese  Poland – Polish   
Italy – Italian  Germany – German  France – French   
Mexico – Mexican
• Now focus on b and the pictures. Get Sts, in pairs, to say 
the nationalities, e.g. It’s Japanese. Check answers.
2 Spanish (castanets)  3 Swiss (penknife)  4 Turkish (flag)   
5 Chinese (vase)  6 French (Camembert cheese)   
7 Polish (flag)  8 German (car)  9 Mexican (cactus)   
10 Egyptian (pyramid)  11 American (baseball bat)   
12 Italian (scooter)  13 Russian (dolls)  14 Brazilian (dancers)
• Now focus on c. Get Sts to complete the sentences 
individually, then check with their partner. 
• Check answers, encouraging Sts to use full sentences 
when they answer the questions.
1 Spanish  2 Arabic  3 English  4 French, German, Italian
• Finally, focus on Activation. Get Sts to test themselves or 
a partner by covering the chart, looking at the pictures, 
and saying the country and nationality.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 204@@
204
4B  Colours and common 
adjectives
  
A hidden word chain and puzzle
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words for colours and opposite adjectives
• Give out the worksheets and focus on a. Tell Sts to find 
and circle the colour words in the word chain. Point out 
that the first one (black) has been done for them.
blue  white  grey  green  red  brown  pink  orange   
yellow
• Now focus on b. Tell Sts to match the colours in a to 
the objects in the pictures. Note that it is not necessary 
to teach the words for the objects in order for Sts to 
complete the exercise.
• Sts work individually, writing the correct colours under 
each object. When they have finished, ask Sts to compare 
their answers with a partner. Then check answers. Get Sts 
to say, e.g. It’s black, etc.
2 orange  3 pink  4 red  5 brown  6 green  7 grey   
8 yellow  9 white  10 blue
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Sts will probably not know all of the 
English words for the things in the pictures. Teach the words 
for the things in the pictures and write them on the board:  
shoes, carrots, a flamingo, strawberries, chocolate, leaves,  
an elephant, a banana, a snowman, the sky. Then get Sts to say 
sentences, e.g. The bird is black, The sky is blue, etc.
• Now focus on c. Ask Sts to look at the first word difficult 
and ask What’s the opposite of difficult? Point out the 
answer easy.
• Sts work individually completing the puzzle with the 
opposites of the words on the left.
• Check answers by getting Sts to tell you the opposite of 
each adjective.
2 short  3 cheap  4 ugly  5 slow  6 new  7 small   
8 bad  9 fast  10 dirty
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  Get Sts to say full sentences, e.g. The 
opposite of difficult is easy.
• Finally, focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs, A and B.  
Tell Sts A to say an adjective for Sts B to say the opposite. 
Then get them to swap roles.
It’s a door. Then say Is number 4 a coat? If B says, yes then 
say How do you spell it?
• Write the questions and answers from Language on the 
board or show them on screen if you are using CPT. Model 
the questions for Sts to listen and copy the rhythm.
• Sts work in pairs asking and answering questions about 
the objects. Monitor and check that they are using the 
article a / an. Refer them to the conversation on the board 
if necessary. 
• When Sts have finished, they should compare their 
worksheets to make sure they have the same words and 
have spelled them correctly.
4A People and family
  
 A sentence completion activity
Copy one worksheet per student or pair.
LANGUAGE
Words for people and family
• Give out the worksheets and focus on a. Tell Sts, 
individually or in pairs, to look at the pictures and 
complete the sentences. If Sts work individually, ask them 
to compare their answers with a partner when they finish.
• Check answers.
2 woman  3 girl  4 men  5 boy  6 man  7 children   
8 women
• Now focus on b. Tell Sts, individually or in pairs, to look at 
the picture and complete the sentences.
• Check answers, encouraging Sts to use full sentences.
2 husband  3 mother  4 father  5 daughter  6 son   
7 sister  8 brother  9 girlfriend  10 boyfriend   
11 grandfather  12 grandmother  13 parents   
14 grandparents
• Focus on Activation and the example. Put Sts in pairs and 
get them to test each other by asking questions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 205@@
205
5A Food and drink
  
Naming food from photos
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words for food and drink
• Give each student a worksheet and get them to look at 
the photos. Tell them to write the name of the food or 
drink for each photo. Point out that the first one (meat) 
has been done for them. Explain that the number of lines 
indicates the number of letters in the missing word.
• Check answers.
2 fish  3 eggs  4 butter  5 cheese  6 potatoes   
7 rice  8 bread  9 cereal  10 sandwich  11 pasta   
12 vegetables  13 fruit  14 sugar  15 chocolate   
16 tea  17 milk  18 water  19 (orange) juice   
20 coffee  21 yogurt  22 salad  23 wine  24 beer
• Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to 
cover the words, point to a photo, and test their partner.
5B Common verb phrases 1
  
A crossword puzzle and gapfill activity
Copy one worksheet per student or pair.
LANGUAGE
Common verb phrases
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell Sts that 
they have to complete the crossword with the verbs that 
complete the sentences. Point out that the first one (have) 
has been done for them. Explain the terms down and 
across by drawing arrows on the board.
• You can make this a race by setting a time limit, e.g. ten 
minutes.
• Check answers by getting Sts to read out the completed 
sentences.
ACROSS
2 live  4 need  7 work  8 listen  10 speak  11 eat
DOWN
2 like  3 go  5 drink  6 watch  7 want  9 read   
10 study
• Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the crossword 
and say the sentences with the missing verbs. Monitor 
and help.
6A Jobs and places of work
  
A pairwork activity
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words for jobs and places of work
• Give out the worksheets and focus on the photo and the 
sentences about Linda. Tell Sts to complete the sentences 
on the worksheet. They have to write what each person 
does and where he / she works.
• Give Sts time to complete the missing information and 
get them to compare answers with a partner.
• Check answers.
2 journalist / office  3 teacher / school   
4 policewoman / street  5 nurse / hospital   
6 waiter / restaurant  7 taxi driver / street   
8 doctor / hospital  9 receptionist / hotel   
10 factory worker / factory
• Now focus on Activation and the example. Sts cover 
the sentences and look only at the photos. They try to 
remember the people’s jobs and where they work. 
• You could elicit the information by saying the number of 
the photo and getting Sts to tell you the person’s job and 
where they work.
6B What’s the word?
  
A vocabulary game
Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Words used to describe daily activities
• Quickly revise a few common daily activities by asking Sts 
questions, e.g. What do you usually do in the morning? What 
about the afternoon? And in the evening? Elicit answers 
from several Sts. They can refer to the Vocabulary Bank A 
typical day on p.125 if necessary.
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell Sts they 
have to complete the words on the right with the missing 
letters. Explain that the number of lines indicates the 
number of letters in the missing word. Point out that the 
first one (home) has been done for them.
• Check answers by getting Sts to read out the completed 
sentences.
2 work  3 sandwich  4 shopping  5 housework   
6 shower  7 dinner  8 have  9 bath  10 gym  11 finish   
12 get  13 bed  14 coffee  15 breakfast  16 watch   
17 school  18 make
• Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the WORD column 
and look at the sentences. Sts work in pairs and try to say 
the sentences including the missing words.
 EXTRA IDEA  You could make the activity a race by setting a 
time limit, e.g. ten minutes. The first pair to write all the words 
correctly wins.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 206@@
206
7A  Common verb phrases 2:  
free time
  
A gapfill activity
Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Common verbs phrases: free time
• Quickly revise the verb phrases related to free time by 
asking a few Sts What do you usually do in your free time? 
Elicit answers from several Sts. They can refer to the 
Vocabulary Bank Common verb phrases 2 Part 1 on 
p.126 if necessary
• Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell Sts they 
have to complete the VERB column on the right with the 
correct verbs from the list.
• Focus on the example and elicit that the verb that goes 
with in the mountains is walk.
• Sts work in pairs to complete the gaps. Monitor and help 
Sts where necessary.
• Check answers by getting Sts to read out the completed 
sentences.
2 meet  3 play  4 go out  5 play  6 do  7 go  8 play   
9 swim  10 relax  11 travel  12 stay
• Now focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the VERB 
column and look at the sentences. Sts, in pairs, try to say 
the sentences including the missing verbs.
8B Activities
  
A labelling activity
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Activities
• Give out the sheets. Tell Sts to look at the pictures. They 
are the same pictures as in Vocabulary Bank Activities 
on p.128. 
• Tell Sts to write the verb that completes the verb phrases 
under each one. The first letter(s) is given. Sts can work 
individually or in pairs and you could make it a race by 
setting a time limit, e.g. four minutes. Monitor and help Sts 
if necessary.
• Check answers, getting Sts to spell the verbs.
2 swimming  3 running  4 doing  5 flying  6 watching   
7 going  8 camping  9 painting  10 eating   
11 shopping  12 reading  13 cycling  14 sleeping   
15 buying  16 travelling  17 going
• Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to look 
at the activities and talk about their likes / dislikes.
• Get some feedback from various pairs.
PE4 Months and ordinal numbers
  
 A secret message puzzle
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Months and ordinal numbers
• Give out the worksheets and focus on a. Tell Sts they have 
to complete the puzzle with the months of the year. The 
number of squares for each word and the letters included 
in the puzzle will help them decide which month to write. 
Explain that when they have finished the puzzle, they 
will find the Secret Message in the shaded column going 
down. Tell Sts to write these words in the question at the 
end of the puzzle.
• Sts work individually or in pairs to complete the puzzle. 
Suggest that they complete the ‘easy’ months first and 
then work on the harder ones.
• When they have finished check answers and ask What is 
the secret message?
2 October  3 June  4 January  5 November  6 April   
7 February  8 September  9 March  10 December   
11 August  12 July
Secret Message: When is your birthday?
• Now focus on b and tell Sts to look at the illustration of 
a race. Tell Sts to complete the chart underneath the 
illustration with the ordinal numbers. Focus on the first 
runner, Mike. Ask Where is he? and elicit the answer (first).
• Sts work individually to complete the table with the 
missing numbers. 
• Check answers, correcting and practising pronunciation  
as necessary.
2 second  4 fourth  5 fifth  8 eighth  9 ninth   
11 eleventh  12 twelfth  14 fourteenth  15 fifteenth   
16 sixteenth  19 nineteenth  20 twentieth
• Finally, focus on Activation. In pairs, Sts cover the table. 
One student says a runner’s name and his / her partner 
says their order in the race. Then they swap roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 207@@
207
9A  Common verb phrases 2: 
travelling
  
A gapfill activity
Copy one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
More common verb phrases, verb phrases about 
travelling
• Quickly revise the verb phrases by asking What do you do 
before you go on holiday? and What things do you do on 
holiday? Sts can refer to the Vocabulary Bank Common 
verb phrases 2 Part 2 on p.126 if necessary.
• Give out the worksheets and focus on the first exercise. 
Tell Sts they have to look at the pictures and complete 
the verb phrases with the correct verb. The first letter(s) is 
given. Point out that the first one (book) has been done 
for them.
• Sts work in pairs to complete in the gaps. Monitor and 
help Sts where necessary. 
• Check answers.
2 pack  3 leave  4 arrive  5 carry  6 wait  7 travel   
8 get  9 wear  10 stay  11 rent  12 phone  13 buy
• Finally, focus on Activation. In pairs, Sts cover the verb 
phrases, look at the pictures, and try to remember the 
verb phrases.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE  You could also ask Sts to find other nouns 
to use in the verb phrases, e.g. phone your family, a friend,  
a classmate; buy a T-shirt, presents, food, etc.
9B Clothes
  
A sentence-completion activity
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Clothes
• Quickly revise the vocabulary by asking What am  
I wearing? Sts can refer to the Vocabulary Bank Clothes 
on p.129 if necessary.
• Give out the worksheets. Tell Sts to look at the photos and 
complete the sentences with the names of the clothes in 
the photos.
• Sts work individually to complete the gaps. Monitor and 
help Sts where necessary. 
• Check answers, getting Sts to spell the words.
2 T-shirt  3 shorts  4 trainers  5 sweater  6 skirt   
7 socks  8 jacket  9 shirt  10 jeans  11 dress  12 coat   
13 suit  14 shoes  15 trousers
• Now focus on Activation. In pairs, Sts cover the sentences 
and test each other by saying what the people in the 
photos are wearing.
10A  Draw it!
  
A vocabulary group game
Copy one worksheet per group. Cut up one set of cards per 
group of three or four.
LANGUAGE
Words for things and places in a hotel
• Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Give out a set of 
cards to each group and ask them to put the cards face 
down on the desk.
• Demonstrate the activity by choosing an object that is not 
on the worksheet, e.g. a window, and drawing it on the 
board. Ask Sts to guess what you are drawing. Don’t say 
anything. Just gesture to indicate if guesses are wrong, 
right, or nearly right. (Make your drawing very simple to 
show Sts that even someone who is not an artist can do  
a simple drawing.)
• Tell Sts that they are going to do the same thing in their 
groups. They will take turns to pick a card and then draw 
the word for their classmates to guess. Emphasize that 
the person doing the drawing must not speak. When a 
student guesses correctly, that student gets to keep the 
card. The student with the most cards when all the cards 
are finished is the winner.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE  Give out a complete worksheet 
to each group. Sts take turns to choose a word from the 
worksheet without letting their classmates know which word 
they have chosen. They then draw the object on the card for 
their classmates to guess. When a student guesses correctly, 
that student writes his / her name on the square with the 
object. Set a time limit for the activity. The person who has 
guessed the most objects in that time is the winner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 208@@
208
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A VOCABULARY Numbers 0–10 and days
  
Find the words for numbers 0–10 and the days of the week.
T
H
R
E
E
S
Y
T
S
I
X
T
R
H
J
L
E
A
U
U
G
F
F
W
F
Y
U
E
N
T
Y
E
D
N
R
O
O
N
E
R
F
U
H
S
P
N
I
S
U
H
T
H
U
R
S
D
A
Y
D
T
R
N
V
H
B
D
P
A
T
M
A
E
T
E
N
X
T
A
A
Y
C
O
Y
I
S
N
I
N
E
Y
E
Y
H
N
U
G
W
E
D
N
E
S
D
A
Y
D
F
H
B
E
X
Z
E
R
O
V
V
A
I
T
T
I
N
A
S
E
V
E
N
Y
V
L
S
U
N
D
A
Y
J
S
P
Q
E
F
 a
  
Write the words in the charts.
Numbers 
  
Days of the week
0 zero 
6 
 
Monday
1 
 
7 
 
T 
2 
 
8 
 
W 
3 
 
9 
 
T 
4 
 
10 
 
F 
5 
 
  
S 
 
 
  
S 
 b
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Student A say a number 0–10 or a day. Student B say the next number or day.  
Then change roles.
2
 
3
Tuesday 
 
Wednesday
7 
 
8
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 209@@
209
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B VOCABULARY Countries
  
Look at the map. With a partner write the names of the countries on the map.
Egypt England France Germany Italy Poland Russia Spain Switzerland Turkey
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the names of the countries. Look at the map and say the names of the countries.
6
8
10
9
7
4
2
1
3
5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 210@@
210
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE1 VOCABULARY Classroom language
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the missing words in the sentences.
The teacher says:
 
The student says:
1
7
3
9
5
11
2
8
4
10
6
12
Please sit d o w n.
Can you r      that, please?
E      me. What’s ‘grazie’ in English?
O    your books.
St    up, please.
S     I’m late.
Go to p    5.
L    at the board, please.
How do you sp    ‘dictionary’?
Cl    your book.
Today is Friday and tomorrow…
Rob is on holiday in Poland and…
What’s the capital of Switzerland?
Sorry. I don’t u          .
I don’t kn   .
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 211@@
211
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
  
Match the pictures with the nationalities. Write the numbers in the boxes.
  
Complete the sentences with the correct languages.
1 In Mexico they speak 
 .
2 In Egypt they speak 
 .
3 In the UK and the USA they speak 
 .
4 In Switzerland they speak 
 , 
 , and 
 .
 b
 c
2A VOCABULARY Nationalities and languages
  
Complete the chart with the nationalities.
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the chart. Look at the pictures and say the country and nationality.
Country
Nationality
Brazil
B r a z i l i a n 
China 
        
The USA
        
Egypt
        
Spain
        
Turkey
        
Switzerland
      
Russia
        
Japan
        
Poland
       
Italy
        
Germany
       
France
       
Mexico
        
1
1
3
5
10
13
12
14
11
9
7
6
8
4
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 212@@
212
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B VOCABULARY Numbers dictation
ACTIVATION
Listen to A. Write A’s numbers in the chart.
Dictate your numbers to A.
ACTIVATION
Dictate your numbers to B.
Listen to B. Write B’s numbers in the chart.
Student A
Student B
  
Write the numbers in words in the Your numbers column.
  
Write the numbers in words in the Your numbers column.
Your numbers
B’s numbers
15 fifteen
23 
37 
48 
56 
61 
79 
84 
92 
11
Your numbers
A’s numbers
11 eleven
27 
31 
43 
54 
69 
78 
82 
96 
15
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 213@@
213
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
  
Check your answers with B.
What’s number 2?
  
It’s a board. 
 b
  
Check your answers with A.
What’s number 1? 
  
It’s a window. 
 b
3A VOCABULARY Things
  
Look at the picture. Write the missing words.
1 window
2 board
3 door
4 
5 umbrella
6 
7 chair
8 
9 dictionary
 
10 
 
11 piece of paper
 
12 
 
13 phone
 
14 
 
15 ID card
 
16 
 
17 notebook
 
18 
 
19 watch
 
20 
 a
  
Look at the picture. Write the missing words.
1 window
2 board
3 
4 coat
5 
6 table
7 
8 bag
9 
 
10 laptop
 
11 
 
12 pen
 
13 
 
14 wallet
 
15 
 
16 credit card
 
17 
 
18 key
 
19 
 
20 glasses
 a
1
1
1
1
8
8
4
4
9
9
5
5
6
6
11
11
12
12
15
15
16
16
19
19
14
14
18
18
13
13
3
3
2
2
10
10
7
7
17
17
20
20
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 214@@
214
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4A VOCABULARY People and family
  
Complete the sentences. Use the words in the list.
boy children friends girl man men woman women
 a
  
Complete the sentences. Use the words in the list.
boyfriend brother daughter father girlfriend grandfather  
grandmother husband mother parents sister son wife
1 Rita is Bob’s wife.
2 Bob is Rita’s 
 .
3 Rita is Ryan and Brenda’s 
 .
4 Bob is Ryan and Brenda’s 
 .
5 Brenda is Rita and Bob’s 
 .
6 Ryan is Rita and Bob’s 
 .
7 Brenda is Ryan’s 
 .
8 Ryan is Brenda’s 
 .
9 Molly is Ryan’s 
 .
 
10 Josh is Brenda’s 
 .
 
11 Martin is Brenda and Ryan’s 
 .
 
12 Susan is Brenda and Ryan’s 
 .
 
13 Bob and Rita are Ryan and Brenda’s 
 .
 
14 Susan and Martin are Brenda’s 
 .
 b
ACTIVATION
Test a partner.
Who is Rita?
  
She’s Bob’s wife.
1
5
Ryan
Bob
Rita
Martin
Molly
Susan
Josh
Brenda
2
6
3
7
4
8
Fabio and Anna are 
friends .
Alex is a 
 .
Mrs DeSouza is a 
 .
Mr Husson is a 
 .
Kim is a 
 .
Megan and Dan are 
 .
George and Michael 
are 
 .
Jessica and Helena are 
 .
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 215@@
215
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
  
Match the words in a to the pictures.
 b
4B VOCABULARY Colours and common adjectives
  
Find the colour words.
 a
  
Write the opposites of words 1–10.
1 difficult
2 long
3 expensive
4 beautiful
5 fast
6 old
7 big
8 good
9 slow
 
10 clean
 c
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Student A say an adjective. Student B say the opposite. Then change roles.
easy
  
difficult 
b
l
a
c
k
m
b
l
u
e
o
a
w
h
i
t
e
h
gr
ey
se
gre
entr
ere
dw
bro
wn
gu
pi
n
k
si
f
o
r
a
n
g
e
x
o
y
e
l
l
o
w
➔
➔
1
6
2
7
3
8
4
9
5
10
black
e
a
s
y
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 216@@
216
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5A VOCABULARY Food and drink
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the words for food and drink.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Cover the words. Point to a picture and test your partner.
1 m e a t
2 f 
 
 
3 e 
 
 
4 b 
 
 
 
 
5 ch 
 
 
 
6 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 r 
 
 
8 br 
 
 
9 c 
 
 
 
 
 
10 s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 p 
 
 
 
 
12 v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 fr 
 
 
 
14 s 
 
 
 
 
15 ch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 t 
 
 
17 m 
 
 
 
18 w 
 
 
 
 
19 j 
 
 
 
 
20 c 
 
 
 
 
 
21 y 
 
 
 
 
 
22 s 
 
 
 
 
23 w 
 
 
 
24 b 
 
 
1
6
11
16
21
2
7
12
17
22
3
8
13
18
23
4
9
14
19
24
5
10
15
20
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 217@@
217
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
  
Look at the clues. Complete the crossword.
H
A
V
E
5B VOCABULARY Common verb phrases 1
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the crossword and look at the clues. Say the sentences with the verbs.
1
2
3
7
5
4
6
8
10
11
9
Across
2 I 
 in a big house with my wife Katya and our children.
4 You don’t 
 a jacket. It isn’t cold.
7 They 
 in a restaurant in London. They’re waiters.
8 I 
 to music on my phone.
 
10 Excuse me? Do you 
 English?
 
11 They don’t 
 meat or fish. They’re vegetarians.
Down
1 Do you 
 brothers and sisters?
2 All my friends 
 this song. It’s great!
3 We 
 to English classes on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
5 I don’t 
 coffee in the evening.
6 Do you 
 TV in the mornings? The programmes are terrible!
7 I don’t 
 a sandwich, thank you. I’m not hungry.
9 I usually 
 books on my tablet or on my phone.
 
10 Do you 
 English at university?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 218@@
218
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6A VOCABULARY Jobs and places of work
  
Look at the people in the photos and complete the sentences about their jobs.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Cover the sentences. Talk about the people in the pictures.
Linda is a shop assistant. She works in a souvenir shop.
Linda is a shop assistant . 
She works in a souvenir 
shop . She speaks 
French and Spanish with 
customers.
Richard is a 
 . 
He works in an Italian 
 . He usually 
works at the weekend.
Amanda is a 
 . 
She works in the 
 of an 
important newspaper. 
She writes articles about 
education.
Paul is a 
 in 
London. He works in the 
 . He drives a 
black cab.
Daniel is a 
 .  
He works in a big 
secondary 
 . 
He teaches history.
Emma is a 
 . 
She works in a children’s 
 . She works 
with Sophie.
Diana is a 
 . 
She works in the 
 . She works 
with her dog, Rex.
Gary is a 
 . He 
works in a 
 in 
Manchester. He meets a 
lot of people every day.
Sophie is a 
 . 
She works in a children’s 
 . She usually 
works in the morning,  
but sometimes she 
works at night.
Roger is a 
 . 
He works in a cheese 
 . He starts 
work at 6.30 every 
morning.
1
6
2
7
3
8
4
9
5
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 219@@
219
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6B VOCABULARY What’s the word?
  
Read the sentences and complete the missing words in the WORD column.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the WORD column. Look at the sentences. Can you remember the words?
1 I usually go 
 at five o’clock. 
h 
 
 
2 Do you go to 
 by train? 
 o r 
3 I always have a 
 for lunch. 
s 
 
 
 w 
 
 
4 We sometimes go 
 on Saturday. 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 g
5 Do you do the 
 in your house? 
h 
 
 
 
 w 
 
 
6 Mike has a 
 every morning. 
 
 o w 
 
7 The Wilson family has 
 at six o’clock every evening. 
 i 
 
 
 r
8 When do you usually 
 lunch? 
h 
 
 
9 I’m tired. I want to have a nice hot 
 . 
b 
 
 h
 
10 We need exercise. Do you want to go to the 
 ? 
 y 
 
11 They 
 work at six o’clock every day. 
 i 
 
 s 
 
12 We never 
 up early on Sundays. 
 e 
 
13 We usually go to 
 late on Saturday night. 
 
 d
 
14 In the morning, I go to a café and have a 
 and a croissant. 
 o 
 f 
 
 
15 We sometimes have 
 in bed on Saturday morning. 
b 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 
 
16 I never 
 TV in the morning. 
 
 t 
 h
 
17 The children go to 
 by bus. 
 c 
 
 o 
 
18 Do you 
 dinner every night for your family? 
m 
 
 
o m e
WORD
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 220@@
220
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7A VOCABULARY Common verb phrases 2: free time
  
Complete the sentences with a verb from the list. Write your answers in the VERB column.
do go go out meet play (x3) relax stay swim travel walk
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the VERB column. Look at the sentences. Can you remember the verbs?
1 We usually 
 in the mountains on Sundays. Our dog comes, too! 
walk
2 I usually 
 my friends on Friday evening and we have a pizza. 
3 Do you 
 the piano? Yes, but I’m not very good. 
4 We always 
 on Saturday night. 
5 A Does your son 
 computer games? 
 
B Yes, every evening.
6 I 
 a lot of sport in my free time. 
7 I sometimes 
 to the cinema, but I usually watch films on my laptop at home. 
8 A Does Marie 
 tennis? 
 
B Yes, she’s very good!
9 I 
 in the sea in the summer. It’s very good exercise. 
 
10 A How do you 
 in the evenings? 
 
B I read or listen to music.
 
11 I 
 a lot in my job. I go to the USA and the UK for meetings. 
 
12 Do you usually 
 in a hotel when you go on holiday? 
VERB
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 221@@
221
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B VOCABULARY Activities
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the activities.
ACTIVATION
Look at the activities. With a partner, say:
• Three things you like doing alone.
• Three things you love doing with your friends.
• Three things you hate doing when it’s very cold.
1 cooking
6 w
 TV
11 sh 
2 sw 
7 g 
 
to the cinema
12 r 
3 r 
8 c 
13 c 
16 tr 
4 d 
 
yoga
9 p 
14 sl 
17 g 
 for a walk
5 fl 
10 e 
 
out
15 b 
 
clothes
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 222@@
222
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PE4 VOCABULARY Months and ordinal numbers
  
Write the months of the year in the crossword. When the puzzle is complete, you can read the 
secret message going down. There are some letters in the puzzle to help you.
 a
The Secret Message: When is  
  
 ?
  
Write the ordinal numbers.
1 – first
2 –
3 – third
4 –
5 –
6 – sixth
7 – seventh
8 –
9 –
10 – tenth
11 –
12 –
13 – thirteenth
14 –
15 –
16 –
17 – seventeenth
18 – eighteenth
19 –
20 –
 b
M
A
Y
C
B
N
E
N
Y
V
M
P
L
E
U
P
B
A
C
C
E
U
S
U
L
ACTIVATION
Cover the chart and look at the picture. Work with a partner. Say a name. Your partner makes a sentence. 
Margo
  
She’s seventh.
Tom
David
Anne
Simon
Kate
Peter
Susan
Jim
Matt
Ella
Maya
Margo
Cath
Lucy
Ed
Mike
Rob
John
Emma
Amy
John
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Lucy
Matt
Rob
David
Ella
Tom
Mike
Margo
Emma
Amy
Ed
Cath
Jim
John
Maya
Peter
Simon
Susan
Anne
Kate
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 223@@
223
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9A VOCABULARY Common verb phrases 2: travelling
  
Look at the pictures. Complete the verb phrases.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. With a partner, cover the verb phrases and look at the pictures. Say the verb phrases.
1 book a hotel
2 p 
 a bag
3 l 
 the house
4 a 
 at the train station
5 c 
 a bag
6 w 
 for a train
7 tr 
 on the train
8 g 
 a taxi
9 w 
 sunglasses
 
10 st 
 in a hotel
 
11 r 
 a bike
 
12 ph 
 a friend
 
13 b 
 a T-shirt
TAXI
S e a s i d e H o t e l
Train Station
Train Station
TAXI
1
5
8
11
2
6
9
12
3
7
10
13
4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 224@@
224
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9B VOCABULARY Clothes
  
Look at the photos and write the names of the clothes.
 
ACTIVATION
Cover the sentences and look at the photos. Say what the people are wearing.
He’s wearing a 8j
 ,  
a 9sh
 , and 10j
 .
He’s wearing a 13s
 and 14sh
 .
She’s wearing 15tr
 .
She’s wearing a 5sw
 ,  
a 6sk
 , and 7s
 .
She’s wearing a 11dr
 
and a 12c
 .
He’s wearing a 1 cap , a 2 T-
 , 
3sh
 , and 4tr
 .
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
11
10
12
13
14
15
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 225@@
225
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Beginner Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10A VOCABULARY Draw it!
a bed
a pillow
a table
a lamp
a remote 
control
a cupboard
a restaurant
a bathroom
a bath
a shower
a towel
a swimming  
pool
a car park
a bar
a garden
a lift
a gift shop
reception
a gym
a light
© Copyright Oxford University Press
