@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Jerry Lambert
Paul Seligson 
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 
Elementary
Teacher’s Guide

@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2019
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2019 
2023  2022  2021  2020  2019
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly 
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford 
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for 
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked 
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers 
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach. 
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this 
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403282 7	
Teacher’s Guide
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world whose 
feedback has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both 
in Oxford and around the world) and the design team who have contributed 
their skills and ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and from 
Christina to Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina would also like 
to thank her children Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their constant inspiration.
The publisher would like to thank the following for permission to reproduce photographs: 
Age Fotostock p.191 (reading/Alan Marsh); Alamy pp.169 (colleagues/
NICOLAS HERRBACH Stock Photo), 169 (students/Lev Dolgachov Stock Photo), 
171 (newspaper/Nikreates), 171 (chairs/Maksym Bondarchuk Stock Photo), 
171 (umbrella/Image Source Stock Photo), 171 (wallet/L A Heusinkveld 
Stock Photo), 185 (concert/Anthony Brown Stock Photo), 185 (BBC Proms/
Milton Cogheil Stock Photo), 186 (Mother Teresa/Tim Graham Stock Photo), 
191 (shopping/Blend Images Stock Photo), 191 (colleagues/Image Source 
Plus Stock Photo), 191 (sale/Westend61 GmbH Stock Photo), 195 (city/
eye35 Stock Photo), 200 (architect/Cultura Creative (RF) Stock Photo), 
217 (scissors), 217 (laptop/Ellen Isaacs Stock Photo), 217 (pens/Zoonar GmbH 
Stock Photo), 217 (headphones/Zoonar GmbH Stock Photo), 217 (photos/
Mauricio Jordan Stock Photo), 217 (parasol/Anatoly Vartanov Stock Photo), 
217 (glasses/Sirpa/Stockimo Stock Photo), 217 (credit card/Artur Marciniec 
Stock Photo), 217 (keys/Tronin Vladimir Stock Photo), 231 (snowman/D. 
Hurst Stock Photo), 231 (birthday/Rawpixel Ltd Stock Photo), 231 (cafe/
MBI Stock Photo), 231 (bicycle/Tony Tallec Stock Photo), 237 (star homes/
Andreas von Einsiedel Stock Photo), 238 (star homes/Andreas von Einsiedel 
Stock Photo), 258 (geishas/Jon Arnold Images Ltd Stock Photo), 258 (dancers/
Nate Clicks Stock Photo), 260 (ticket), 262 (guitar/Hero Images Inc. Stock 
Photo), 263 (nurse), 263 (policewoman/Janine Wiedel), 263 (journalist), 
263 (musician), 267 (sprint/Yon Marsh Stock Photo), 267 (painting/
Blend Images Stock Photo), 273 (yoghurt/Shotshop GmbH Stock Photo), 
273 (kiwi/Maya Kovacheva Stock Photo); Corbis UK Ltd. pp.263 (dentist/
Benelux), 263 (waiter), 263 (lawyer/Ocean), 263 (builder), 263 (engineer); 
Getty Images pp.186 (Picasso/ullstein bild), 217 (watch), 217 (lamp/Digital 
Vision/Creative Crop), 222 (Cristiano Ronaldo), 222 (Tom Hiddleston/
WireImage), 234 (Anthony Hopkins/Moviepix), 234 (Elizabeth Arden/Hulton 
Archive), 235 (Anthony Hopkins/Moviepix), 235 (Elizabeth Arden/Hulton 
Archive), 237 (dream flats/Arcaid Images), 238 (dream flats/Arcaid Images), 
258 (China/Gallo Images), 258 (mosque/E+/Leonardo Patrizi), 258 (sombrero/
Image Source), 262 (reading/Digital Vision/Dougal Waters), 263 (architect/
Photolibrary/Tetra Images), 263 (soldier), 263 (hairdresser/Frank Gaglione/
Stockbyte), 263 (doctor/Thomas Tolstrup), 263 (actor), 263 (pilot); Guinness 
GB p.258 (Guinness); iStockphoto pp.171 (keys), 171 (pizza), 171 (tissue box), 
171 (sandwiches), 184 (cleaning), 195 (desert), 217 (coins), 217 (magazines), 
217 (wallet), 258 (Eiffel Tower), 258 (tango), 258 (Poland), 258 (Ethiopia), 
258 (cathedral), 258 (Prague), 262 (listening), 267 (flowers), 273 (cheese cake), 
273 (lettuce/E+/Creativeye99), 273 (mushrooms), 273 (vegetables); Oxford 
University Press pp.171 (lamp/exopixel/Shutterstock), 171 (headphones/Mark 
Mason), 171 (pencils/Yganko/Shutterstock), 249 (), 188 (fireworks), 258 (paella/
Christina Latham-Koenig), 260 (coin/MM Studios), 260 (key/MM Studios), 
260 (diary/Shutterstock), 260 (laptop/Shutterstock), 260 (watch/MM Studios), 
260 (magazine/MM Studios), 260 (ID card/MM Studios), 260 (sunglasses/MM 
Studios), 260 (scissors/MM Studios), 260 (file/MM Studios), 260 (purse/MM 
Studios), 260 (wallet/MM Studios), 260 (umbrella/MM Studios), 273 (apple/
Alex Staroseltsev/Shutterstock), 273 (bread/Robert Milek/Shutterstock), 
273 (carrots/Ivonne Wierink/Shutterstock), 273 (egg/rangizzz/Shutterstock), 
273 (fish/Ivaschenko Roman/Shutterstock), 273 (grapes/Evgeny Karandaev/
Shutterstock), 273 (burger/rvlsoft/Shutterstock), 273 (ice cream), 273 (juice/
Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock), 273 (nuts/Maks Narodenko/Shutterstock), 
273 (onions/mylisa/Shutterstock), 273 (peas/Egor Rodynchenko/Shutterstock), 
273 (rice/oriori/Shutterstock), 273 (tomato/Rob Stark/Shutterstock), 
273 (watermelon/Alex Staroseltsev/Shutterstock), 273 (sandwich/
ampFotoStudio/Shutterstock); PPR/Lindt & Spruengli AG p.258 (chocolate); 
Press Association Images pp.222 (Samuel L Jackson/Doug Peters), 222 (Jennifer 
Lawrence/ABACA USA), 222 (Hugh Jackman/EMPICS Entertainment), 
222 (Rihanna/Doug Peters), 222 (Brad Pitt/AFF), 222 (Adele/ABACA), 222 (Taylor 
Swift/AFF), 222 (Benedict Cumberbatch/AFF), 222 (Charlize Theron/AFF); Rex 
Features – Shutterstock p.222 (Scarlett Johansson/Theo Kingma); Shutterstock 
pp.171 (mobile phone/Nick Merkulov), 173 (etorres), 175 (ESLINE), 184 (eating/
Monkey Business Images), 195 (train station/cowardlion), 200 (pasta/Mint and 
Lemon), 217 (charger/Pongsathon Ladasuwankul), 258 (Mercedes/Bhakpong), 
258 (boomerangs/Stepan Bormotov), 263 (receptionist), 263 (cleaner), 
263 (vet), 274 (skeleton); Superstock Ltd. p.186 (Barack Obama); Zooid Pictures 
p.217 (license).
Illustrations by: Adrian Barclay Illustration pp.179, 181, 187, 198, 201, 272; 
Bess Harding pp.177, 181, 198, 201, 223, 232, 248, 264; Atsushi Hara pp.224; 
Hannah Davies pp.246; Bill Brown pp.168, 172, 174, 193, 197, 233, 239, 240; 
Jerome Mireault pp.189; Kath Walker pp.228, 244, 266; Mark Duffin p.190; 
Oxford University Press pp.265; Paul Boston pp.259; Roger Penwill pp.170, 
179, 180, 196, 199, 223, 241, 268; Sophie Joyce pp.177, 192, 223.
Grammar photocopiable activities written by: Amanda Begg
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Elementary students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 1
p.30
File 2 A–C	
1&2 Revise and Check
p.40
File 3 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 2
p.55
File 4 A–C	
3&4 Revise and Check
p.67
File 5 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 3
p.80
File 6 A–C	
5&6 Revise and Check
p.92
File 7 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 4
p.104
File 8 A–C	
7&8 Revise and Check
p.118
File 9 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 5
p.133
File 10 A–C	
9&10 Revise and Check
p.144
File 11 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 6
p.155
File 12 A–C	
11&12 Revise and Check
p.164
Photocopiable activities
p.164
Introduction
p.165
Grammar activity answers
p.168
Grammar activity masters
p.204
Communicative activity instructions
p.214
Communicative activity masters
p.253
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.257
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A	Welcome to the class
verb be + , subject 
pronouns: I, you, etc.
days of the week, numbers 
0–20
vowel sounds, word stress
8
B	 One world
verb be – and ?
countries, numbers 21–100
/ə/, consonant sounds /tʃ/,  
/ʃ/, /dʒ/, word stress
10
C	 What’s your email?
possessive adjectives:  
my, your, etc.
classroom language
/əʊ/, /uː/, /ɑː/, the alphabet,  
sentence stress
12
Practical English Episode 1	
checking in    V in a hotel
2
14
A	Are you tidy or untidy?
singular and plural nouns
things, in, on, under
final -s and -es
16
B	 Made in America
adjectives
colours, adjectives, 
modifiers: very / really, quite
long and short 
vowel sounds
18
C	 Slow down!
imperatives, let’s
feelings
linking
 
20
Revise and Check 1&2
3
22
A	Britain: the good  
and the bad
present simple + and –
verb phrases: cook dinner, 
etc.
third person -s
24
B	 9 to 5
present simple ?
jobs
/ɜː/ and /ə/
26
C	 Love me, love my dog
word order in questions
question words
sentence stress
28
Practical English Episode 24
buying a coffee    V telling the time
4
30
A	Family photos
possessive ’s, Whose…?
family
/ʌ/, the letter o
32
B	 From morning to night
prepositions of time (at, in, 
on) and place (at, in, to)
daily routine
linking
34
C	 Blue Zones
position of adverbs, 
expressions of frequency
months, adverbs and 
expressions of frequency
the letter h
36
Revise and Check 3&4
5
38
A	Vote for me!
can / can’t
verb phrases: buy a 
newspaper, etc.
sentence stress
40
B	 A quiet life?
present continuous:  
be + verb + -ing
noise: verbs and verb 
phrases
/ŋ/
42
C	 A city for all seasons
present simple or  
present continuous?
the weather and seasons
places in London
44
Practical English Episode 34
buying clothes    V clothes
6
46
A	A North African story
object pronouns: me, you, 
him, etc.
words in a story
/aɪ/, /ɪ/, and /iː/
48
B	 The third Friday in June
like + (verb + -ing)
the date, ordinal numbers
/ð/ and /θ/,  
saying the date
50
C	 Making music
revision: be or do?
music
/j/, giving opinions
52
Revise and Check 5&6
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
saying hello, saying goodbye
recognizing names
recognizing places and numbers
Where are you from? Where is it from? 
Where are they from?
Where are you from? Where is it from? 
Where are they from?, numbers
giving personal information
classroom language; understanding 
personal information
classroom language
saying where things are
listening for detail
describing things; the same  
or different?
identifying paragraph headings
What’s the matter?
inferring mood, understanding 
specific advice
things I like and don’t like about  
my country
identifying attitude
guess the job
understanding specific information
getting to know somebody
identifying who’s who
talking about family
identifying the main / supporting 
information
a typical weekend
inferring feelings
understanding specific information
retelling the main information in a  
short text
listening for detail
inferring information
talking about abilities
focusing on practical information
spot the difference
identifying a situation from context
the weather and seasons; what to do 
in London
the weather and seasons
finding specific information
reading habits, retelling a story
checking predictions
understanding a traditional story
favourite times
understanding dates
understanding feelings and opinions
music questionnaire; giving opinions
understanding specific information
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
7
54
A	Selfies
past simple of be: was / were
word formation:  
write > writer
sentence stress
56
B	 Wrong name,  
wrong place
past simple: regular verbs
past time expressions
-ed endings
58
C	 Happy New Year?
past simple: irregular verbs
go, have, get
sentence stress
60
Practical English Episode 4	
asking the way    V directions
8
62
A	A murder mystery
past simple: regular and 
irregular
irregular verbs
past simple: verbs
64
B	 A house with a history
there is / there are, some / 
any + plural nouns
the house
/eə/ and /ɪə/
66
C	 Room 333
there was / there were
prepositions: place and 
movement
silent letters
 
68
Revise and Check 7&8
9
70
A	#mydinnerlastnight
countable / uncountable 
nouns; a / an, some / any
food and drink
the letters ea
72
B	 White gold
quantifiers: how much /  
how many, a lot of, etc.
food containers
linking, /ʃ/ and /ə/
74
C	 Facts and figures
comparative adjectives
high numbers
/ə/, sentence 
76
Practical English Episode 54
ordering a meal    V understanding a menu
10
78
A	The most dangerous 
place…
superlative adjectives
places and buildings
consonant groups
80
B	 Five continents in a day
be going to (plans); future 
time expressions
city holidays
sentence stress
82
C	 The fortune teller
be going to (predictions)
verb phrases
word stress
84
Revise and Check 9&10
11
86
A	Culture shock
adverbs (manner and 
modifiers)
common adverbs
understanding connected 
speech
88
B	 Experiences or things?
verb + to + infinitive
verbs that take the infinitive
weak to, sentence stress
90
C	 How smart is your 
phone?
definite article: the or no the
phones and the internet
the
92
Practical English Episode 64
getting to the airport    V public transport
12
94
A	I’ve seen it ten times!
present perfect
irregular past participles
sentence stress
96
B	 He’s been everywhere!
present perfect or  
past simple?
learning irregular verbs
irregular past participles
98
C	 The English File 
interview
revision: question formation
100
Revise and Check 11&12
102
Communication
113 Writing
118 Listening
124 Grammar Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
selfies and photos
understanding the order of life events
Did you…?; When was the last time?
checking predictions understanding 
the sequence of events
checking predictions
a memorable night
understanding extra information
understanding gist and detail
police interview
taking notes and comparing 
information
understanding events in a story
describing a house
using evidence to predict outcome
describing a room
understanding specific details
identifying paragraph topics
food diary for yesterday
hypothesizing about photos to prepare 
for listening
how much salt and sugar do you  
have a day?
categorizing information
asking and answering quiz questions
understanding instructions
identifying section topics
tourist information
identifying paragraph endings
city holidays
using prior knowledge to predict 
stages, taking notes
making predictions
checking predictions
following the events of a story
Do you think people in your country…?
understanding details
understanding opinions
talking about dreams and ambitions
scanning for information
phones and the internet
understanding habits and preferences
using visual clues to support 
understanding
films, TV, and books
recognizing topic questions
recently…, in your life…
identifying key information
question formation
understanding biographical 
information
understanding topics
148
Vocabulary Bank
165 Irregular verbs
166 Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 8@@
8
	 	
Course overview
Vocabulary
•	 A focus on high-frequency words and phrases
•	 Opportunities to personalize new vocabulary
•	 Accessible reference material
Every lesson focuses on high frequency vocabulary and 
common lexical areas, but keeps the load realistic. All new 
vocabulary is given with the phonemic script alongside, to 
help students with the pronunciation of new words.
Many lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which 
help present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an 
audio model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
•	 A solid foundation in the sounds of English.
•	 Targeted pronunciation development.
•	 Awareness of rules and patterns.
Elementary learners are often frustrated by English 
pronunciation, particularly the sound–spelling relationships, 
silent letters, and weak forms. There is a pronunciation focus 
in every lesson, which integrates clear pronunciation into 
grammar and vocabulary practice. There is an emphasis on 
the sounds most useful for communication, on word stress, 
and on sentence rhythm. Online Practice contains the Sound 
Bank videos which show students the mouth positions to 
make English vowels and consonants. They can also review 
the pronunciation from the lesson at their own speed.  There 
is more practice of pronunciation in the Workbook, with 
audio, which can be found on Online Practice.
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A, B, C Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
•	 videos that can be used in class in every File: Practical 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
•	 Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, an End-of-course Test, and an Entry Test, which you 
can use at the beginning of the course
•	 photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities 
for every A, B, C lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Elementary 
students need? 
We believe that in 9 out of 10 cases when a student signs up 
for English classes, their goal is to speak. Speaking a foreign 
language is very hard, so students need a great deal of 
motivation to encourage them to speak in English.
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation
If we want students to speak English with confidence, 
we need to give them the tools they need – Grammar, 
Vocabulary, and Pronunciation (G, V, P). We believe that  
‘G + V + P = confident speaking’, and in English File 
Elementary all three elements are given equal importance.
Each lesson has clear G, V, P aims to keep lessons focused 
and give students concrete learning objectives and a sense 
of progress.
Grammar
•	 Clear and memorable presentations of new structures
•	 Regular and varied practice in useful and natural contexts
•	 Student-friendly reference material
We have tried to provide contexts for new language that 
will engage students, using real-life stories and situations, 
humour, and suspense. The Grammar Banks give students 
a single, easy-to-access grammar reference section, with 
example sentences with audio, clear rules, and common 
errors. There are at least two practice exercises for each 
grammar point. Students can look again at the grammar 
presented in the lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook 
provides a variety of practice exercises and the opportunity 
for students to use the new grammar to express their  
own ideas.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 9@@
9
of real sources (the British press, magazines, news websites) 
and have been chosen for their intrinsic interest and ability 
to generate discussion.
Writing
•	 Clear models
•	 The ‘nuts and bolts’ of writing on a word and 
sentence level
The growth of the internet and email means that people 
worldwide are writing in English more than ever before 
both for business and personal communication. English File 
Elementary provides guided writing tasks covering a range 
of writing types from a formal email to a social media 
post. Students can use Online Practice to develop their 
writing skills further. The Discussion board also provides 
opportunities for informal written interaction.
Practical English
•	 Understanding high-frequency phrases
•	 Knowing what to say in typical situations
The Practical English lessons give students practice in key 
language for situations such as checking into a hotel or 
ordering a meal in a restaurant. To make these everyday 
situations come alive, there is a storyline involving two main 
characters, Jenny (from New York) and Rob (from London). 
There is a clear distinction between what students will hear 
and need to understand and what they need to say. The 
lessons also highlight other key ‘Social English’ phrases. On 
Online Practice, students can use the interactive video to 
record themselves and hear their own voice in the complete 
conversation. They can also listen and record the Social 
English phrases. The Workbook provides practice of all the 
language from the Practical English lessons.
Revision
•	 Regular review
•	 Motivating reference and practice material
•	 A sense of progress
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a 
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page revises 
the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of each File. 
The right-hand page provides a series of skills-based 
challenges, including street interviews, and helps students 
to measure their progress in terms of competence. These 
pages are designed to be used flexibly according to the 
needs of your students. On Online Practice, for each File, 
there are three Check your progress activities. The first is a 
multiple choice activity for students to test themselves on 
the Grammar and Vocabulary from the File. The second is a 
dictation related to the topic and the language of the File 
for students to practise the new language in context. Finally, 
there is a Challenge activity, which involves a mini-research 
project based on a topic from the File. Every two Files, the 
Workbook contains a Can you remember...? page, which 
provides a cumulative review of language students have 
covered in the Student’s Book.
Speaking
•	 Topics that will inspire students’ interest
•	 Achievable, motivating tasks
•	 Regular opportunities to use new language
English File motivates students to speak by providing varied 
and achievable tasks, and the language (G + V + P) that they 
need in order to communicate with confidence. In addition 
to the Speaking stage, students are encouraged to speak all 
through each lesson, responding to texts and listenings, 
and practising grammar and vocabulary orally. Every two 
Files, students can use Online Practice to record themselves 
doing a short task.
Listening
•	 A reason to listen
•	 Confidence-building tasks
•	 Help with connected speech
The listenings in English File are based on a variety of 
entertaining and realistic situations. The tasks focus on 
helping students to get the gist on the first listen and then 
being able to understand more the second time. On Online 
Practice, for each File students can find further listening 
practice related to the topic. They can also access the 
listening activities from every lesson, to practise in their own 
time, and to read the script to check anything that they have 
found difficult.
Reading
•	 Engaging topics and stimulating texts.
•	 Manageable tasks that help students to read.
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to give them motivating 
but accessible material and tasks they can do. In English File 
Elementary reading texts have been adapted from a variety 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 10@@
10
	 	
Course overview
Workbook 
For language practice after class.
•	 All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Practical English
•	 Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
•	 Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
•	 Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 12 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A, B, and C lessons
Each File contains three two-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the C lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Practical English
Every two Files (starting from File 1), there is a two-page lesson with  
integral video which teaches functional ‘survival English’ (for example 
language for checking into a hotel or ordering a meal) and also ‘Social 
English’ (useful phrases like Nice to meet you, Let’s go.). The video is in the  
form of a drama, featuring the two main characters, Rob and Jenny.  
The lessons have a storyline which runs through the level.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, Listening, 
Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and  
Sound Bank. 
The Student’s Book is also available as  
an eBook.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or 
catch up on a class they have missed.
•	 Look again: students can review the language from  
every lesson.
•	 Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, 
Writing, Listening, and Speaking practice.
•	 Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main 
language from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an 
extra challenge.
•	 Interactive video to practise the language from the Practical  
English lessons.
•	 Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
•	 Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, 
dyslexia-friendly texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
•	 Individual sounds
•	 Sounds in key words
•	 Speak and record  
functionality
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
•	 an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
•	 Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
•	 Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
•	 Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 90 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 165 – 203
•	 An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp.204 – 252
•	 Extra speaking practice for every A, B, C lesson
Vocabulary
see pp.253 – 275
•	 An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 164 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
•	 All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
•	 Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 Answer keys
•	 All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
•	 All the Workbook audio files and scripts
•	 Tests and assessment material, including: an Entry Test; 
Progress Tests; an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every 
File; and complete test for every File. There are A and B 
versions of all the main tests and audio files for all the 
Listening tests
•	 CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
•	 The complete Student’s Book
•	 Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
•	 Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
•	 Dyslexia-friendly texts
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
•	 Short documentary, drama, or 
animation for students at the 
end of even-numbered  
C lessons (2C, 4C, 6C, etc.)
Practical English
•	 A unique series of videos that 
goes with the Practical English 
lessons in the Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
•	 Street interviews filmed in 
London, New York, and Oxford 
to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook,  
and the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 12@@
1A
12
	1A	 Welcome to the class
 G   verb be + , subject pronouns: I, you, etc. 
 V   days of the week, numbers 0–20
 P   vowel sounds (/ɪ/, /iː/, /æ/, /e/, /eɪ/, /aɪ/), word stress
Lesson plan
The context of this first lesson is a young man who meets a 
woman at a salsa class. He then introduces her to his friend, 
who clearly likes her and joins the class. The lesson starts 
with five conversations where Sts practise basic greetings, 
asking names, etc. They then focus on the grammar of the 
verb be in positive sentences and on subject pronouns. In 
Pronunciation, Sts are introduced to word stress and the 
English File system of teaching the sounds of English. Here 
they begin by focusing on six vowel sounds. There is a 
vocabulary focus on the days of the week and numbers 0–20, 
and the lesson finishes with a listening and speaking activity, 
which pulls together the various strands of the lesson.
There is an Entry Test on the Teacher’s Resource Centre which 
you can give Sts before starting the course. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  verb be + , subject pronouns p.168 
Vocabulary  Days of the week / Numbers 0–20 p.257 
(instructions p.253) 
Communicative  You say, you answer p.214  
(instructions p.204)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Entry test
For students
Workbook  1A
Online Practice  1A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Pre-teach conversation 2 in b by introducing yourself. Say  
Hi / Hello, I’m (…), and ask three or four Sts What’s your name? 
When they answer, pretend sometimes not to have heard 
them properly, and say Sorry? and put your hand to your ear.
1	LISTENING & SPEAKING  recognizing names
a	 e 1.2  Books open. Focus on the people in the photo 
story. Then tell Sts to listen to the conversations and label 
the four people in pictures 1–4.
	 Play the audio once or twice if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
A  Carla    ​B  Matt    ​C  Sally    ​D  Ben
e 1.2
C = Carla, M = Matt, S = Sally, B = Ben
1
C	 Hello, everybody. Welcome to the class. I’m Carla. I’m your teacher.
2
M	 Hi, I’m Matt. What’s your name?
S	 Sally.
M	 Sorry?
S	 Sally!
3
M	 What’s your phone number?
S	 It’s 07894 132 456.
4
B	 Hi, Matt.
M	 Hello. This is Sally. She’s in my salsa class.
B	 Nice to meet you. My name’s Ben.
S	 Nice to meet you, too.
M	 Bye, Sally.
S	 Goodbye, Matt. Bye, Ben.
5
B	 Hi, Sally.
S	 Ben! Are you in the salsa class, too?
B	 Yes, I am. How are you?
S	 I’m very well, thank you. And you?
B	 Fine, thanks. … Great! You’re my partner!
S	 Yes! See you later, Matt.
b	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete the 
gaps. Point out that the first one (name) has been done for 
them. Play it again if necessary. 
	 Check answers and write the words on the board.
2  Sorry    ​3  number    ​4  Hi    ​5  meet    ​6  you    ​7  thank    ​
8  Fine
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the seven missing words in jumbled 
order on the board.
	 Finally, go through each line of the conversations  
eliciting / explaining the meaning of any words / phrases 
that Sts don’t understand. You might want to tell Sts that 
nowadays some people say I’m good (instead of I’m fine. / 
Fine.) in answer to the question How are you?.
c	 e 1.3  Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to try to copy the rhythm of the audio. 
Getting the rhythm right is one of the most important 
aspects of good pronunciation.
e 1.3
Same as script 1.2 with repeat pauses
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in groups of three, and tell them to take 
roles (Sally, Matt, and Ben). Tell them to focus on the pictures 
and explain that they are going to act out the conversations. 
If there’s time, get Sts to swap roles.
d	 Focus on the exercise. Explain that Hello and Hi mean the 
same, but Hi is more informal.
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to complete the gaps with words from the list.
	 Check answers and highlight that the words / phrases on 
the right are more informal than those on the left.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 13@@
1A
13
My name’s... = I’m    Very well = Fine    Thank you = Thanks
Goodbye = Bye
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the phrases in the left-hand column 
on the board first.
e	 Focus on the example sentences in the speech bubbles. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Explain that in English some words are 
said more strongly than others, e.g. in Nice to meet you, Nice 
and meet are pronounced more strongly than to and you. 
Model and drill the phrase, and encourage Sts to try to copy 
the rhythm. 
	 Tell Sts to imagine that they’re at a party where they don’t 
know anyone. Get them to stand up. 
	 Now tell Sts to introduce themselves to at least five other 
Sts. Encourage them to shake hands, or use a locally 
appropriate gesture, say Nice to meet you, and say Sorry? if 
they don’t hear the other student’s name.
2	GRAMMAR  verb be + , subject pronouns
a	 Focus on the instructions and on the first sentence, I am 
Carla. Then read the second sentence, I’m Carla, and 
explain that I’m is the contraction of the two words I and 
am. Tell Sts that when people speak, they normally use 
contractions.
	 Give Sts a minute to complete the other four gaps and 
check answers. 
2  I’m Matt.    ​3  My name’s Ben.    ​4  You’re my partner.    
​5  She’s in my salsa class.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.124. Explain that 
all the grammar rules and exercises are in this section of 
the book.
Grammar notes
Highlight that fluent speakers of English often use 
contractions in conversation, especially when the subject 
is a pronoun.
Highlight also that in English there is only one form of 
you, which is used for singular and plural, and for formal or 
informal situations. In your Sts’ language(s), there may be 
different pronouns for second person singular and plural, 
and also formal and informal forms.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you have a monolingual class, don’t be 
afraid of using your Sts’ L1 to talk about the grammar rules. 
At this level, it is unrealistic to expect Sts to fully understand 
grammar rules in English.
	 e 1.4  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Focus particularly on the 
pronunciation of the contractions, especially You’re /jʊə/, 
We’re /wɪə/, and They’re /ðeə/. Then go through the rules 
with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1A on p.125. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  are    ​2  is    ​3  are    ​4  is    ​5  am    ​6  is    ​7  are    ​8  is    ​9  is    ​
10  am
b
1  It’s…    ​2  They’re…    ​3  I’m…    ​4  You’re…
c
1  He’s…    ​2  We’re…    ​3  She’s…    ​4  It’s…    ​5  They’re…
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 1.5  Play the audio and get Sts to listen and repeat the 
pronouns and contractions.
e 1.5
1	 I, I’m
2	 you, you’re
3	 he, he’s
4	 she, she’s
5	 it, it’s
6	 we, we’re
7	 they, they’re
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the words on the board so that Sts 
know what they are saying.
d	 e 1.6  Focus on the example and tell Sts they’re going 
to hear a full form of the verb and that they must say the 
contracted form. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 1.6
1	 I am (pause) I’m
2	 you are (pause) you’re
3	 he is (pause) he’s
4	 she is (pause) she’s
5	 it is (pause) it’s
6	 we are (pause) we’re
7	 they are (pause) they’re
	 Now repeat the activity with individual Sts.
e	 Point to a male student whose name you remember and 
say He’s (Antonio). Then point to a female student and elicit 
She’s (María). 
	 Put Sts in pairs and ask them to continue naming other 
Sts, using He’s / She’s.
f	 Focus on the example sentences in the speech bubbles. 
	 Tell Sts to stand up and speak to the other Sts.
3	PRONUNCIATION  vowel sounds, word stress
Pronunciation notes
It is important to point out to Sts that with vowels (a, e, i, 
o, u), there is no one-to-one relation between a letter and 
a sound, e.g. the letter e can be pronounced in more than 
one way, e.g. he, very, and they. However, reassure your 
Sts that there are common combinations of letters which 
are usually pronounced the same way and these will be 
pointed out to them as the course progresses. 
a	 e 1.7  Focus on the Vowel sounds box and go through 
it with the class. Tell Sts that English has 20 vowel sounds, 
and that the English File pronunciation system has an 
example word to help them remember each sound. 
Learning the sounds will help them to pronounce words 
more clearly and confidently.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 14@@
1A
14
	 Now play it again, pausing after each word for Sts to 
underline the stressed syllable. 
	 Check answers. 
See underlining in script 1.9
EXTRA IDEA   If Sts have got dictionaries with them, for 
example on their phones, get them to look up a word, e.g. 
airport, and show them that stress is marked in dictionaries 
with an apostrophe before the stressed syllable, e.g.  
/ˈeəpɔːt/. If not, copy a dictionary entry onto the board, 
or use an online dictionary entry if you have an interactive 
board.
d	 Get Sts to copy the chart and write the words from c 
under the correct heading. Point out that the first one 
(airport) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
food
technology
places
pasta
computer
airport
pizza
email
hotel
salad
internet
museum
sandwich
website
university
e	 Write the three categories on the board. Then give Sts, 
in pairs, one minute to try to add more English words to 
each column.
	 Write their answers on the board. Underline the stressed 
syllable, and model and drill the correct pronunciation. 
4	VOCABULARY  days of the week, numbers 0–20
a	 e 1.10  Focus on the picture and elicit that the two 
people are Ben and Sally. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.10
Ben  See you on Saturday. Bye.
Sally  Bye, Ben.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Days and numbers 
on p.148 and get them to do Parts 1 and 2. Explain that 
these pages (Vocabulary Banks) are their vocabulary 
section where they will first do the exercises, and will 
then have the pages for reference to help them learn and 
remember the words. 
	 Focus on 1 Days of the week and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 e 1.11  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.11
Days and numbers, 1 Days of the week
Monday  Tuesday  Wednesday  Thursday  Friday  Saturday  Sunday
	 Focus on the six sound pictures (fish, tree, etc.). Explain 
that the phonetic symbol in the picture represents the 
sound. The phonetic alphabet is used worldwide to show 
how words are pronounced. Learning to recognize these 
symbols will help Sts to check the pronunciation of a word 
in a dictionary.
	 Tell Sts that the two dots in the symbol /iː/ mean that it’s a 
long sound. 
	 Now tell Sts that diphthongs, e.g. /eɪ/ and /aɪ/, are two 
sounds together (/e/ and /ɪ/, /æ/ and /ɪ/).
	 Now focus on the example words in the column under 
each sound picture, e.g. it, this, in. Explain that the pink 
letters are the same sound as the picture word they’re 
under. Demonstrate for Sts, e.g. say fish, it, this, in; tree, he, 
we, meet, etc. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen.
e 1.7 
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.7
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Get Sts to repeat the first picture word (fish), then the 
sound (/ɪ/), and then the group of three words (it, this, in). 
However, you may wish to get Sts to repeat after each 
individual word rather than the group of three.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 1.8  Tell Sts they’re going to hear ten words and that 
they must write them in their notebooks. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each word to give Sts time  
to write.
	 Check answers by getting Sts to write the words on the 
board.
e 1.8
Hi  Bye  meet  they  he  thanks  we  very  this  name
c	 e 1.9  Focus on the Word stress box and go through 
it with the class. Elicit / Explain the meaning of syllable 
(= units into which a word is divided). 
	 Now focus on the words. These are words that many Sts 
will probably already know, and some are ‘international’, 
e.g. hotel, internet. Write AIRPORT on the board. Elicit / Teach 
that it has two syllables. Then explain that all words of two 
or more syllables have one which is stressed (pronounced 
more strongly than the other(s)). Then say airport both 
ways (airport and airport) and ask Sts which way they think 
is correct (airport). Underline AIR on the board, and tell Sts 
to underline the stressed syllable when they learn new 
words, especially if it isn’t where they would expect it. 
!   Warn Sts that even if the same or a similar word exists in 
their language, the stress may be on a different syllable. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 1.9
airport  computer  email  hotel  internet  museum  pasta  pizza  
salad  sandwich  university  website
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 15@@
1A
15
EXTRA SUPPORT   Most Sts will probably know how to 
count to ten, but may be less confident with 11–20. Get 
the class to try to count from 0 to 20. You start with the 
number 0 and get a student to say the next number. Try to 
elicit all numbers from 0 to 20. Then do the same counting 
backwards, starting from 20.
	 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words with 
a piece of paper, leaving the numbers visible. 
	 Finally, go through the Phone numbers box with the 
class. Highlight that 0 is usually pronounced /əʊ/ in 
telephone numbers, although zero can also be used. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 1.14  Focus on the example and tell Sts they will hear 
two words (days of the week or numbers), and they have 
to say the next word in the sequence. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after the two words, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 1.14
Monday, Tuesday, (pause) Wednesday
eighteen, nineteen, (pause) twenty
Tuesday, Wednesday, (pause) Thursday
eight, nine, (pause) ten
thirteen, fourteen, (pause) fifteen
Friday, Saturday, (pause) Sunday
Sunday, Monday, (pause) Tuesday
ten, eleven, (pause) twelve
sixteen, seventeen, (pause) eighteen
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Model and drill the question. Get Sts to ask three Sts 
sitting near them. They should write down the phone 
numbers so that they can check them.
!   Tell Sts they can invent their phone numbers if they prefer. 
	 Get feedback from the class.
5	LISTENING & SPEAKING  recognizing places 	
	 and numbers
a	 e 1.15  Focus on the six places (airport, sandwich bar, etc.) 
and make sure Sts understand them. Tell Sts they’re going 
to listen to six short conversations. The first time they listen 
they should just try to understand where the conversation 
is taking place and write a number 2–6 in the boxes. Point 
out that the first one has been done for them.
!   Make sure Sts write 2–6 in the boxes before the words 
airport, sandwich bar, etc., and not in the spaces, e.g. after 
Gate number. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts to identify the place. Play again 
if necessary, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2  language school    ​3  airport    ​4  taxi    ​5  hotel    ​6  museum
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the days, or model and drill them yourself. Ask Sts where 
the stress is (always on the first syllable). Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
Sts may have problems with Tuesday /ˈtjuːzdeɪ/, 
Wednesday /ˈwenzdeɪ/, and Thursday /ˈθɜːzdeɪ/. You 
could write these on the board and cross out the silent d 
in Wednesday, and highlight the vowel sounds in Tuesday 
and Thursday.
	 e 1.12  Now focus on the instructions for c, and play the 
audio for Sts just to listen.
e 1.12
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.148
	 Highlight the stressed syllables (weekend, weekday, 
today, etc.). Elicit / Explain the meaning of any words Sts 
don’t know.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
	 Then focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the days of the 
week with a piece of paper and say them in order. Now 
ask them What day is it today? And tomorrow?
	 Finally, go through the Capital letters box with the class. 
	 Now focus on 2 Numbers 0−20 and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs
Vocabulary notes
Highlight the spelling changes between three and 
thirteen, and five and fifteen. You could also point out to 
Sts that numbers in English have only one form and never 
change.
	 e 1.13  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
5  five    ​7  seven    ​11  eleven    ​12  twelve    ​15  fifteen    ​ 
18  eighteen    ​20  twenty
e 1.13
2 Numbers 1-20
zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, 
twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, 
nineteen, twenty
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
numbers, or model and drill them yourself. Explain / Elicit 
that numbers 13–19 are stressed on the second syllable. 
Give further practice of any numbers your Sts find difficult 
to pronounce. 
!   When we count in a list, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., we usually stress 
numbers 13–19 on the first syllable. However, at all other 
times, when we say them in isolation, e.g. Room 13, they are 
stressed on the second syllable. We recommend that you 
teach this pronunciation, as it is important for Sts to later 
distinguish between, e.g. 13 (thirteen) and 30 (thirty).
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 16@@
1A
16
e 1.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
1	 A	 A cheese and tomato sandwich, please.
	
B	 That’s five pounds twenty.
2	 A	 So, Anna, your classes are on Tuesday and Thursday mornings. 
	
B	 Que? Sorry?
3	 The British Airways flight to Rome is now boarding at Gate 
number nine.
4	 A	 Where to, madam?
	
B	 Manchester Road, please. Number sixteen.
5	 A	 Here’s your key, sir. Room twelve.
	
B	 Thank you.
6	 A	 Here we are. 
	
B	 Oh no. It’s closed.
	
A	 Look, it says ‘Closed on Monday’!
b	 Focus on the words on the right in a. Elicit / Explain the 
meaning of Gate, etc. Now tell Sts to listen again, but this 
time to focus on the numbers and days they hear in each 
conversation. 
	 Play the audio once or twice as necessary, pausing 
between each conversation to give Sts time to write the 
numbers or days in the gaps. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by playing the audio a final time and eliciting the 
numbers and days for each one.
1	 sandwich bar	
5 pounds 20 
2	 language school	
Classes on Tuesday and Thursday  
mornings
3	 airport	
Gate number 9
4	 taxi	
16 Manchester Road
5	 hotel	
Room 12
6	 museum	
Closed on Mondays
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.118, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 e 1.16  Focus on the examples and tell Sts they’re going 
to hear a sentence and they must respond to it. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 1.16
1	 Hello. Nice to meet you. (pause) 
2	 What day is it today? (pause)
3	 Hi. What’s your name? (pause)
4	 What’s your phone number? (pause)
5	 Bye. See you on Monday. (pause)
6	 Have a nice weekend. (pause)
7	 Hi. This is Anna. (pause)
8	 Hello. How are you? (pause)
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 17@@
17
1B
	1B	 One world
e 1.17
1	 Scottish music
2	 Brazilian music
3	 Mexican music
4	 Russian music
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Countries on p.149. 
	 Focus on 1 Continents and get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs. 
	 e 1.18  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.18
Countries, 1 Continents
4	 Africa (pause) African
5	 Asia (pause) Asian
6	 Australia (pause) Australian
3	 Europe (pause) European
1	 North America (pause) North American
2	 South America (pause) South American
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the instructions for c. Get Sts to cover the words 
with a piece of paper, leaving the map visible. Sts look at 
the map and try to remember both the continents and 
adjectives.
	 Finally, focus on the compass points, and model and drill 
the pronunciation: north /nɔːθ/, east /iːst/, south /saʊθ/, 
west /west/. 
	 Focus on 2 Countries and nationalities and get Sts to do 
a individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
The nationality word is normally the same as the word for 
the language of the country, e.g. in Italy the language is 
Italian, in Hungary the language is Hungarian. However, 
some countries are different, for example in Brazil the 
language is Portuguese, and in some countries like 
Switzerland there are several official languages (German, 
French, Italian, and Romansch).
	 e 1.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. 
 G   verb be − and ?
 V   countries, numbers 21–100
 P   /ə/, consonant sounds /ʧ/, /ʃ/, /ʤ/, word stress
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is the Olympics, a time when 
people from many nationalities gather together in one place. 
Sts complete their study of the verb be and learn how to say 
where they and other people are from. They start the lesson 
by learning vocabulary for countries and nationalities, and this 
language is then practised in a world quiz. Next, Pronunciation 
covers the schwa /ə/, a sound which occurs in many English 
words, and three consonant sounds, which are difficult for 
many nationalities. The Grammar section, be in negative 
sentences and questions, is then presented through three 
interviews between a journalist and sports fans from different 
countries. Sts then practise asking where people are from. 
There is then a second Vocabulary section where Sts learn 
numbers 21−100, and a Pronunciation and Listening section 
which focuses on word stress in numbers, and practises 
numbers through listening and playing Bingo.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  verb be − and ? p.169 
Vocabulary  The world p.258 (instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Nationalities bingo p.215  
(instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook  1B
Online Practice  1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the word CONTINENT on the board and elicit / teach its 
meaning. Ask Sts how many continents there are (six) and 
if they can name them (from largest to smallest: Asia, Africa, 
North America, South America, Europe, Australia). Answers 
to this question might differ as some people say there are 
five continents (counting North and South America as one); 
some also include Antarctica.
1	VOCABULARY  countries
a	 e 1.17  Books open. Focus on the four countries and 
make sure Sts know what they are. 
	 Now tell Sts that they are going to hear music from these 
countries and they must write a number 1–4 in the boxes.
	 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  Scotland    ​2  Brazil    ​3  Mexico    ​4  Russia
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 18@@
18
1B
1
a  Europe    ​b  Asia    ​c  Africa    ​d  Australia    ​e  North America    ​
f  South America
2
a  Argentina    ​b  England    ​c  Turkey    ​d  Scotland    ​e  the USA  ​
f  Italy
3
a  Germany    ​b  Spain    ​c  Ireland    ​d  Poland    ​e  Switzerland    ​
f  Hungary
4
a  Chinese    ​b  French    ​c  Czech    ​d  Russian    ​e  Brazilian    ​
f  Mexican    ​g  Egyptian    ​h  Japanese
2	PRONUNCIATION  /ə/, /tʃ/, /ʃ/, /dʒ/
Pronunciation notes
The /ə/ sound occurs before or after stressed syllables 
and is the most common vowel sound in English. Final 
unstressed -er is always pronounced /ə/.
/tʃ/ the letters ch and tch are usually pronounced /tʃ/, e.g. 
children, watch.
/ʃ/ the letters sh are always pronounced /ʃ/, e.g. she, shop. The 
letters s and double ss are very rarely pronounced /ʃ/, e.g. only 
in sure, sugar, Russian, passion, and a few other words.
/dʒ/ j is always pronounced /dʒ/, e.g. Japanese. g is usually 
pronounced /dʒ/ before e or i (e.g. German, giraffe), but 
is pronounced /g/ before all other consonants, e.g. gate, 
goodbye, and sometimes before e and i, e.g. get, give, etc.
a	 e 1.20  Focus on The /ə/ sound box and go through it 
with the class. Model and drill the sound. Before you play 
the audio, you may want to point out that some words, 
e.g. computer, can have more than one /ə/ sound in them 
(it has two). Also show Sts that the stressed syllable has 
been underlined in the example words.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the sound and the 
four example words in the list. 
e 1.20
See words in Student’s Book on p.8
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
b	 e 1.21  Focus on the Consonant sounds box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the three sound pictures (chess, shower, 
jazz). Remind Sts that the phonetic symbol in the picture 
represents the sound. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. 
e 1.21
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.8
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sound and 
sentence for Sts to repeat. Play again if necessary.
	 Put Sts in pairs to practise saying the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
e 1.19
2 Countries and nationalities
3	 England (pause) English
6	 Ireland (pause) Irish
2	 Poland (pause) Polish
5	 Scotland (pause) Scottish
1	 Spain (pause) Spanish
4	 Turkey (pause) Turkish
9	 Germany (pause) German
7	 Mexico (pause) Mexican
8	 the United States (pause) American
14	 Argentina (pause) Argentinian
10	 Brazil (pause) Brazilian
12	 Egypt (pause) Egyptian
11	 Hungary (pause) Hungarian
13	 Italy (pause) Italian
15	 Russia (pause) Russian
17	 China (pause) Chinese
16	 Japan (pause) Japanese
20	 the Czech Republic (pause) Czech
18	 France (pause) French
19	 Switzerland (pause) Swiss
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 If your Sts’ country is not in the list, teach it with the 
nationality adjective, and elicit which group the adjective 
belongs to.
	 Focus on the Capital letters and The United Kingdom 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions for b. Get Sts to cover each 
group of words with a piece of paper, leaving the flags 
visible. Sts look at the flags and try to remember both the 
countries and nationalities. 
	 Finally, focus on Activation and the example. Put Sts in 
pairs and get them to tell their partner in which continent 
the six countries are, or, still in pairs, A could say a country, 
e.g. Italy, and B says where the country is, e.g. Italy is in 
Europe.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to do a quiz in small groups. 
Before they start, draw their attention to the example 
speech bubbles. Focus on the expressions I think… and 
I’m not sure. Teach / Elicit their meaning and drill the 
pronunciation. 
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and set them 
a time limit to do questions 1–4 in The World Quiz. Tell 
them that the answers to questions 2, 3, and 4 are the 20 
countries in the Vocabulary Bank, and let them refer to it.
	 Check answers and find out which group got the most 
correct answers. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 19@@
19
1B
	 Finally, go through the interviews, eliciting / explaining 
the meaning of any words or phrases that Sts don’t 
understand. You might want to point out to Sts the 
different use of sorry in the last interview. In 1A Sts saw 
Sorry being used to ask someone to repeat something. 
Here the interviewer uses it to apologize – to show he 
feels bad about getting the nationality wrong. 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.124. 
Grammar notes
Remind Sts that in conversations it is more common to 
use contractions in negatives than the full form. 
In the negative, the verb be can be contracted in two 
ways, e.g. You aren’t Italian (contracting not) or You’re 
not Italian (contracting are). English File at lower levels 
normally uses the former.
With short answers, explain to Sts that although native 
speakers often use Yes, I am instead of just Yes, both ways 
of answering are perfectly correct. However, answering 
just Yes or No can sound abrupt.
	 e 1.24  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1B on p.125. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 1	 I’m not British.
	
2	 They aren’t Brazilian.
	
3	 It isn’t in South America.
	
4	 You aren’t French. 
b	 1	 Am I in room 10? Yes, you are. 
	
2	 Is it Spanish? No, it isn’t. 
	
3	 Are they students? No, they aren’t. 
	
4	 Is he from the USA? Yes, he is. 
	
5	 Are you Mike Bell? No, I’m not.
c	 1  ’s    ​2  Are    ​3  ’m    ​4  ’m    ​5  Are    ​6  ’m    ​7  Is    ​8  isn’t    ​	
	
9  ’s    ​10  Are    ​11  ’m
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 e 1.25  Focus on the example and tell Sts they will hear 
ten questions, and each time they must respond with a 
short answer.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question to elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 1.25
1	 Is Sydney the capital of Australia? (pause) No, it isn’t.
2	 Are you English? (pause) No, I’m not.
3	 Is Asterix French? (pause) Yes, he is.
4	 Are the Simpsons English? (pause) No, they aren’t. 
5	 Is sushi Chinese? (pause) No, it isn’t.
6	 Are Zara and Mango from Italy? (pause) No, they aren’t. 
7	 Is Glasgow in Scotland? (pause) Yes, it is.
8	 Are Honda and Suzuki Japanese? (pause) Yes, they are.
9	 Is J.K. Rowling American? (pause) No, she isn’t.
 10	 Is New York the capital of the United States? (pause) No, it isn’t. 
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
c	 e 1.22  Here Sts recycle some of the country and 
nationality words that they learned in the Vocabulary 
Bank. 
	 Tell Sts they will hear the name of a country and they 
must say the nationality. Focus on the example.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each country, and elicit the 
nationality from the class. 
e 1.22
1	 Scotland (pause) Scottish
2	 Turkey (pause) Turkish
3	 China (pause) Chinese
4	 Germany (pause) German
5	 Hungary (pause) Hungarian
6	 Brazil (pause) Brazilian
7	 France (pause) French
8	 Poland (pause) Polish
9	 Argentina (pause) Argentinian
10	 Japan (pause) Japanese
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from individual 
Sts. Give further practice of any words your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
3	GRAMMAR  verb be − and ?
a	 e 1.23  Focus on the instructions, and on the photos and 
conversations.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each interview for Sts to 
write the country or nationality.
	 Check answers.
1  Spain, Spanish    ​2  Australia    ​3  German, Switzerland
e 1.23
(script in Student’s Book on p.118) 
1	 A	 Hi. Where are you from?
	
B	 We’re from Oviedo, in Spain.
	
A	 OK. Good luck to the Spanish team!
	
B	 Thank you!
2	 A	 Hello. I’m Mike from UK News. Where are you from?
	
B	 I’m from Australia. 
	
A	 Are you from Sydney?
	
B	 No, I’m not. I’m from Cairns.
	
A	 Where’s Cairns? Is it near Sydney?
	
B	 No, it isn’t. It’s in the north. Am I on TV?
	
A	 Yes, you are.
	
B	 Wow!
3	 A	 Hi. Are you German? 
	
B	 No, we aren’t. We’re from Switzerland.
	
A	 Oh, sorry!
b	 Give Sts two minutes to read the interviews again and 
complete the chart. Point out the example (you aren’t).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by copying the chart onto the board and getting 
Sts to tell you how to complete it.
+
I’m
you’re
it’s
−
I’m not
you aren’t
it isn’t
?
Am I
Are you
Is it
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 20@@
20
1B
e 1.26
1	 What’s three plus one? (pause) four
2	 What’s nine plus two? (pause) eleven
3	 What’s thirteen plus three? (pause) sixteen
4	 What’s eight plus five? (pause) thirteen
5	 What’s seven plus five? (pause) twelve
6	 What’s six plus four? (pause) ten
7	 What’s ten plus four? (pause) fourteen
8	 What’s five plus three? (pause) eight
9	 What’s eight plus three plus seven? (pause) eighteen
10	 What’s eleven plus seven plus two? (pause) twenty
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Days and numbers 
on p.148 and get them to do Part 3. 
	 Focus on 3 Numbers 21−100 and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 e 1.27  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers and write the numbers on the board.
30    ​35    ​40    ​43    ​50    ​59    ​60    ​67    ​70    ​72    ​80    ​88    ​90    ​
94    ​100
e 1.27
3 Numbers 21-100
twenty-one, thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-three, fifty, fifty-nine, 
sixty, sixty-seven, seventy, seventy-two, eighty, eighty-eight, ninety, 
ninety-four, a hundred
	 Focus on the Pronunciation box and go through it with 
the class. Point out that 13, 14, etc. are stressed on the 
second syllable, and 30, 40, etc. are stressed on the first 
syllable. Sts will practise this difference in the next part of 
the lesson. Point out that with compound numbers e.g. 
twenty-one, thirty-five, forty-three, etc., the main stress is on 
the second number e.g. twenty-one, thirty-five, forty-three.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again or say the numbers 
yourself, pausing after each number for Sts to repeat. 
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words 
with a piece of paper and say the numbers.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA IDEA   A numbers game which Sts always enjoy is 
Buzz. You may want to play it now or at any other time when 
you want to revise numbers.  
Get Sts to sit or stand in a circle and count out loud. When 
they come to a number which contains three (e.g. 13) or a 
multiple of three (e.g. three, six, nine, etc.), they have to say 
‘Buzz’ instead of the number.  
If a student makes a mistake, either saying the number 
instead of ‘Buzz’, or simply saying the wrong number, he / 
she is ‘out’, and the next player begins again from number 
one.  
Carry on until there is only one student left, who is the 
winner, or until the group have got to 30 without making a 
mistake.  
You can also play Buzz with seven as the ‘wild’ number, and 
go up to 50.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Play the audio again and ask Sts for the 
correct answers where appropriate, e.g. ‘Is Sydney the capital 
of Australia?’ ‘No, it isn’t. The capital of Australia is Canberra.’
e	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to write similar 
questions to those they heard in d, beginning with Is…? 
or Are…?. Give them some more examples if necessary, 
and then set a time limit for Sts, in pairs, to write three 
questions.
	 Monitor and check what they are writing. Then put two 
pairs together and get them to answer each other’s 
questions.
	 Get feedback from a few pairs.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Where are they from?, A on p.102,  
B on p.108. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully, and focus 
on the two example questions (Where’s X from? and Where 
in (country)?). Tell Sts they have to ask these questions for 
each of their three people and write the answers in the 
chart.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A asks his / her questions about 
person 1 to B and writes the information in the chart. 
	 B now asks A about person 2, and they then take turns to 
ask and answer.
	 When they have finished, get them to compare charts, 
and then get feedback from some pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to choose a 
different country from Vocabulary Bank Countries and 
then think of a city there.
	 Get Sts to ask you the questions first.
!   The answer to Where are you from? is usually I’m from 
(town) when you’re in your own country, and I’m from 
(country) or I’m (nationality) followed by the town when 
you’re abroad. 
	 Get Sts to stand up and ask five other Sts the questions. 
	 Finally, ask a few Sts where they are from.
EXTRA SUPPORT   In a multilingual class, get Sts to use their 
real towns and countries / nationalities.
5	VOCABULARY  numbers 21–100
a	 e 1.26  This exercise revises numbers 1–20, which Sts 
did in 1A. Focus on the illustration and elicit how to say 
it (three plus one is…). Then point out the speech bubble 
and elicit the number (four).
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear ten sums and they must 
only write the answers.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question to give Sts 
time to write the answer.
	 Check answers by playing each sum again, pausing and 
getting individual Sts to answer.
See numbers in bold in script 1.26
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 21@@
21
1B
e 1.30
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
1	 Announcer  The train waiting on platform thirteen is the nine forty-
eight Great Western train to Oxford, calling at Slough, Reading, 
Didcot Parkway, and Oxford. 
	
A	 That’s our train. Platform thirteen. Come on.
	
B	 OK. Let’s go. 
2	 A	 Excuse me! How far is it to Dublin? 
	
B	 It’s about forty kilometres.
	
A	 Thanks a lot. 
3	 A	 Just one more set. Come on. 
	
B	 Fifteen–love.
	
A	 Fantastic serve! 
4	 A	 Will all passengers on flight B-A two three four to Budapest 
please go to gate sixty immediately.
	
B	 Gate sixty. Is that our flight?
	
C	 No, it’s to Budapest, not Bucharest. 
5	 A	 How much is that?
	
B	 Two pizzas and a Coke. That’s seventeen pounds. 
6	 A	 What’s your address?
	
B	 It’s eighty Park Road.
	
A	 Sorry? What number?
	
B	 Eighty, eight oh. Park Road.
7	 A	 OK, can you be quiet, please? Open your books on page ninety.
	
B	 What page is it?
	
C	 Page ninety.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.118, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts what each conversation is about.
c	 Draw this bingo card on the board for Sts to copy.
	 In pairs, Sts complete their bingo card with six numbers 
from a. They must only choose one from each pair, e.g. 
either 13 or 30, but not both. 
	 Call out random numbers, choosing from the pairs of 
numbers in a. Keep a note of the numbers you call out.
	 If Sts have one of the numbers you call out on their card, 
they should cross it off. Keep calling until one pair has 
crossed off all the numbers, at which point they should 
call out ‘Bingo!’
	 Check the winning pair’s card. If it’s correct, they have 
won. If it isn’t, continue the game. Once there is a winner, 
you can play again if there is time. 
c	 e 1.28  Play the audio and get Sts to write the numbers 
they hear.
	 Check answers by eliciting the numbers onto the board.
25    ​33    ​47    ​50    ​66    ​78    ​81    ​99    ​
e 1.28
twenty-five  thirty-three  forty-seven  fifty  sixty-six 
seventy-eight  eighty-one  ninety-nine 
d	 Sts work individually and choose ten numbers from 21 to 
100, which they write on a piece of paper.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to dictate their numbers to 
their partner, who writes them down. 
	 When they have swapped roles, they can compare pieces 
of paper to check for mistakes.
6	PRONUNCIATION & LISTENING  word stress
Pronunciation notes
As Sts have seen in the Vocabulary Bank, 13, 14, etc. 
are stressed on the second syllable, and 30, 40, etc. are 
stressed on the first syllable. However, 13 / 30, 14 / 40, etc. 
can sound very similar and are often confused. Native 
speakers sometimes need to clarify which number they 
mean, by saying, e.g. ‘one three’ or ‘three oh’ to make it clear 
whether they are saying 13 or 30.
a	 e 1.29  Play the audio and get Sts to repeat the numbers. 
	 Ask What’s the difference between the numbers in a and b?
The numbers in a, e.g. 13, 14, etc., are stressed on the second 
syllable, and the numbers in b, e.g. 30, 40, etc., are stressed on the 
first syllable.
	 Point out to Sts that this means that the pairs of numbers 
can be easily confused and this can be a problem, even 
for native speakers, particularly for example in a noisy 
environment like a restaurant or café.
e 1.29
See numbers in Student’s Book on p.9
b	 e 1.30  Tell Sts that this time they will hear seven 
conversations, and in each conversation they will hear just 
one number from each pair in a.
	 Play the audio twice and Sts circle a or b.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  a 13    ​2  b 40    ​3  a 15    ​4  b 60    ​5  a 17    ​6  b 80    ​7  b 90
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 22@@
22
1C
	1C	 What’s your email?
	 Now play it again to drill the pronunciation of the words. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
c	 Focus on the two small illustrations. Model and drill the 
two questions What’s this? (for a singular object near 
you) and What’s that? (for a singular object far from you). 
Demonstrate the meaning by touching your chair and 
asking What’s this? Then point to the door and ask What’s 
that?.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to point to objects and ask 
and answer the questions.
d	 Focus on the illustration in a again and the speech 
bubbles A–C. Tell Sts that sentences 1–3 are what the 
people are saying, and give them time to match them.
e	 e 1.32  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  C    ​2  A    ​3  B
e 1.32
1	 C	 What page is it? 
2	 A	 Sorry I’m late.
3	 B	 Look at the board, please.
f	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Classroom language 
on p.150. The teacher says section helps Sts recognize 
and respond to common instructions used in the 
classroom. Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 1.33  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. Make sure the meaning of each phrase is 
clear by miming or getting Sts to mime.
e 1.33
Classroom language
7	 Open your books, please.
 11	 Go to page eighty-four.
 13	 Do exercise a.
5	 Read the text.
1	 Look at the board.
 12	 Close the door.
2	 Work in pairs.
 10	 Answer the questions.
9	 Listen and repeat.
6	 Stand up.
3	 Sit down.
8	 Turn off your phone.
4	 Please stop talking!
	 Focus on the Please box and go through it with the class.
	 In You say Sts learn phrases they themselves may need to 
use in class. Get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 1.34  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts know what all the phrases 
mean. 
 G   possessive adjectives: my, your, etc.
 V   classroom language
 P   /əʊ/, /uː/, /ɑː/, the alphabet, sentence stress
Lesson plan
The context for this lesson is the classroom, and signing 
up for an English course. The lesson starts with a focus on 
classroom language, which helps Sts to understand and 
respond to common classroom instructions, and to ask 
the teacher in English for information and clarification. Sts 
then learn the pronunciation of the alphabet and practise 
it with common abbreviations. Next, Sts listen to a Skype 
interview with a student and a teacher at a language school 
in England, and learn how to give personal information 
and practise spelling. This leads into the grammar focus of 
possessive adjectives. The different elements of the lesson 
are brought together in the final activities, where Sts do 
a communication activity discovering what some actors’ 
and singers’ real names are, and a writing focus where they 
complete an application form for a visa. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  possessive adjectives: my, your, etc. p.170 
Vocabulary  Classroom language p.259 (instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Personal information p.216  
(instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook  1C
Online Practice  1C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Point to a few things in the classroom (from Vocabulary a) 
and ask Sts what they are. Write the words on the board, and 
model and drill pronunciation.
1	VOCABULARY  classroom language
a	 Books open. Focus on the illustration and get Sts to match 
the words and pictures.
b	 e 1.31  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.31
4	 a board
9	 a chair
3	 a computer
5	 a desk
1	 a door
2	 a picture
8	 a table
6	 a wall
7	 a window
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 23@@
23
1C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 1.37  Focus on the alphabet. Explain that it’s important 
to know how to say the English alphabet because you 
often need to spell names, surnames, town names, email 
addresses, passwords, etc. (especially when you’re talking 
on the phone).
	 Play the audio for Sts to repeat the letters in groups  
of three.
e 1.37
See alphabet in Student’s Book on p.10
c	 e 1.38  Focus on the chart. Explain that the letters are in 
columns according to the vowel sound of each letter. Elicit 
the seven picture words and sounds (Sts have seen them 
all before). 
	 Then show Sts how the letters in each column have the 
same vowel sound, e.g. train, A, H, J; tree, B, E, etc. 
	 Put Sts in pairs. Get them to go through the alphabet, 
stopping at the letters that are missing from the chart, and 
writing them in the correct column. Do the first one with 
them (C ). Write it on the board and ask Sts how to say it 
and which column it goes in (tree). Give Sts a time limit, 
e.g. three minutes, to complete the chart. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check answers 
(you may want to copy the complete chart onto the 
board).
e 1.38
train /eɪ/	
A H J K
tree /iː/	
B C D E G P T V
egg /e/	
F L M N S X Z
bike /aɪ/	
I Y
phone /əʊ/	
O
boot /uː/	
Q U W
car /ɑː/	
R
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sound for 
Sts to repeat the group of letters.
d	 e 1.39  Focus on the group of letters and explain that 
these letters are often confused. Play the audio for Sts just 
to listen to the different sounds.
e 1.39
See letters in Student’s Book on p.10
e	 e 1.40  Tell Sts that now they are going to hear just one 
letter from each group. They will hear the letter twice. 
	 Play the audio and tell Sts to circle the letter they hear. 
	 Check answers.
e 1.40
1  E, E    2  J, J    3  Q, Q    4  C, C    5  B, B    6  M, M    7  V, V    8  Y, Y
f	 Focus on the phrases and tell Sts that they are all things 
that we normally refer to just using abbreviations (the 
bold letters). Point out the example (a PC). Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to practise saying the abbreviations. Make 
sure they understand all the phrases.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.34
Classroom language
 19	 Sorry, can you repeat that, please?
 14	 Sorry I’m late.
 18	 I don’t understand.
 15	 Can I have a copy, please?
 22	 How do you spell it?
 17	 I don’t know.
 21	 How do you say gato in English?
 20	 Can you help me, please?
 16	 What page is it?
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences and questions, or model and drill them yourself. 
Encourage Sts to use the right rhythm.
	 Now focus on the instructions for e. Get Sts to cover the 
sentences and questions with a piece of paper, leaving 
the pictures visible. 
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Tell Sts from now on you 
want them to try to use the phrases from this lesson. It’s a 
good idea to have a poster on the wall with this classroom 
language for Sts to refer to.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g	 e 1.35  Tell Sts they are going to hear some instructions 
and they must act out what they hear.
	 Play the audio and get Sts to follow the classroom 
instructions.
e 1.35
Stand up.
Sit down.
Open your books.
Go to page twelve.
Look at exercise one b.
Close your books.
Listen and repeat ‘Nice to meet you.’
Answer the question ‘Where are you from?’
2	PRONUNCIATION  /əʊ/, /uː/, /ɑː/, the alphabet
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that the two dots in the symbols /uː/ and /ɑː/ 
mean that it’s a long sound. 
Remind Sts that /əʊ/ is a diphthong, i.e. two sounds 
together, /ə/ and /ʊ/, if you think this will help them. 
a	 e 1.36  Focus on the three sound pictures (phone, boot, 
car). 
	 Now focus on the example words in the row next to each 
sound picture, e.g. close (verb), go, and Poland. Elicit / 
Explain that the pink letters are the same sound as the 
picture word they’re next to. Demonstrate for Sts, e.g. say 
phone, close, go, etc. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen.
e 1.36
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.10
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 24@@
24
1C
	 Give Sts time to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  Vazquez    ​2  20    ​3  Argentina    ​4  Buenos Aires    ​5  ​(Florida) 
165    ​6  C1005AAC    ​7  11 15 8934 5568    ​8  ​(54) 11 6023 5442
e 1.41
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
T = teacher, M = Micaela
T	 Hello? Hello? Can you hear me?
M	 Hi, yes, fine. I can hear you.
T	 Good! I’m Mark, from English House Language School.
M	 Hi, Mark.
T	 OK, can I check your details first?
M	 Yes, of course.
T	 What’s your first name?
M	 Micaela.
T	 How do you spell it?
M	 M-I-C-A-E-L-A.
T	 M-I-C-A-E-L-A – is that right?
M	 Yes, that’s right.
T	 And what’s your surname?
M	 Vazquez.
T	 Vasquez. Is that V-A-S…?
M	 No, it’s V-A-Z-Q-U-E-Z.
T	 V-A-Z-Q-U-E-Z. OK. And how old are you?
M	 I’m 20.
T	 Where are you from?
M	 I’m from Argentina.
T	 Where in Argentina?
M	 From Buenos Aires.
T	 What’s your address?
M	 It’s Florida one six five.
T	 Florida’s the street? Number one six five?
M	 Yes.
T	 What’s your postcode?
M	 Sorry?
T	 You know, the postcode.
M	 Ah yes. It’s C-one zero zero five A-A-C.
T	 C-one zero zero five A-A-C. Great. What’s your email address?
M	 It’s m dot vazquez at mail dot com.
T	 And what’s your phone number?
M	 My mobile or my home phone, my landline?
T	 Both – mobile and landline.
M	 My mobile is one one, one five, eight nine three four, five five six 
eight.
T	 One one, one five, eight nine three four, five five six eight. Great. 
And your landline?
M	 Five four, one one, six zero two three, five four four two.
T	 Five four, one one, six zero two three, five four four two. 
M	 That’s right. 
T	 OK, that’s great. So, what do you do, Micaela?
M	 I’m at university. I’m a medical student… 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.118, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
b	 e 1.42  Now focus on the teacher’s questions and give 
Sts a couple of minutes to complete them. Point out that 
the first one (What’s) has been done for them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Play it again, 
pausing if necessary.
	 Check answers and elicit the meaning of How old are you?
!   The question How old are you? and the answer I’m 20 are 
with the verb be. In your Sts’ L1, a different verb may be used, 
e.g. have. 
EXTRA IDEA   Play Hangman. Think of a word Sts know, 
preferably of at least eight letters, e.g. NATIONALITY. Write a 
dash on the board for each letter of the word: 
__ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ 
Sts call out letters one at a time. If the letter is in the 
word (e.g. A), fill it in each time it occurs, e.g.  
__ A __ __ __ __ A __ __ __ __. Only accept correctly pronounced 
letters. If the letter is not in the word, draw the first line of 
this picture on the board: 
Write any wrongly guessed letters under the picture so that 
Sts don’t repeat them. The object of the game is to guess the 
word before the man is ‘hanged’. Sts can make guesses at 
any time, but each wrong guess is ‘punished’ by another line 
being drawn.  
The student who correctly guesses the word comes to the 
board and chooses a new word.  
Sts can also play in pairs / groups, drawing on a piece of 
paper.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 personal information
a	 e 1.41  Focus on the task and the photo of Micaela, 
a language student, and Mark, the man on the laptop 
screen, who is a teacher at a language school. 
	 Now focus on the language school enrolment form. 
Explain (in Sts’ L1 if necessary) that Micaela wants to study 
English at a language school in England. Tell Sts that 
they are going to listen to her having an interview with 
a teacher called Mark on Skype, and they must complete 
the form with her information. 
	 Go through the different headings on the form and make 
sure Sts understand them. Explain the difference between 
first name and surname, using the names of famous 
people who you think Sts will know, e.g. Brad Pitt, showing 
that Brad is his first name and Pitt his surname (or family 
name). Sts may also not know age and postcode.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. Then play it again, 
pausing to give Sts time to complete the gaps. Play again 
if necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   This is the first quite long listening that Sts 
have had. Reassure them by telling them just to relax and 
listen the first time, without trying to complete the form, but 
just trying to follow the conversation. Then tell them to try 
to complete some of the form, and play the audio as many 
times as you think they need, pausing where necessary, e.g. 
after the phone numbers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 25@@
25
1C
4	GRAMMAR  possessive adjectives: my, your, etc.
a	 Focus on the two questions and answers, and get Sts to 
complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  you    2  I    3  your    4  My
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1C on p.124. 
Grammar notes 
In some languages the possessive adjective agrees with 
the following noun, i.e. it can be masculine, feminine, or 
plural, depending on the gender and number of the noun 
that comes after. In English, nouns don’t have gender, 
so possessive adjectives don’t change, and the use of, 
e.g. his / her / their, simply depends on whether we are 
talking about something belonging or related to a man, a 
woman, or two or more people. 
Remind Sts that your is used for singular and plural.
	 e 1.43  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Then focus on the it’s or its? box and go through it with 
the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1C on p.125. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  Their    ​2  Her    ​3  Our    ​4  its    ​5  your    ​6  His    ​7  My    ​
8  your    ​9  Her    ​10  Our
b
1  Her    ​2  their    ​3  your    ​4  she    ​5  He    ​6  his    ​7  your    ​
8  Our    ​9  My    ​10  She
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point. 
c	 e 1.44  Focus on the examples and tell Sts they are 
going to hear a sentence, e.g. I’m Matt, and they must 
change it using a possessive adjective and the word name 
(My name’s Matt).
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 1.44
1	 I’m Matt. (pause) My name’s Matt.
2	 You’re Sally. (pause) Your name’s Sally.
3	 We’re Mike and Mia. (pause) Our names are Mike and Mia.
4	 He’s Ben. (pause) His name’s Ben.
5	 They’re William and Harry. (pause) Their names are William and 
Harry.
6	 She’s Carla. (pause) Her name’s Carla.
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   The first time you could pause the audio 
and give Sts time to write the transformed sentences. Then 
repeat, getting Sts to cover what they wrote and do the 
transformations orally.
2  What’s    ​3  How    ​4  How    ​5  from    ​6  ​What’s    ​7  What’s    ​
8  email    ​9  ​number 
e 1.42
1	 What’s your first name?
2	 What’s your surname?
3	 How do you spell it?
4	 How old are you?
5	 Where are you from?
6	 What’s your address?
7	 What’s your postcode?
8	 What’s your email address?
9	 What’s your phone number?
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to close their books. Play the audio 
again, pausing after each question and get Sts to answer 
about themselves.
c	 Focus on the Sentence stress box and go through it 
with the class. Remind Sts that getting the rhythm right 
when they speak will help them to understand and be 
understood. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question for Sts to 
repeat the questions. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio, pausing after each question 
for Sts to underline the stressed words. Check answers.
1	 What’s your first name?
2	 What’s your surname?
3	 How do you spell it?
4	 How old are you?
5	 Where are you from?
6	 What’s your address?
7	 What’s your postcode?
8	 What’s your email address?
9	 What’s your phone number?
Then play the audio again for Sts to repeat the questions, 
copying the rhythm. 
d	 Focus on the Saying emails box and go through it with 
the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Teach underscore (_) and hyphen (-), and 
mention double for letters in spelling, e.g. Ella. 
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to sit facing each 
other. Explain that they’re going to role-play the Skype 
interview and ask and answer the questions in b. A is the 
teacher, and B is a new student. A is going to interview B. 
	 Tell A to start the interview: Hello. What’s your first name?, 
etc. Remind Sts to write down the answers.
!   Tell Sts they can invent their ages, addresses, and phone 
numbers if they prefer. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get B to listen and answer the questions 
with his / her book closed. 
	 Get Sts to swap roles. 
	 Get some quick feedback by asking a few Sts about their 
partners, e.g. What’s his address? What’s her email address?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 26@@
26
1C
5	WRITING  completing a form
	 This is the first time Sts are sent to the Writing section at 
the back of the Student’s Book. Here Sts will find model 
texts, with exercises and language notes, and then a 
writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercise(s) in class, but set the actual writing 
task for homework. 
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Completing a form on p.113.
a	 Focus on the Capital letters box and go through it 
with the class. Tell them to highlight any rules which are 
different from their L1 (e.g. nationalities and languages are 
not written with a capital letter in several languages.).
b	 Focus on the application form for a visa. Go through 
the different sections with Sts. Highlight and check the 
meaning and pronunciation of:
•	 Mr for a man, Mrs for a married woman, and Ms /məz/ for a 
woman (giving no indication about marital status). 
•	 gender, for the sex of the person (male or female).
•	 married, single, divorced, separated.
•	 birth.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to complete the form. Remind 
them to check that they use capital letters correctly.
	 Go round checking Sts are completing the form correctly. 
Then elicit answers from individual Sts for each section. 
EXTRA IDEA   If you want to give extra practice with personal 
information questions, get Sts to use the form to interview 
each other. 
c	 Focus on the paragraph and get Sts to copy it out again, 
using capital letters where necessary. 
	 Check answers by eliciting from Sts the words which need 
capital letters and writing the paragraph on the board.
My name’s Marek. I’m from Gdansk in Poland, and I speak Polish, 
German, and a little English. My teacher is American. Her name’s 
Kate. My English classes are on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Quickly revise how to say the alphabet in 
English before Sts try to correct the paragraph.
d	 As this writing task is very short, you may like to get Sts to 
do it in class. Get them to write their own paragraphs on a 
piece of paper, check for capital letters, and then swap the 
paragraph with another student. 
d	 e 1.45  Focus on the photos and ask Sts if they know the 
people. Make sure they understand the meaning of real 
(= actually true, in this case names, e.g. on their passport 
or ID). 
	 Ask the question to the class and for each photo, elicit 
with a show of hands who thinks they are their real 
names.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.45
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
Snoop Dogg isn’t his real name. His real name is Calvin Cordozar 
Broadus. He’s American.
Shakira is her real name. Her full name is Shakira Isabel Mebarak 
Ripoll. She’s from Colombia.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What’s his / her real name?, A on 
p.102, B on p.108.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully.  
Explain / Elicit the meaning of actor (= a man in a film), 
actress (= a woman in a film), and singer (= a person 
whose job is singing). Tell Sts that nowadays the word 
actor is often used for both men and women. Then drill 
the question What’s his real name? or What’s her real name?.
	 Give Sts a minute to put crosses next to the names they 
think aren’t real. Then sit A and B face-to-face. A asks his / 
her questions to B and writes the information in the chart. 
	 B now asks A his / her questions.
	 At the end of the activity, get Sts to compare charts to 
check they have spelled the real names correctly.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 27@@
27
PE1
	 Focus Sts’ attention on the phonetics next to each word. 
Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to repeat.
c	 Tell Sts to cover the words and look at the symbols. They 
could either test themselves or a partner. 
2	r INTRODUCTION
a	 e 1.47  Focus on the two photos and elicit what Sts 
can see. Tell them that the man is Rob and the woman 
is Jenny, and that they are the main characters in these 
lessons. 
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and go through them with 
Sts, eliciting / explaining new words, e.g. lives, works, 
magazine, etc. Then play the video / audio once the whole 
way through for Sts just to watch or listen. 
	 Then play it again for Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or 
F (false). Make it clear that they don’t need to correct the 
false sentences yet.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  T    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F 
e 1.47
Rob  Hi. My name’s Rob Walker. 
I live here in London, I work in London, and I write about London! 
I work for a magazine called London 24seven. 
I write about life in London – the people, the theatre, the 
restaurants…It’s fun! 
I love London. It’s a great city.
Jenny  Hi. My name’s Jenny Zielinski. 
I’m from New York – the number one city in the world. 
I’m the assistant editor of a magazine, New York 24seven. I’m the 
new assistant editor. 
But this week, I’m on a business trip to London. 
This is my first time in the UK. 
It’s very exciting!
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen 
again and correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
3	 The name of his magazine is London 24seven.
4	 Jenny is American.
6	 It’s her first time in the UK.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
3	r CHECKING IN
a	 e 1.48  Focus on the photo and ask Sts Who is the person? 
(the receptionist in a hotel).
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write 
questions 1 and 2 on the board, or get Sts to focus on the 
two questions.
Function	
checking in
Vocabulary	
in a hotel
Lesson plan
This is the first in a series of six Practical English lessons (one 
every other File) which teach Sts functional language to help 
them ‘survive’ in English in travel and social situations. All the 
content for these lessons is on video. There is also an audio 
version, if you are unable to show the video in class. There 
is a storyline based on two characters, Rob Walker, a British 
journalist who works for a magazine called London 24seven, 
and Jenny Zielinski, who works in the New York office of the 
same magazine and is on a work trip to London. Sts meet 
them for the first time in this lesson, when Jenny arrives 
in the UK and checks into a hotel. The main focus of this 
lesson is on hotel vocabulary and checking into a hotel. You 
might want to point out to Sts that in the You say section 
of the lessons, they will be watching or listening and then 
repeating what the people say. If the speaker is Jenny, they 
will be listening to an American accent, but they do not 
need to copy the accent when they repeat her phrases.  
You can find the video on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, Class DVD, and an audio-only 
version on the Class Audio CDs. Sts can find the video and 
extra activities on Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 1 
                     Can you remember? 1
Online Practice  Practical English 1 
                             Check your progress 
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Introduce this lesson (in Sts’ L1 if you prefer) by giving the 
information in the lesson plan.
1	r VOCABULARY  in a hotel
a	 Books open. Focus on the symbols. Give Sts, in pairs, a few 
minutes to match the words and symbols. 
b	 e 1.46  Play the video / audio for Sts to check. 
	 Check answers. Check Sts understand ground floor, and 
drill the pronunciation of first, second, and third. You may 
also want to teach that for other ordinals, you normally 
add th, e.g. fourth. 
e 1.46
1  Reception    6  the lift    2  a single room    4  a double room 
3  the bar    5  the ground floor
	 1	
Practical English  Arriving in London
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 28@@
28
PE1
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts to read their instructions, 
and help them to understand exactly what they have 
to do.
	 A is the receptionist and has his / her book open. He / 
She reads the You hear part with the new information. 
Elicit that he / she needs to change Good evening to Good 
morning, madam to sir if B is a man, and It’s room 306 on 
the third floor to It’s room 207 on the second floor.
	 B has his / her book closed. He / She should quickly read 
the You say phrases again before starting. Remind Sts B 
that they should use their own first name and surname.
f	 Sts now role-play the conversation. A starts. Monitor and 
help. 
	 When they have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
g	 e 1.50  Focus on the Can you…? Can I have…? box and 
go through it with the class. Highlight that Can I have…? 
is one of the most common ways to ask for something in 
English (much more common than Can you give me…?).
	 Now play the video / audio for Sts to listen and repeat the 
Can phrases.
e 1.50
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.13
h	 Tell Sts to imagine they are in a hotel and they want 
certain things from the receptionist. Focus on the four 
things and make sure Sts know what they mean.
	 Elicit the phrases from the class or individual Sts.
Can I have my key, please? / Can I have the key to room X, 
please?
Can I have my passport, please?
Can I have a map of London, please?
Can I have a pen, please?
EXTRA IDEA   Focus on how Jenny says Here you are as a 
response to Can I have your passport, please? Get Sts to 
practise in pairs, asking each other for the four things with 
Can I have…, please?.
4	r JENNY TALKS TO ROB
a	 e 1.51  Focus on the photo and elicit that Jenny is in the 
hotel bar, and then she talks on the phone to Rob.
	 Focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–6. 
Go through them with Sts and make sure they 
understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Make it clear that they don’t need to correct the false 
sentences yet.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers. 
!   Sts will be surprised to hear Jenny say zee, not zed. Explain 
that this is American English, and is the only letter of the 
alphabet that is different from British English.
1  Z-I-E-L-I-N-S-K-I    ​2  306
e 1.48 e 1.49
R = receptionist, J = Jenny
R	 Good evening, madam.
J	 Hello. I have a reservation. (repeat) My name’s Jennifer Zielinski. 
(repeat)
R	 Can you spell that, please?
J	 Z-I-E-L-I-N-S-K-I. (repeat)
R	 For five nights?
J	 Yes, that’s right. (repeat)
R	 Can I have your passport, please?
J	 Just a second… (repeat) Here you are. (repeat)
R	 Thank you. Can you sign here, please? Thank you. Here’s your key. 
It’s room three oh six, on the third floor. The lift is over there. 
J	 The lift? Oh, the elevator. (repeat)
R	 Yes. Enjoy your stay, Ms Zielinski.
J	 Thank you. (repeat) 
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Ask Sts 
Who says the You hear sentences? and elicit that it is the 
receptionist. Then ask Who says the You say sentences? and 
elicit that here it is Jenny. These phrases will be useful for 
Sts if they need to check into a hotel.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  spell    ​2  please    ​3  key    ​4  lift
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. You might want to highlight that we use over 
there to indicate something which is some distance away 
from the speakers.
	 Now focus on the information box about British and 
American English and Greetings, and go through it with 
the class. 
	 Ask Sts which greeting they would use now if they met 
someone.
c	 e 1.49  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage Sts to copy the rhythm and intonation, but 
not to try to copy Jenny’s American accent. Where Jenny 
pronounces z as /ziː/, Sts should pronounce it as /zed/. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. 
e 1.49
Same as script 1.48 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is the receptionist. Get Sts to 
read the conversation aloud, and then swap roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 29@@
29
PE1
f	 e 1.53  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen to 
the six phrases and check their answers to e. 
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases. Highlight that This is (Rob 
Walker) is what we use on the phone to say who we are.
1  J    ​2  J    ​3  w    ​4  R    ​5  J    ​6  J
e 1.53
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.13
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
g	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Point out that the first one (4) has 
been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
​B  6    ​C  1    ​D  2    ​E  3    ​F  5 
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
e 1.51
W = waitress, J = Jenny, R = Rob
W	 Is your tea OK?
J	 Yes, thank you…It’s very quiet this evening.
W	 Yes, very relaxing! Are you on holiday?
J	 No, I’m here on business.
W	 Where are you from?
J	 I’m from New York. What about you?
W	 I’m from Budapest, in Hungary.
J	 Really? Oh, sorry.
W	 No problem.
***
J	 Hello?
R	 Is that Jennifer?
J	 Yes…
R	 This is Rob. Rob Walker…from London 24seven?
J	 Oh, Rob, yes, of course. Hi.
R	 Hi. How are you?
J	 Oh, I’m fine, thanks. A little tired, that’s all.
R	 I can meet you at the hotel tomorrow morning. Is nine OK for 
you?
J	 That’s perfect.
R	 Great. OK, see you tomorrow at nine. 
J	 Thanks. See you then. Bye.
W	 Would you like another tea?
J	 No, thanks. It’s time for bed.
W	 Good night, and enjoy your stay.
J	 Good night.
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen a 
second time and correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Jenny has tea.
3	 The waitress is Hungarian.
4	 Rob Walker phones Jenny.
6	 Their meeting is at 9.00.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
c	 e 1.52  Focus on the Would you like…? box and go 
through it with the class. Highlight that in English it is not 
polite to respond to an offer with simply Yes or No. We 
always use Yes, please or No, thanks.
	 Now tell Sts they must listen and repeat the Would you 
like…? phrases and responses.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing to give Sts time to repeat.
e 1.52
See script in Student’s Book on p.13
d	 Focus on the list of drinks and make sure Sts know what 
they are. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise offering and 
responding to each other.
e	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 30@@
30
2A
	2A	 Are you tidy or untidy?
 G   singular and plural nouns
 V   things, in, on, under
 P   final -s and -es
Lesson plan
Two rooms, one very tidy and one very untidy, where the 
well-known authors Virginia Woolf and Ian Rankin wrote 
their books provide the context for the presentation of both 
vocabulary and grammar in the lesson. Sts begin by looking 
at photos of these rooms, which are full of objects, and then 
learn more words for everyday things. They then learn the 
grammar of singular and plural nouns, and focus on the 
pronunciation of the final -s or -es in plural nouns. There is 
then a second vocabulary focus, where Sts learn how to 
use in, on, and under, after which all the language from the 
lesson is practised in Speaking and Listening.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  single and plural nouns p.171 
Vocabulary  Things p.260 (instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Mystery objects p.217  
(instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook  2A
Online Practice  2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Make sure you have five of the things taught in Vocabulary 
Bank Things (p.151) in your bag, e.g. a phone, a purse or 
wallet, etc. Pre-teach some of the vocabulary from the 
lesson, first with the bag itself, by asking Sts What’s this? 
and eliciting It’s a bag, and continuing with the things in 
your bag. 
Write the words for the things on the board, and model and 
drill pronunciation.
1	VOCABULARY  things
a	 Books open. Focus on the photos on p.14 and find out if 
Sts know Virginia Woolf and Ian Rankin. You might want to 
tell them that Virginia Woolf began writing as a young girl 
and published her first novel, The Voyage Out, in 1915. She 
committed suicide in 1941, at the age of 59. Ian Rankin is 
famous for his detective novels, especially the Inspector 
Rebus series. The books have been translated into 22 
languages and are bestsellers around the world. 
	 Now focus on the question and make sure Sts understand 
tidy (= with everything in the right place) and untidy. 
Model and drill the pronunciation of the two words.
	 Elicit a few answers from the class. You could tell the class 
whether you are tidy or not.
b	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs.
	 When time is up, elicit Sts’ answers and write them on the 
board.
	 See which pair got the most words.
Virginia Woolf
1  door    ​2  lamp    ​3  file    ​4  glasses    ​5  chair
Ian Rankin
6  laptop    ​7  window    ​8  photo    ​9  table    ​10  newspaper
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Things on p.151 and 
get them to do a individually or in pairs.
Vocabulary notes
You may want to highlight that: 
	 - an identity card is often abbreviated to an ID card
	 - a purse is normally used by a woman, and a wallet by 
a man 
	 e 2.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 2.1
Things
 15	 a bag
9	 a charger
1	 a coin
 21	 a credit card
5	 a diary
 23	 a dictionary
2	 a file
4	 glasses
 22	 headphones
 13	 an identity card
 11	 a key
 29	 a lamp
3	 a laptop
 17	 a magazine
 14	 a newspaper
 30	 a notebook
 26	 a pen
 16	 a pencil
 12	 a phone
8	 a photo
 20	 a piece of paper
 24	 a purse
 19	 scissors
 28	 sunglasses
 25	 a tablet
 27	 a ticket
7	 a tissue
 10	 an umbrella
6	 a wallet
 18	 a watch
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
	 Focus on the Plural nouns box and go through it with 
the class. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 31@@
31
2A
	 Now focus on Activation. Model and drill the two 
questions, What is it? (for singular objects) and What are 
they? (for plural objects). Stress that What are they? is only 
for the four plural objects, glasses, headphones, scissors, 
and sunglasses. Demonstrate by holding up an object, e.g. 
a pen, and ask What is it? to elicit It’s a pen. Then do the 
same with a pair of glasses or scissors, etc.
	 In pairs, get Sts to cover the words with a piece of paper, 
look at the photos, and ask the appropriate question.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	GRAMMAR  singular and plural nouns
a	 Focus on the chart and get Sts to complete it in pairs. 
Point out that the first one (an umbrella) has been done 
for them.
	 Check answers. 
(two) umbrellas    a watch    a diary
	 Now ask Sts if they can guess why we use an (not a) 
before umbrella.
Because it begins with a vowel sound, not a consonant sound.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.126. 
Grammar notes
Singular nouns
We usually use singular nouns for things with a / an (the 
indefinite article).
Articles are easy for some nationalities and more difficult 
for others, depending on Sts’ L1. Here the focus is just on 
the indefinite article. Some nationalities may not have an 
indefinite article, and others may confuse the number one 
with the indefinite article as it may be the same word in 
their L1.
Plural nouns
The system in English of making regular nouns plural is 
very straightforward, simply adding an s. 
es (/ɪz/) is added to some nouns when it would be 
impossible to pronounce the word by adding just an s, 
e.g. watches. A very small number of English words have 
an irregular plural form, e.g. child – children.
	 e 2.2  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the information box about the and go through it 
with the class. 
!   Articles are very easy for some nationalities and more 
difficult for others, depending on Sts’ L1. If articles are a 
problem for your Sts, give more examples to highlight the 
meaning of the.
	 Then go through the rules for regular and irregular plurals 
with the class.
	 Highlight particularly the pronunciation of -es (/ɪz/) in 
watches and boxes.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2A on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences in b.
a
1  a window, windows    ​2  a key, keys    ​3  an identity card, 
identity cards    ​4  a country, countries    ​5  a watch, watches    ​
6  an exercise, exercises    ​7  a person, people    ​8  an email, 
emails    ​9  a box, boxes    ​10  a woman, women
b
1  They’re children.    ​2  It’s a purse.    ​3  They’re men.    ​4  It’s an 
umbrella.    ​5  They’re sunglasses.    ​6  They’re scissors.    ​7  It’s a 
charger.    ​8  They’re diaries.    ​9  It’s a coin.    ​10  It’s an egg.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  final -s and -es
Pronunciation notes
When plural nouns end in s, the s is pronounced either 
as /s/ or as /z/ depending on the previous sound. The 
difference is small and difficult for Sts at this level to hear 
or produce (they will tend to pronounce all endings as 
/s/), and you simply want to point it out. Sometimes this 
difference can produce misunderstanding, e.g. eyes  
/aɪz/ and ice /aɪs/. The full rules are:
1  -s is pronounced /s/ after these unvoiced* sounds: 
/k/, /p/, /f/, /t/, e.g. books, maps, cats.
2  -s is pronounced /z/ after all other (voiced*) endings, 
e.g. phones, keys, photos. This is by far the biggest group.
*Voiced and unvoiced consonants
Voiced consonant sounds are made by vibrating the 
vocal chords, e.g. /b/, /l/, /m/, /v/, etc. Unvoiced consonant 
sounds are made without vibration in the throat, e.g. 
/p/, /k/, /t/, /s/, etc.
You can demonstrate this to Sts by getting them to hold 
their hands against their throats. For voiced sounds, they 
should feel a vibration in their throat, but not for unvoiced 
sounds.
However, a common error, which is easier to help Sts with, 
is the tendency to add the /ɪz/ pronunciation to nouns 
which don’t need it, e.g. files as /faɪlɪz/, etc. This rule, i.e. 
when to pronounce -es as /ɪz/, is the main focus of the 
exercises here.
a	 e 2.3  Focus on the chart. Elicit the two sound picture 
words (snake and zebra) and the sounds /s/ and /z/. If your 
Sts have problems hearing the difference between these 
two sounds, tell them and demonstrate that the /s/ is like 
the sound a snake makes, and the /z/ is like the sound 
made by a bee or a fly.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the sounds and 
example words. 
e 2.3
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.15
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 32@@
32
2A
Picture 2
The file is under the desk.    The headphones are in the 
bag.    The magazine is under the bag.    The phone is on 
the chair.    The photo is on the desk.    The tissues are in the 
bag.    The watch is on the book.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
5	LISTENING  listening for detail
a	 e 2.5  Focus on the task. Elicit / Explain that a study is 
another term for a room in a house where you study, read, 
or write. Make sure Sts understand that the first time they 
listen, they just need to number the places in the  
left-hand column that the three speakers talk about. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  on his desk    ​2  in her study    ​3  in her bag
e 2.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.118) 
1	 On my desk I have my computer. I have some pens and pieces of 
paper. I have a lamp, and a photo of my family. Oh, and a phone. 
It’s very tidy.
2	 In my study I have a desk, a table, and two chairs. I have a lot of 
books and a big dictionary on the desk – it isn’t very tidy! And I 
have a map of Europe on the wall.
3	 I have a lot of things in my bag. I have my phone. I have the 
charger for my phone. I have my sunglasses, tissues. And I have 
my house keys and my purse.
b	 Play the audio again, and this time, tell Sts to write the 
things each person has. Point out that the first item 
(a computer) has been done for them. Play the audio again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Speaker 1
a computer, pens, pieces of paper, a lamp, a photo, a phone
Speaker 2
a desk, a table, two chairs, books, a dictionary, a map
Speaker 3
a phone, a charger, sunglasses, tissues, keys, a purse
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.118, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 In pairs, Sts tell each other what they have in their bag, on 
their desk, or where they work or study.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to write what they have 
first.
	 Get some feedback on what things Sts have, and who has 
a tidy desk or study.
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them they are 
going to play What is it? A closes his / her eyes. B gives A 
things and asks What is it? What are they?
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 2.4  Focus on the Final -s or -es box and go through it 
with the class. 
	 Now ask Sts to circle the words in 1–8 where -es is 
pronounced /ɪz/. 
	 Get them to compare their answers with a partner.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
1  classes    ​4  boxes    ​5  pieces    ​7  pages
e 2.4
See words in Student’s Book on p.15
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
c	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to look at the photos 
of Virginia Woolf and Ian Rankin’s rooms on p.14 and 
write all the plural items they can see. Sts could do this 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
Virginia Woolf: chairs, doors, files, glasses
Ian Rankin: tables / desks, chairs, pieces of paper, photos, CDs
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  in, on, under
a	 Tell Sts to look at the photos and complete the gaps with 
in, on, or under.
	 Check answers.
1  on    ​2  in    ​3  under
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give more practice by putting your pen 
in different places, e.g. under a book, on the table, etc., and 
asking Sts Where’s the pen?.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication in, on, under, A on p.103, B on p.108. 
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully, and focus 
on the example question (Where’s the charger? ). Elicit the 
question for a plural object, e.g. headphones (Where are 
the headphones?). Tell Sts they have to ask these questions 
for the objects in their list, and then they must draw the 
object in the correct place in the picture. Elicit / Explain 
the meaning of draw.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A asks his / her first 
question about the charger to B and draws the item in 
picture 1. When A has finished asking about all his / her 
objects, Sts swap roles and B now asks A about the file.
	 When they have finished, get them to compare pictures.
	 Finally, elicit some sentences from the class about the 
objects in both pictures.
Picture 1
The charger is in the bag.          The glasses are on the book.    
The keys are under the desk.     The laptop is on the chair.     
The scissors are on the book.    The umbrella is under the chair.     
The wallet is on the desk.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 33@@
33
2B
	2B	 Made in America
e 2.6
black    yellow    grey    orange    brown
pink    green    purple    silver    gold
c	 Focus on the instructions, and model and drill the two 
questions.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask each other about 
things in the classroom.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give more practice of colours, getting Sts 
to ask each other about different flags, e.g. What colour is the 
Polish flag?, etc.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Adjectives on p.152. 
Vocabulary notes
Three of the adjectives here have two meanings: old, 
right, and short. Make sure Sts are clear about the different 
meanings and their opposites.
	 Focus on the pictures and tell Sts they have to match the 
numbered pictures to the pairs of adjectives. Get Sts to do 
a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 2.7  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.7
Adjectives
 19	 beautiful  ugly
2	 big  small
7	 cheap  expensive
4	 clean  dirty
5	 easy  difficult
9	 fast  slow
6	 full  empty
1	 good  bad
 10	 high  low
 17	 hot  cold
 20	 light  dark
 11	 long  short
 14	 old  new
 16	 old  young
 15	 rich  poor
 13	 right  left
 12	 right  wrong
3	 safe  dangerous
8	 the same  different
 18	 strong  weak
 21	 tall  short
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the instructions for c. Put Sts in pairs and get them 
to test each other. A (book open) says an adjective, e.g. full, 
and B (book closed) answers empty. They then swap roles.
	 Focus on the Modifiers box and go through it with Sts. 
	 Get Sts to do Activation, checking that they know the 
names and places before they start. 
	 Check answers.
 G   adjectives: bad, good, etc.
 V   colours, adjectives, modifiers: very / really, quite
 P   long and short vowel sounds
Lesson plan
In this lesson iconic aspects of the USA are used to introduce 
common adjectives and their grammatical position, and Sts 
learn to give simple descriptions of things. Sts begin with a 
vocabulary focus on common adjectives. The grammar of 
adjectives is presented through a quiz about American icons, 
which includes common adjective / noun phrases such as 
The White House and New York, which should be familiar to 
Sts in English or in their own language. After the grammar 
practice, Sts go on to a pronunciation focus on long and 
short vowel sounds, which also serves to recycle the 
adjectives. Sts then do a picture-difference activity, before 
reading an article about the differences between British and 
American English.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  adjectives p.172 
Vocabulary  Opposites crossword p.261  
(instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Can you name...? p.218  
(instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook  2B
Online Practice  2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write THE USA on the board and ask Sts to tell you things 
which they think are typically American, e.g. Hollywood films, 
hamburgers, etc.
Write their suggestions on the board. 
1	VOCABULARY  colours, adjectives
a	 Books open. Focus on the question. Sts need to add the 
missing vowels.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then write the 
answer on the board.
red, white, blue
EXTRA SUPPORT   To get Sts to revise the alphabet, elicit the 
missing letters, or ask a student to spell the whole word.
b	 e 2.6  Individually or in pairs, Sts complete the colours.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the missing letters onto the 
board. Model and drill pronunciation. Highlight especially 
the pronunciation of orange /ˈɒrɪndʒ/.
black    yellow    grey    orange    brown
pink    green    purple    silver    gold
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 34@@
34
2B
b
1	 It’s a very hot day.   
2	 Is your teacher Australian?
3	 That car isn’t very fast.   
4	 It’s a bad idea.
5	 Are you good students?   
6	 English is quite easy.
7	 My brother is really strong.   
8	 This is a slow train.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Get Sts to close their books and try to remember the 
phrases in American Icons. You could do this as a  
whole-class activity or get Sts to do it in pairs.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
3	PRONUNCIATION  long and short vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
Many Sts will find it difficult to hear the difference 
between some or all long and short vowel sounds, as they 
may not have these sounds in their L1. You can help Sts to 
hear the difference by exaggerating the long sounds.
You can also use the videos with the Sound Bank to show 
Sts the correct mouth position, or get Sts to watch them 
at home.
a	 e 2.9  Focus on the eight sound pictures. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen. 
e 2.9
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.17
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. Elicit 
that /iː/, /ɑː/, /ɔː/ and /uː/ are long sounds. Remind Sts 
that the two dots in the phonetic symbol mean that it is a 
long sound.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 2.10  Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts they are going 
to hear two adjectives for each sound, and they must 
write them in the chart.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each pair to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again.
	 Check answers.
e 2.10
fish /ɪ/	
rich, big
tree /iː/	
easy, cheap
cat /æ/	
black, bad
car /ɑː/	
fast, dark 
clock /ɒ/	
hot, wrong
horse /ɔː/	
small, short
bull /ʊ/	
full, good
boot /uː/	
blue, new
Possible answers
Mount Everest is very high and cold.
Bill Gates is American and very rich.
The Mona Lisa is beautiful, old, and quite small.
The Pyramids are very old and very big.
Africa is very hot and quite poor.
	 Finally, focus on the Opinion adjectives box and go 
through it with the class. Model and drill the adjectives.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	GRAMMAR  adjectives
a	 Focus on the photos in American Icons and the Adjectives 
and Nouns in the circles. Then focus on the example 
(American football) and make sure Sts know what they 
have to do. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and set a time limit, e.g. two or three 
minutes, for Sts to label the photos. 
	 Check answers.
2  yellow taxis    ​3  fast food    ​4  French fries    ​5  White House    ​
6  blue jeans    ​7  hot dog    ​8  New York
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to circle the 
correct word or phrase in 1 and 2.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Explain that adjectives go before a 
noun, and adjectives don’t change before a plural noun.
1  hot dog    ​2  yellow 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.126. 
Grammar notes
The grammar of adjectives in English is simple.
There is only one possible form, which never changes.
When an adjective is with a noun in a phrase, there is only 
one possible position: before the noun, e.g. a new car, a big 
house. 
However, Sts sometimes get confused because when the 
adjective goes with a noun, the order is, e.g. a fast car, but 
if it is in a question with be, it goes after the subject, e.g. Is 
your car fast?
	 e 2.8  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2B on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1	 It’s a very big house.
2	 Is Louis French?
3	 It’s an expensive watch.
4	 Is it an easy exercise?
5	 Is your girlfriend Spanish?
6	 These questions are very difficult.
7	 Are they cheap tickets?
8	 My new glasses are very good.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 35@@
35
2B
b	 e 2.12  Play the audio for Sts to listen to the article and 
check answers to a.
	 Check answers.
2  Spelling    ​3  Grammar    ​4  Pronunciation
e 2.12
British and American English – the same, but different
British and American people speak the same language, English, but 
with some small differences.
1	 Vocabulary
Some words are different in American English, for example, they 
say ZIP code, not postcode; vacation, not holiday; and cell phone, not 
mobile phone. Some words have different meanings, for example, in 
British English a purse is a thing where women have their money and 
credit cards. In American English a purse is a woman’s bag.
2	 Spelling
Colour, favour, and other words that end in o-u-r in British English 
end in o-r in American English. Centre, theatre, and other words that 
end in t-r-e in British English, end in t-e-r in American English.
3	 Grammar
There are some small differences, especially prepositions. For 
example, Americans say See you Friday, but British people say See you 
on Friday.
4	 Pronunciation
This is the really important difference between American and British 
English. American accents and British accents are very different. 
When an American starts speaking, British people know he or she is 
American, and vice versa.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could ask the class what nationality 
they think the speaker is. With a show of hands find out who 
thinks the speaker is American (The speaker is American.).
c	 Give Sts time to mark sentences 1–6 T (true) or F (false).
	 Check answers. Elicit why the F answers are false.
1	 F (The differences are small.)
2	 F (In American English they are vacation and ZIP code.)
3	 T
4	 F (It’s the American spelling. British spelling is kilometre.)
5	 T
6	 F (It’s easy.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to read the article again to check 
their answers, and then check answers as a class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to cover the article. Then write 
the following words and phrases on the board: CELL PHONE, 
CENTER, COLOR, PURSE, SEE YOU FRIDAY, VACATION, ZIP CODE. 
Ask Sts what they are in British English.
USA	
UK
cell phone	
mobile phone
center	
centre
color	
colour 
purse	
handbag
See you Friday.	
See you on Friday.
vacation	
holiday
ZIP code	
postcode
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Sts may remember 
elevator and z (/zed/ from Practical English 1). Other 
common American words include movie, cookie, 
apartment, soccer, etc.
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each group for 
Sts to repeat.
c	 Focus on the two groups of words and the example, and 
explain the activity. Remind Sts to use the article a / an 
with singular nouns. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to write the phrases. 
EXTRA IDEA   You could make c into a race with a time limit 
of, for example, three minutes.
d	 e 2.11  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers and find out if any pairs have made nine 
correct phrases.
e 2.11
a big city    a black bag    cheap jeans    dark glasses    a good book 
a grey day    new boots    an old photo    a short story
	 Then play the audio again to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to make adjective + noun 
phrases about things in the classroom, e.g. a dirty board, big 
windows, a brown bag, etc. 
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions, and then give Sts time to think 
of eight things they have.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to write the eight things 
they have.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other about their 
eight things.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
EXTRA IDEA   Before getting feedback, ask Sts if they can 
remember the eight things their partner has. Get Sts to tell 
each other You have….
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication The same or different?, A on p.103,  
B on p.109. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A describes the odd pictures 
and B describes the even pictures. A starts by describing 
picture 1, and B must say if his / her picture is the same or 
different. Then B describes picture 2, and A responds.
	 When Sts have found the eight pictures where there are 
differences, tell them to compare pictures to see if they 
have correctly identified them. 
Different:  Pictures 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12
The same:  Pictures 2, 6, 8, 10
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
5	READING  identifying paragraph headings
a	 Focus on the title of the article and elicit what it is about 
(the differences between the two languages). 
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the 
headings. Point out that the first one (Vocabulary) has 
been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 36@@
36
2C
	2C	 Slow down!
Vocabulary notes
In English, feelings are expressed using the verb be and 
an adjective. In some other languages, they are expressed 
using the verb have + a noun, and this causes Sts to make 
mistakes like I have hot, etc. For this reason it is important 
to highlight the structure here as well as the adjectives 
themselves.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each phrase for  
Sts to listen and repeat. Model and drill any phrases  
which are difficult for your Sts, e.g. I’m thirsty. Make sure  
Sts can hear and pronounce the difference between  
angry /ˈæŋɡri/ and hungry /ˈhʌŋɡri/.
	 Then give further practice by calling out the numbers 
of some pictures for Sts to tell you how the person feels 
using the verb be, e.g.
	 T	Number 5
	 Sts	 She’s angry.
	 T	Number 2, etc.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the example sentences. 
Demonstrate the activity by telling Sts how you feel, using 
the phrases in a. Remind Sts of the modifiers very and 
quite. 
	 In pairs, Sts cover the words, look at the pictures, and 
make true sentences about themselves.
	 Get some quick feedback, asking the class about a few of 
the adjectives, e.g. Who’s thirsty?, and getting a show of 
hands. 
2	LISTENING & READING  inferring mood
a	 e 2.14  Set the scene by going through the instructions 
and telling Sts to cover the conversations on p.19 and only 
look at the pictures. 
	 Play the audio and tell Sts to listen and look at the 
pictures. 
	 In pairs, Sts tell each other how the people feel in each 
picture. Point out the example (angry).
	 Don’t check answers at this stage.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts read and listen.
e 2.14
See story in Student’s Book on p.19
 G   imperatives, let’s
 V   feelings: hungry, thirsty, etc.
 P   linking
Lesson plan
In this lesson, Sts begin by learning adjectives to describe 
states and feelings, e.g. hungry, happy. They then listen to 
a series of conversations between a couple with a baby, 
who are in a car going on holiday. The husband becomes 
increasingly irritated, and the child tired, hungry, etc. as the 
journey goes on. This serves as a context to present more 
imperatives (Sts have already learned some in Classroom 
language) and phrases to make suggestions beginning with 
Let’s…. Following this is a speaking activity with Sts  
role-playing different situations and asking each other what’s 
wrong. There is then a pronunciation focus on connected 
speech, which is aimed at helping Sts to understand native 
speakers, and the lesson ends with a video listening about 
safe car journeys.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  imperatives, let’s p.173 
Communicative  Dominoes p.219 (instructions p.205)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Have a safe journey!
For students
Workbook  2C
Online Practice  2C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Mime being hot and cold, and elicit I’m hot and I’m cold, and 
write them on the board. Model and drill pronunciation.
1	VOCABULARY  feelings
a	 Books open. Give Sts a time limit to match the adjectives 
and pictures. Point out that the first one (worried) has 
been done for them.
b	 e 2.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.13
5	 I’m angry.
 11	 I’m bored.
9	 I’m cold.
 12	 I’m frightened.
2	 I’m happy.
4	 I’m hot.
6	 I’m hungry.
 10	 I’m sad.
8	 I’m stressed.
3	 I’m thirsty.
7	 I’m tired.
1	 I’m worried.
	 When Sts have finished matching, go through the 
Collocation box together.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 37@@
37
2C
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2C on p.126. 
Grammar notes
Imperatives
Emphasize the simplicity of imperatives in English. There 
are only two forms, e.g. Stop. / Don’t stop.
Emphasize too that an imperative can sound abrupt in 
English if you are asking somebody to do something, e.g. 
Close the door (please). I’m cold. Here it would be much 
more normal to use a polite request with Can..., e.g. Can 
you close the door, please?
Let’s (= Let us) + infinitive is used to make suggestions 
which include the speaker.
A positive suggestion is made by using Let’s + infinitive, 
e.g. Let’s go to the cinema.
A negative is made with Let’s not, e.g. Let’s not eat here.
	 e 2.16  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class. 
	 Then focus on the Can you…? box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2C on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  Read    ​2  don’t speak    ​3  Go    ​4  Don’t watch    ​5  Have    ​
6  Be    ​7  Take    ​8  Don’t be
b
1  Let’s go    ​2  Let’s turn off    ​3  Let’s do    ​4  Let’s not take    ​
5  Let’s stop    ​6  Let’s not go, Let’s watch
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts to look at the nine signs and to write a positive 
 + or negative − sentence for each, using the verb 
phrases from the list. Point out that the first two have 
been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
3	 Don’t eat or drink here.
4	 Turn off your phone.
5	 Don’t take photos.
6	 Don’t go in here.
7	 Cross the road now.
8	 Be careful.
9	 Don’t listen to music here.
d	 Get Sts to cover the list of phrases and look at the signs.
	 In pairs, Sts tell each other the phrases.
	 Get some feedback from the class, by calling out a 
number and getting Sts to tell you the meaning.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts where they might see these 
signs, e.g. Don’t smoke here in a station, Turn off your phone in 
the classroom, Don’t take photos in a museum, etc.
b	 Now tell Sts to uncover the conversations. Play the 
audio again for Sts to listen and read at the same time. 
The pictures and sound effects should help them to 
understand the conversations.
	 Check answers to a.
Picture 1: Lisa’s angry / stressed.
Picture 2: John’s thirsty, Alfie’s hungry.
Picture 3: Lisa’s cold and frightened, John’s hot.
Picture 4: Lisa and Alfie are tired.
	 Go through the conversations and deal with any new 
vocabulary.
c	 e 2.15  Focus on the instructions and play the audio for 
Sts to listen to the end of the story. Play the audio again if 
necessary.
	 Check whether it is a happy ending by getting a show of 
hands.
Yes. A police officer stops John because he is driving too fast, but 
the police officer isn’t angry with them because of Alfie, and they 
go to their hotel.
e 2.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
L = Lisa, J = John, P = policewoman
L	 The Highland Hotel’s twenty miles from here. Let’s go there.
J	 Twenty miles? No problem.
L	 John! Slow down! 
J	 Oh no!…Here she comes.
P	 Good evening, sir, madam. Turn off the engine, please, sir. Thank 
you.
J	 What’s the problem, officer?
P	 The problem? Well, sir, seventy miles an hour is the problem. 
That’s very, very fast. The limit on this road is fifty miles an hour. 
Can I see your driving licence?
J	 Seventy? Oh. Er, I’m very sorry, officer. 
P	 Ah, what a beautiful baby! What’s his name?
L	 Alfie. He’s very tired, officer. And it’s twenty miles to our hotel.
P	 Well…OK…go to your hotel. But please slow down, sir.
J	 Yes – thank you, officer.
P	 Goodbye, sir, madam. Goodbye, Alfie!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to both parts of the audio with the scripts in the main 
lesson and on p.118, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts if they’re more similar to John 
or Lisa on car journeys.
3	GRAMMAR  imperatives, let’s
a	 Tell Sts to look at the highlighted phrases in 2b again and 
to complete the chart. Point out that the first one (Turn) 
has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
Imperatives
Suggestions
+
Turn right. Be careful! Look 
for a hotel.
Let’s stop at a café. Let’s 
go there.
−
Don’t turn left! Don’t drive 
fast! Don’t worry.
Let’s not stop.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 38@@
38
2C
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a programme about car 
journeys. Make sure they know the meaning of the title, 
Have a safe journey!, and a tip (= a small piece of advice). 
	 Give Sts time to read tips 1–10 and point out that the first 
one (Plan) has been done for them. Elicit / Explain any 
words they may not know, e.g. seat belt.
	 Play the video for Sts to watch. Then play it again, pausing 
after each tip to give Sts time to complete them. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen.
​2  car    ​3  traffic    ​4  map    ​5  water    ​6  tablets    ​7  Check    ​
8  petrol    ​9  fifteen    ​10  phone
Have a safe journey!
Here are ten top tips to make your car journey safe.
Tip one: Plan your journey. Look at a map and plan where to stop on 
the way.
Tip two: Check your car. Is it ready for a long journey? Do it yourself 
or take it to a garage. 
Tip three: Listen to traffic information on the radio, or check on the 
internet, before you start your journey. 
Tip four: Take a map with you in the car, or have a map app on your 
phone – satnav (or GPS) isn’t always right. 
Tip five: Take bottles of water. People are often thirsty on long car 
journeys.
Tip six: If you have children in the car, take books, games, and tablets 
with you. Then the children can watch videos or read. When children 
are quiet, the driver is less distracted.
Tip seven: Check that all the passengers in the car have their seat 
belt on.
Tip eight: Check that you have petrol. Don’t wait until your petrol 
tank is nearly empty before you look for a petrol station. 
Tip nine: After driving for two hours, stop for fifteen minutes. Have a 
snack, and get some fresh air. If you’re very tired, have a coffee or a 
drink with caffeine. 
Finally, tip ten. This is very, very important. Don’t use your phone. 
Phoning and texting are very dangerous because you don’t 
concentrate on the road. 
Have a safe journey!
b	 Play the video again. Sts in pairs decide on their top 
three tips.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 You could also ask Sts if they have any tips of their own.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles / showing the script, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand.  
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
4	SPEAKING
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What’s the matter?, A on p.103,  
B on p.109. 
	 Carefully go through the instructions and example 
conversation in a with the class, explaining and drilling the 
question What’s the matter?, and explain the expression 
cheer up (= be happy). Then focus on b and c, and explain 
that Sts are going to have similar conversations using 
prompts 1–4 and responding with a phrase, e.g. Thanks, 
OK, Good idea, etc.
	 Demonstrate the activity with a good student. 
	 Then sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A asks B What’s 
the matter?, B responds with his / her first prompt, and 
they have a mini conversation. They then have three more 
conversations, using B’s other prompts.
	 A and B then swap roles, and B asks What’s the matter?.
	 When they have finished, focus on instruction d. Sts 
should try to do all eight conversations without looking at 
their books.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the eight adjectives (bored, cold, etc.) 
on the board to remind Sts how to start.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2C.
5	PRONUNCIATION  linking
a	 e 2.17  Focus on the Connected speech box and go 
through it with the class. Explain that in English, when 
people speak fast they don’t pronounce each word 
separately. They tend to run them together and this can 
make it difficult for Sts to hear what has been said. 
	 Tell Sts they will hear six short sentences and they must 
write them down.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers by writing the sentences on the board.
e 2.17
1	 Turn off your phone.
2	 Let’s eat in this café.
3	 Take a book with you.
4	 Let’s open the windows.
5	 Let’s stop at a hotel.
6	 Don’t open the door.
b	 In pairs, Sts practise saying the six sentences. Encourage 
them to try to say them fast and link the words like on the 
audio.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING  understanding specific 	
	 advice
	 This is the first of six video listenings, which are 
incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable 
to show the video in class, remind students that they can 
find the video on Online Practice and ask them to watch 
the video and do the activities for homework. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 39@@
39
Revise and Check
c
1  file (the others are numbers)
2  Chinese (the others are countries)
3  France (the others are nationalities / languages)
4  Ireland (the others are continents)
5  sixteen (the others are multiples of ten)
6  Italy (the others are days of the week)
7  purse (the others are always used in the plural)
8  school (the others are part of a classroom)
9  wallet (the others are things you read)
10  happy (the others are negative adjectives)
d	
1  bad    ​2  cheap    ​3  clean    ​4  low    ​5  right
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  email /iː/    ​2  fast /ɑː/    ​3  page /dʒ/    ​4  sit /ɪ/    ​  tissues /ʃ/
d	
1  address    ​2  Italy    ​3  expensive    ​4  sunglasses    ​5  thirteen
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	 It’s for tourists / visitors to New York.
b	 1  F    ​2  T    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  F    ​6  T
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  c, a    ​4  c
e 2.18
1	 Mallini
I = interviewer, M = Mallini
I	 What’s your name?
M	 Mallini.
I	 How do you spell it?
M	 M-A-L-L-I-N-I.
2	 Olga
I = interviewer, O = Olga
I	 Where are you from?
O	 Originally I’m from Russia.
I	 And where in Russia?
O	 Moscow.
3	 Mairi
I = interviewer, M = Mairi
I	 What’s your name?
M	 My name’s Mairi.
I	 How do you spell it?
M	 M-A-I-R-I.
I	 Where are you from?
M	 I’m from Edinburgh.
I	 Where’s that?
M	 That’s in Scotland.
4	 Jake
I = interviewer, J = Jake
I	 Are you tidy or untidy?
J	 I’m very tidy.
I	 What’s on your desk?
J	 On my desk I have all of my pencils and my computer.
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, in 
class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and the 
class time available.  
The first page revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 50 
(grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), so 
you can use the first page as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. The 
pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank on 
pp.166–167. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the Sound Bank videos showing the mouth position for each 
sound. If you don’t want to use these in class, tell Sts to look 
at them at home and to practise making the sounds and 
saying the words.
The second page presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a slightly 
higher level than those in the File, but which revises grammar 
and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The listening is some 
unscripted street interviews, where people are asked questions 
related to the topics in the Files. Sts can either watch the 
interviews on video or listen to them on audio. You can find 
these on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom Presentation 
Tool , Class DVD, and Class Audio CDs (audio only). Alternatively, 
you could set these sections / activities as homework. Sts can 
find the video on Online Practice. Finally, there is a speaking 
challenge which assesses Sts’ ability to use the language of the 
Files orally. You could get Sts to do these activities in pairs, or 
Sts can tick the boxes if they feel confident that they can do 
them. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 1&2 
Quick Test 2 
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  b    ​7  c    ​8  a    ​9  b    ​10  b    ​
11  c    ​12  a    ​13  c    ​14  b    ​15  a
VOCABULARY
a
1  from    ​2  to    ​3  in    ​4  at    ​5  off
b
1  Read    ​2  Work    ​3  Stand    ​4  Open    ​5  Answer
	1&2	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 40@@
	 1A	
Welcome to the class
40
3A
 G   present simple + and −
 V   verb phrases: cook dinner, do homework, etc.
 P   third person -s
Lesson plan
Different aspects of life in Britain provide the context for Sts 
to meet the present simple for the first time. They begin 
by learning a group of common verb phrases, and then, in 
a short text where a journalist writes what she likes about 
Britain, they see how the verb forms change for positive and 
negative forms and in the third person singular (question 
forms are presented separately in 3B). Sts then practise the 
pronunciation of verb + -s or -es, as well as the vocabulary 
and grammar, talking about themselves and about a partner. 
The lesson ends with Reading and Speaking. Sts read a text 
adapted from a British newspaper, in which foreigners who 
live in Britain say what they like or don’t like about it, and Sts 
compare what they think about their country.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present simple + and − p.174 
Vocabulary  Verb phrases p.262 (instructions p.254) 
Communicative  I work… He works… p.220  
(instructions p.205)
For students
Workbook  3A
Online Practice  3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write DRINK EAT DRIVE READ on the board. Ask Sts for words that 
can go after these verbs. Elicit ideas from the class and write 
them on the board.
1	VOCABULARY  verb phrases
a	 e 3.1  Books open. Give Sts time to look at the verb 
phrases.
	 Tell them they are going to hear a sound effect for each 
verb phrase and they must listen and number them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Play it again, pausing after each sound effect to check the 
answer. Model and drill the pronunciation of the phrases.
1  speak German    ​2  drink mineral water    ​3  watch TV    ​4  play 
the guitar    ​5  like animals
e 3.1
(sound effects of the following)
1	 Guten Tag. Wie geht’s?
2	 noise of bottle being unscrewed, a glass of water being poured... 
3	 sound of opening of TV news programme with music
4	 someone playing a classical guitar
5	 someone opening the front door, dogs barking, cats meowing...
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Verb phrases on p.153 
and get them to do a individually or in pairs. Many of 
these verbs may already be familiar to them
Vocabulary notes
You could point out that have can be used for 
possessions, but also with both food and drink (have a 
sandwich, have a coffee) and is more common when we 
talk about specific meals, e.g. have breakfast / lunch. Eat, 
e.g. eat fast food, can only be used for food.
You might also want to make sure Sts are clear about the 
meaning of take (an umbrella). Give a clear example like 
‘Take an umbrella with you. It’s raining.’ Sts may think that 
this verb means carry (e.g. Can you carry my bag for me? It’s 
very heavy.).
	 e 3.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 3.2
Verb phrases
 19	 cook dinner
 20	 do exercise
 14	 do housework
 24	 do homework
 17	 drink mineral water
 23	 drive a car
 18	 eat vegetables
9	 go to the cinema
3	 have a garden
8	 like animals
 11	 listen to music
6	 live in a flat
 22	 need a new phone
 15	 play the guitar
 12	 play tennis
7	 read a book
 16	 say sorry
5	 speak German
4	 study history
 13	 take an umbrella
1	 want a coffee
 10	 watch TV
 21	 wear glasses
2	 work in an office
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the verbs and 
use the photos to test themselves or their partner. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
	3A	 Britain: the good and the bad
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 41@@
41
3A
c	 e 3.3  Focus on the example and tell Sts they will hear 
the second part of some verb phrases and they must say 
the whole verb phrase.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each one, and elicit a 
response from the whole class.
e 3.3
1	 TV (pause) watch TV
2	 the guitar (pause) play the guitar
3	 mineral water (pause) drink mineral water
4	 to music (pause) listen to music
5	 glasses (pause) wear glasses
6	 a garden (pause) have a garden
7	 vegetables (pause) eat vegetables
8	 to the cinema (pause) go to the cinema
9	 history (pause) study history
 10	 exercise (pause) do exercise
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, Sts do a similar activity to the 
listening. A (book open) says the second part of a verb 
phrase from the Vocabulary Bank, e.g. dinner, and B (book 
closed) has to guess the whole phrase, e.g. cook dinner.
2	GRAMMAR  present simple + and −
a	 Ask Sts What do you think of when you hear the word 
‘Britain’? to elicit some ideas and write them on the board.
	 Focus on the instructions and the words / phrases in the 
list, and help Sts with vocabulary if necessary, e.g. the BBC, 
freedom. Elicit / Explain what a journalist is. Point out that 
the first one (multiculturalism) has been done for them. 
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the task. 
b	 e 3.4  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2  the language    ​3  gardens    ​4  the freedom    ​5  the BBC    ​
6  pubs    ​7  the weather    ​8  Indian food
e 3.4
My name’s Carola. I’m a journalist. I like…
multiculturalism. People from all over the world live in the UK, and 
they live together happily. Usually.
the language. English is international. I speak English. You speak 
English. I don’t have communication problems.
gardens. My garden’s small, but I have flowers and vegetables in it. 
When the sun’s out I sit in the garden and I feel really happy.
the freedom. I wear what I want. I say what I want. I do what I want. 
the BBC. I listen to the radio in the morning and I watch TV in the 
evening. A lot of programmes are interesting, funny, or educational. 
Sometimes all three.
pubs. We drink there, and we eat there, too – the food now is very 
good. 
the weather. It’s cold, but not very cold. It’s hot, but not very hot. It 
rains, but it doesn’t rain every day. 
Indian food. My boyfriend cooks fantastic curries, and the UK is great 
for Indian restaurants!
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to cover the article and, in pairs, 
try to remember what Carola likes.
c	 Focus on the instructions, and get Sts to answer the 
questions in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1	 They end with -s because they are third person singular (he, 
she, it).
2	
− I don’t have, it doesn’t rain. 
We use don’t to make negatives with I, you, we, and they.  
We use doesn’t to make negatives with he, she, and it.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you have a monolingual class, don’t be 
afraid of using your Sts’ L1 to talk about the grammar here. At 
this level, it is unrealistic to expect Sts to talk about grammar 
in English.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.128. 
Grammar notes
Emphasize to Sts the relative simplicity of the present 
simple. There is only one different verb ending in the 
present simple (third person singular verbs add an -s or 
-es). All other forms are the same as the infinitive. For this 
reason, the use of the pronoun (I, you, etc.) is not optional 
as it is in many languages. It is essential as it identifies 
which person is being referred to.
In the negative, highlight the use of don’t and doesn’t, 
which are put before the infinitive. These contracted forms 
(of do not and does not) are almost always used in spoken 
English and in informal writing.
Highlight that goes /ɡəʊz/ and does /dʌz/ both end with 
-oes, but are pronounced differently.
	 e 3.5  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the information box Be careful with some he / 
she / it forms and go through it with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 3A on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers. Get Sts to read the sentences out loud 
and help them with the rhythm of + and − sentences, 
e.g. We live in a flat. We don’t study French. 
a
1	 She goes to the cinema. 
2	 He lives in a flat. 
3	 They have two children. 
4	 I don’t like cold weather.
5	 The supermarket closes at 5.30.
6	 My sister doesn’t study French.
7	 I do housework.
8	 My son wants a guitar.
9	 My friend doesn’t work on Saturdays.
10	 Our lessons finish at 5.00.
b
1  doesn’t work    ​2  reads    ​3  speak    ​4  don’t play    ​5  wears    ​
6  listen    ​7  don’t eat    ​8  has
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 42@@
42
3A
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Focus on the instructions and the two example sentences. 
Highlight the use of don’t to make a negative in the 
second sentence. Then tell Sts to go to the Vocabulary 
Bank Verb phrases on p.153 and demonstrate the 
activity by making true sentences about yourself.
	 Give Sts time to think about their six sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to write the six sentences.
	 In pairs, Sts tell each other their sentences. Tell Sts to put 
a tick or a cross next to the pictures that apply to their 
partner, so that they don’t forget the information.
e	 Get Sts to change partners. Sts now tell their new partner 
about their first partner, using the third person singular.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the example on p.23 of the Student’s 
Book on the board to help Sts: EVA PLAYS TENNIS. SHE DOESN’T 
WEAR GLASSES… 
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts, both about 
themselves and about their partners.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
4	READING  identifying attitude
a	 Focus on the title and explain / elicit the meaning of 
foreigner (= a person from another country). Model and 
drill pronunciation.
	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Tell them that this 
is a real (adapted) article from a British newspaper. It is 
very motivating for Sts to realize that they can actually 
understand a newspaper article even at elementary level.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the task. 
	 Check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Erdal	 g British people don’t work like that. They only want to 
finish work and go home.
Khalal	 g I don’t like the weather. And I don’t like the food.
Camille	 f The British are friendly.
Shurooq	 f In the UK women have a lot of freedom. I like the 
weather here. I love days when it rains, or it’s cold. The 
people are also nice and friendly.
Michelle	 f My favourite thing about Britain is the Scotch eggs. 
Everybody says that British food is awful, but I love it… The 
shops are great too…
Lian Tang	 f Because I like the culture, the art, the history. I also 
love the beautiful scenery… 
g I don’t like…the weather and the food.
3	PRONUNCIATION  third person -s
Pronunciation notes
The pronunciation rules for third person singular -s and 
-es endings are exactly the same as those for plural nouns 
(see 2A).
As with the plurals, if Sts want to know when the final s is 
pronounced /s/ and when it is pronounced /z/, explain 
that it is pronounced /s/ after verbs ending with these 
unvoiced sounds: /k/, /p/, /f/, /t/, e.g. works, stops, laughs, 
sits. After all other voiced endings, the s is pronounced /z/. 
See the Voiced and unvoiced consonants box on p.31.
Sts will have problems distinguishing between, and 
producing, the /s/ and the /z/ sounds, and will tend to 
pronounce all s endings as /s/. Remind them that the /s/ 
is like the sound made by a snake, and the /z/ is like the 
sound made by a bee or a fly.  
a	 Sts read the rule in the Final -s or -es box and then, in 
pairs, they answer the question.
	 Check answers. Model and drill the three words.
books /bʊks/
keys /kiːz/
watches /wɒtʃɪz/
b	 e 3.6  Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the three 
sounds and sentences. 
e 3.6
See sounds and sentences in Student’s Book on p.22
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. If Sts 
are having difficulties producing the /s/ and /z/ endings, 
tell them that the difference is small and reassure them 
that it will come with practice. The most important thing 
at this stage is to make the /ɪz/ sound in the right place, 
e.g. watches, and not to make it in the wrong place, e.g. 
lives (NOT /lɪvɪz/).
	 Play the audio again if necessary. 
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 e 3.7  Focus on the instructions and the example, and 
tell Sts that they must listen to the first sentence and then 
change it using the new subject given, e.g. he, she, it.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 3.7
1	 I live in a flat. She (pause) She lives in a flat.
2	 I need a new phone. He (pause) He needs a new phone.
3	 They work in an office. She (pause) She works in an office.
4	 We wear glasses. He (pause) He wears glasses.
5	 They finish at eight. It (pause) It finishes at eight.
6	 I want a coffee. She (pause) She wants a coffee.
7	 They have two children. He (pause) He has two children.
8	 We do homework. She (pause) She does homework.
9	 They study French. He (pause) He studies French.
 10	 They go shopping. She (pause) She goes shopping.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 43@@
43
3A
b	 Tell Sts they are going to read the article again and must 
complete each gap in 1–7 with a name.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and complete the 
task. 
	 Then get them to compare with a partner, and check 
answers.
1  Shurooq    ​2  Khalal, Lian Tang    ​3  Michelle    ​4  Khalal, Lian 
Tang    ​5  Camille, Shurooq    ​6  Shurooq    ​7  Erdal
	 Ask Sts if they have been to the UK and if so, find out if 
they agree with anything they read in the article. 
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Either explain / demonstrate meaning, getting Sts to 
check in their dictionaries, or translating into Sts’ L1.
1	 all things    everything
2	 all people    everybody
everywhere means ‘all places’
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the two headings and the sentence beginnings 
under each one. Elicit / Explain the meaning of favourite 
(= the one that you like more than any other), and model 
and drill pronunciation /ˈfeɪvərɪt/.
	 Tell Sts to complete the sentences under each heading, 
using their own words. Monitor and help.
b	 Focus on the instructions and go through the Useful 
words box, making sure Sts understand the meaning 
of why and because /bɪˈkɒz/. Model and drill the 
pronunciation.
	 Now read the example. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
compare sentences. Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to 
pay attention to the use of because.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 44@@
	 1A	
Welcome to the class
44
3B
	 Point out the Glossary. Give Sts time to read the 
questions from the list, the interview, and then 
complete 2–5.
c	 e 3.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2	 Do you work long hours?
3	 What does your husband do?
4	 Does he have free weekends?
5	 Do you have time together?
e 3.8
I = interviewer, J = Jess
I	 What do you do, Jess?
J	 I work in an office. I’m an administrator. 
I	 Do you work long hours?
J	 No, I don’t. I work normal hours, from nine to five, Monday to 
Friday.
I	 What does your husband do? 
J	 He’s a police officer. He works at night, from eight p.m. to six in 
the morning.
I	 Does he have free weekends? 
J	 No, he doesn’t. Well, he has two free days, but they’re Wednesday 
and Thursday. He works Saturday and Sunday – they’re busy 
nights for police officers. 
I	 Do you have time together?
J	 Not really, except when we’re on vacation. I’m in bed when he 
comes home, he’s in bed when I leave home in the morning. We 
don’t eat together. That’s awful. Sometimes I don’t cook, I just 
have cookies for dinner.
I	 Can you think of any good things about your different hours?
J	 Yes, we earn more money because Carl does a lot of overtime. 
I	 Do you have any suggestions for couples like you?
J	 Have a whiteboard in your hall or your kitchen and write down all 
the housework. Then tick things when you do them. That way, the 
dogs don’t eat twice! 
d	 Get Sts to cover the interview and just look at the five 
questions in b. In pairs or as a whole-class activity, get Sts 
to answer them.
	 Deal with any new vocabulary in the interview. Model and 
drill pronunciation, e.g. administrator.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
f	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to check who 
the questions in b are about.
	 Check answers. 
1	 What do you do, Jess?, Do you work long hours?
2	 Does he have free weekends?, What does your husband do?
3	 Do you have time together?
	 Now ask What’s different when the question is about Jess and 
about Carl?
About Jess: Do you...?    About Carl: Does he...?
 G   present simple ?
 V   jobs: journalist, doctor, etc.
 P   /ɜː/ and /ə/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is jobs and work. Sts begin by 
reading an interview which presents questions in the 
present simple in both second and third person singular, 
(Do you…? Does he…?). Then Sts learn the vocabulary for 
common jobs, and how to say what they do. There is a 
pronunciation focus on the /ɜː/ and /ə/ sounds. Sts then 
listen to a radio programme, where competitors try to guess 
first a man’s job, and then his wife’s job. Sts then practise by 
asking each other present simple questions about imaginary 
jobs, and the lesson finishes with Sts asking questions in the 
third person singular to guess someone’s job. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present simple + , − and ? p.175 
Vocabulary  Jobs p.263 (instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Present simple questionnaire p.221 
(instructions p.206)
For students
Workbook  3B
Online Practice  3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following sentences on the board. Make them true 
for you.  
1	 I’M A TEACHER. 
2	 I WORK IN (THE NAME OF YOUR SCHOOL). 
3	 I WORK (…) HOURS A DAY. 
4	 I LIKE MY JOB VERY MUCH.
Elicit the difference between job and work (job is a noun; 
work is a verb) and focus on the use of a before teacher.
1	GRAMMAR  present simple ?
a	 Books open. Focus on the photo of Jess and Carl, and the 
question. 
	 Now tell Sts to read the interview quickly to find the 
answer. Remind Sts that they need to find out what Carl’s 
job is, not Jess’s.
	 Check the answer.
He’s a police officer.
b	 Focus on the title and elicit the meaning of night and day. 
	 Tell Sts they are going to read the interview and this 
time they need to complete it with the questions the 
interviewer asks. 
	 Focus on the example (What do you do, Jess?) and elicit / 
explain that this question is the same as What’s your job?.
	3B	 9 to 5
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 45@@
45
3B
	 e 3.10  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 3.10
Jobs
 28	 an accountant
 26	 an actor
2	 an administrator
1	 an architect
6	 a builder
7	 a chef
 27	 a cleaner
4	 a dentist
 17	 a doctor
8	 an engineer
 11	 a factory worker
 22	 a flight attendant
 13	 a footballer
 30	 a guide
 19	 a hairdresser
 10	 a journalist
 12	 a lawyer
 14	 a manager
 16	 a model
 18	 a musician
5	 a nurse
 21	 a pilot
 23	 a police officer
 24	 a receptionist
 15	 a shop assistant
9	 a soldier
 29	 a taxi driver
 25	 a teacher
3	 a vet
 20	 a waiter / a waitress
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Point out that in 
compound nouns (e.g. factory worker, flight attendant), the 
main stress is on the first word. Give further practice of any 
words and phrases your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 e 3.11  Focus on the flow chart in c and go through the 
possible answers to the question What do you do?. Play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the sentences.
e 3.11
See flow chart in Student’s Book on p.154
	 Play again if necessary.
	 Highlight the use of the prepositions for, in, at, and the 
article a / an. 
	 Then give Sts time to decide how to say what they do in 
English, and go round helping with any jobs they don’t 
know how to express. Don’t ask Sts at this stage what 
they do as they will be asking each other in c in the main 
lesson.
	 Now focus on Activation. In pairs, get Sts to cover the 
words with a piece of paper, look at the photos, and try to 
remember the jobs. They could test each other – A says a 
number, and B says the job.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.128. 
Grammar notes
do and does
The auxiliary do (and does) can puzzle Sts if they try to 
translate questions word for word. Explain (in Sts’ L1 if you 
prefer) that auxiliary means ‘helper’, and that the auxiliaries 
do and does ‘help’ to form questions and negatives. They 
do not have a separate meaning. The auxiliaries do and 
does are also often used to ‘soften’ a yes / no answer (which 
can sound abrupt), e.g. Do you work here? No, I don’t.
	 e 3.9  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the do and does box and go through it with Sts. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 3B on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  Do    ​2  Do    ​3  Does    ​4  Does    ​5  Do    ​6  Does    ​7  Does    ​
8  Does    ​9  Do    ​10  Does
b
1	 Does he like tennis?
2	 Does she speak German?
3	 Do you eat pizzas? 
4	 Do they cook lasagne? 
5	 Does she live in a house? 
6	 Do you want an iPhone? 
7	 Does he drive fast?
8	 Does she drink it with milk? 
9	 Do you have boys or girls? 
10	 Do you listen to music on your phone?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	VOCABULARY  jobs
a	 Focus on the jobs in the list and point out to Sts that they 
have seen all these jobs before. 
	 Individually or in pairs, Sts complete sentences 1–5 with a 
job from the list. 
	 Check answers and write the words on the board.
1  police officer    2  actor    3  teacher    4  receptionist    
5  administrator
	 Model and drill the pronunciation, and underline the 
stress. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Jobs on p.154 and get 
them to do a individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to point out to Sts that it is more common 
to ask What do you do? (which covers all possibilities, e.g. 
being a student, being unemployed, etc.) rather than 
What’s your job?, which we would probably only ask if we 
knew the other person was working.
	 Focus on the a / an + jobs box and go through it with  
the class. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 46@@
46
3B
4	LISTENING  understanding specific information
a	 e 3.14  Tell Sts they’re going to listen to a game show 
called His job, her job, where a team of three people ask 
a man, Alex, and then his wife, Sue, questions for two 
minutes, and then have to guess their jobs. 
	 Focus on the questions in the chart. Go through them, 
and elicit / explain any new words, e.g. outside / inside, 
with the public, qualifications, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
	 Tell Sts that they will hear the contestants asking Alex 
questions first and they must underline the questions in 
the chart. Point out that the first one (work in an office?) 
has been done for them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts that the contestants ask Alex a total 
of nine questions.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and underline the 
questions. Play the audio again if necessary, pausing after 
each question, and then check answers.
EXTRA IDEA   You might want to pause the audio after the 
announcer says Let’s have your first question for Alex and ask 
Sts what David, Kate, and Lorna do.  
You could also ask how long they have to ask Alex and Sue 
about their jobs.
David is a teacher, Kate is unemployed, and Lorna is a writer.
They have one minute to ask about Alex’s job, and one minute 
to ask about Sue’s.
Alex’s questions about his job
Do you work in an office?
Do you work in the evening? 
Do you make things? 
Do you wear a uniform or special clothes? 
Do you drive? 
Do you work in a team? 
Do you have special qualifications? 
Do you speak foreign languages? 
Do you travel?
c	 Focus on the two questions and give Sts time to decide 
how to say in English what their parents do.
	 Get Sts to stand up and ask at least three other Sts the two 
questions. 
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to answer in a full 
sentence.
	 Get feedback from as many Sts as possible. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the two questions that Sts need to ask 
(What do you do? What do your parents do?) and write them 
on the board to help Sts.
3	PRONUNCIATION  /ɜː/ and /ə/
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that the two dots in /ɜː/ mean that this sound 
is long. It is a longer version of the /ə/ sound. Also remind 
them that they have met the /ə/ sound before, on p.8 
of 1B, and that it is the most common vowel sound in 
English.
You may want to tell Sts that the most common wor- 
words which have the /ɜː/ sound, and which Sts often 
mispronounce, are work, word, and world. You could also 
remind them that when er and or are unstressed, e.g. at 
the end of many job words, they are pronounced /ə/ (the 
schwa).
a	 e 3.12  Focus on the new sound picture, bird, and on 
computer. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the two sounds and 
example words. 
e 3.12
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.25
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, focus on the /ɜː/ and /ə/ box and go through it 
with the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 3.13  Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the six 
sentences.
e 3.13
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.25
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
	 Get a few Sts to say them aloud to the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 47@@
47
3B
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and underline the 
questions. Play the audio again if necessary, pausing after 
each question, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts that the contestants ask Sue a total 
of seven questions.
Sue’s questions about her job
Do you work outside? 
Do you work at the weekend? 
Do you work with the public? 
Do you have good holidays? 
Do you work at night? 
Do you earn a lot of money? 
Do you like your job?
e 3.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
Part 2
P	 Now team, you have a minute to ask Sue about her job.
K	 Hello, Sue. Do you work outside?
S	 It depends. Outside and inside.
L	 Do you work at the weekend?
S	 Yes, I do.
D	 Do you work with the public?
S	 No, I don’t.
K	 Do you have good holidays?
S	 No, I don’t. I never have any holidays.
K	 Do you work at night?
S	 Sometimes. It depends.
L	 Do you earn a lot of money?
S	 No, nothing! I don’t have a salary.
D	 Do you like your job?
S	 Yes, I do! I love it.
P	 That’s time. OK, team…
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and put a tick, a 
cross, or a D in Sue’s column.
	 Check Sue’s answers about her job.
Sue’s answers about her job
Do you work outside? D
Do you work at the weekend? f
Do you work with the public? g
Do you have good holidays? g
Do you work at night? D
Do you earn a lot of money? g
Do you like your job? f
d	 Focus on the instructions and two examples. You might 
want to point out to Sts the position of sometimes before 
the verb.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to make sentences about 
Alex and Sue’s jobs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to write their sentences.
	 Elicit the sentences about Alex from the class. 
Alex
…doesn’t work in an office.
…sometimes works in the evening.
…works in a team.
…doesn’t have special qualifications.
…doesn’t speak foreign languages.
…travels at weekends.
…doesn’t drive in his job.
…doesn’t make things.
…wears special clothes.
e 3.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.118)
A = announcer, P = presenter, D = David, K = Kate, L = Lorna, Al = Alex,  
S = Sue
Part 1
A	 And now on Radio 4, His job, her job. 
P	 Good evening and welcome again to the jobs quiz His job, her job. 
And our team tonight are David, a teacher…
D	 Hello.
P	 Kate, who’s unemployed…
K	 Hi.
P	 …and Lorna, who’s a writer.
L	 Good evening.
P	 And our first couple tonight are…
Al	 Alex.
P	 And?
S	 Sue.
P	 Welcome to the programme, Alex and Sue. OK team, you have 
one minute to ask Alex questions about his job and then one 
minute to ask Sue about her job, starting now. Let’s have your first 
question for Alex.
D	 Hi, Alex. Do you work in an office?
Al	 No, I don’t.
L	 Do you work in the evening?
Al	 It depends. Yes, sometimes.
K	 Do you make things?
Al	 No, I don’t.
L	 Do you wear a uniform or special clothes?
Al	 Er, yes – I wear special clothes.
K	 Do you drive in your job?
Al	 No, I don’t.
L	 Do you work in a team?
Al	 Yes, I do. With ten other people.
K	 Do you have special qualifications?
Al	 Qualifications? No, I don’t.
D	 Do you speak foreign languages?
Al	 No, only English.
P	 You only have time for one more question, team…
D	 Er, do you travel?
Al	 Yes, I do. At weekends. Well, not every weekend…
P	 Your time’s up. 
b	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that now they have 
to focus on Alex’s answers. Elicit that he can only answer 
yes, no, or it depends. Explain / Elicit the meaning of it 
depends and drill pronunciation. Point out that the first 
one has been done for them.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and put a tick, a cross, 
or a D in Alex’s column.
	 Check Alex’s answers about his job and elicit / explain the 
meaning of sometimes (= not all the time).
Alex’s answers about his job
Do you work in an office? g
Do you work in the evening? D
Do you make things? g
Do you wear a uniform or special clothes? f
Do you drive? g
Do you work in a team? f
Do you have special qualifications? g
Do you speak foreign languages? g
Do you travel? f
c	 e 3.15  Sts now do the same for Sue. Tell Sts that they will 
hear the contestants asking Sue questions and they must 
underline the questions they hear. You might want to 
suggest that Sts underline her questions using a different 
colour if they can.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 48@@
48
3B
5	SPEAKING
a	 Tell Sts they are now going to play the same game, His job, 
her job, but as individuals, not couples. Put Sts in groups of 
four. Tell them to go to Vocabulary Bank Jobs on p.154 
and each choose a job.
	 When they are ready, tell them they have two minutes 
to ask each person the questions in the chart in 4b. Get 
Sts to make notes of the answers to help them to guess 
the jobs.
	 When the time is up, tell Sts to guess the jobs.
	 Find out how many Sts guessed correctly.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Jobs on p.154 again, 
and this time, think of someone they know who has one 
of the jobs.
	 In the same groups, Sts first tell the others if they are 
thinking about a man or a woman. Then Sts take it in 
turns to ask questions from the chart in the third person 
singular to find out what this person’s job is.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to 
ask you the questions first.
	 Get Sts to make notes of their partners’ answers to help 
them guess the jobs when time is up.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
	 Now give Sts 30 seconds to guess his job. Write the 
different ideas on the board.
	 Get feedback, but don’t tell Sts if they’re right or wrong.
	 Now elicit the sentences about Sue from the class.
Sue
…sometimes works outside.
…sometimes works at night.
…works at the weekend.
…doesn’t work with the public.
…doesn’t have any holidays.
…doesn’t earn a lot of money / doesn’t have a salary.
…loves her job.
	 Now give Sts 30 seconds to guess her job. 
	 Get feedback, but don’t tell Sts if they’re right or wrong.
e	 e 3.16  Play the end of the show on the audio. Pause 
after they ask Are you a footballer, Alex? and ask Sts what 
they think, before letting them hear his job.  
	 Then continue the audio until So, Sue, what do you do? and 
ask Sts what they think, before letting them hear Sue’s job.
	 Ask the class with a show of hands who had guessed 
correctly for each job.
Alex is a footballer.  Sue is a full-time mother.
e 3.16
P	 OK, team. So, what’s Alex’s job?
K	 OK, so he wears special clothes, he works with ten other people, 
he sometimes travels… Are you a footballer, Alex? 
Al	 Yes, I am.
P	 Very good! And Sue?
D	 Let’s see. She works outside and inside. She works at the 
weekend. She doesn’t earn any money. She doesn’t have holidays. 
But she likes her job! We give up. We can’t think of any jobs with 
those conditions!
P	 So, Sue, what do you do?
S	 I’m a mum. A full-time mother!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to the audio with scripts 3.14 and 3.15 on pp.118–119, 
so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 49@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
49
3C
e 3.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
B = Becca, D = Dave
B	 He’s beautiful. Is he a fox terrier? Sorry, he or she?
D	 She. Yes, she’s a fox terrier. Her name’s Dolly. And your dog? 
B	 He’s a Labrador. 
D	 What’s his name? 
B	 Barry. Barry, come here! 
D	 Dolly. Here. Stop it. 
B	 I think Barry likes her.
D	 Yes! Sorry, I’m Dave. What’s your name?
B	 Becca. Hi.
D	 Nice to meet you, Becca! How old is Barry?
B	 Er…He’s, er, two. And Dolly?
D	 Er…The same. Hey, Dolly! Come back!
b	 e 3.18  Focus on the second illustration and establish 
that Becca and Dave go to a café. Tell Sts to cover the 
conversation with a piece of paper and listen to the 
conversation to find out what happens in the end.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task. 
	 Check the answer.
Dave invites Becca to lunch.
e 3.18
D	 It’s really hot. Would you like a drink? Or an ice cream?
B	 Yes, why not? Let’s go to the café. 
D	 What kind of ice cream do you want?
B	 Er, a Magnum if they have it.
D	 Here you are. One Magnum.
B	 Thanks, Dave.
D	 Where do you live?
B	 Very near here, in Park Road. And you?
D	 I live quite near, in Queen’s Road. What do you do, Becca?
B	 I’m a journalist. 
D	 Really? How interesting! Do you work for a newspaper?
B	 No, for TV. What about you?
D	 I’m a teacher. I’m on holiday now.
B	 Me too. Oh! My ice cream. 
D	 Dolly! Bad dog! I’m really sorry.
B	 That’s OK.
D	 Do you want another ice cream?
B	 No, thanks.
D	 Are you sure? I’m really sorry. Look, let’s have lunch one day. Are 
you free on Saturday? 
B	 Oh, well, OK, then. Yes. Thanks very much.
c	 Tell Sts to uncover the conversation, and give them a few 
minutes to read it. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts, in pairs, to try to guess the 
missing words before they listen.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to complete the questions (or 
check their guesses). Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
2  What…want?    ​3  Where…live?    ​4  What…do    ​5  work    ​
6  What    ​7  want 
 G   word order in questions 
 V   question words
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
This lesson starts with a listening in which two characters, 
Becca and Dave, meet for the first time. This provides a 
context for asking a lot of questions to try to get to know 
somebody. Sts go on to look at the grammar of word order 
in questions, especially those beginning with question 
words. There is then a vocabulary stage, where Sts revise 
and expand their knowledge of questions words, and then 
in Pronunciation they practise the rhythm of questions. 
Sts have a Speaking activity where they practise asking 
each other a variety of questions, and the lesson ends with 
Writing as they learn to write a personal profile.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  word order in questions p.176 
Communicative  Famous people p.222  
(instructions p.206)
For students
Workbook  3C
Online Practice  3C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask the class who has a dog (either their own or a family 
pet). Then ask Sts who have a dog what kind of dog it is and 
who usually takes it for a walk.
1	LISTENING  identifying who’s who
a	 e 3.17  Books open. Focus on the instructions and the 
first illustration. Give Sts time to read the four names, and 
make sure they understand what they have to do. Point 
out that the first one (Becca is the woman) has been done 
for them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and match the names to the 
people or the dogs.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Barry is her dog.  Dave is the man.  Dolly is his dog. 
	 Now ask Sts if they know any more information about 
the dogs.
Barry is a Labrador; he’s two years old.
Dolly is a fox terrier; she’s two years old.
	3C	 Love me, love my dog
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 50@@
50
3C
2	GRAMMAR  word order in questions
a	 Focus on the instructions, and tell Sts to try to put the 
words in the correct order to make questions.
b	 e 3.21  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.21
1	 How old is Barry?
2	 What’s his name?
3	 Do you like it?
4	 How do you feel about cats?
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3C on p.128. 
Grammar notes 
Word order in English is less flexible than in many other 
languages, and this is especially true of questions. Sts 
often have problems remembering the position of the 
auxiliaries do and does in present simple questions.  
The acronyms ASI (auxiliary, subject, infinitive) and  
QuASI (question word, auxiliary, subject, infinitive) will 
help your Sts remember to use the correct word order in 
questions. Use the acronyms as a quick way of reminding 
them if they make mistakes. 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 3.22 and e 3.23 for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 3C on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1	 How many children do you have?
2	 Is your job interesting?
3	 What colour is his car? 
4	 Where does your brother work? 
5	 Do you work with computers?
6	 What kind of magazines do you read? 
7	 What does he do at the weekend?
8	 Are you stressed in your job?
9	 Where does your sister live?
10	 How do you say that in English?
b
1  does…do    2  does she work    3  Does…like    4  does…do
5  Is he    6  Does…do    7  do you do
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 e 3.19  Focus on the Showing interest box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear three sentences from Becca 
and Dave’s conversation, and they must only repeat each 
phrase that shows interest.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the phrases. 
e 3.19
1	 B	 I’m a journalist. 
	
D	 Really? (pause) How interesting! (pause)
2	 D	 Do you work for a newspaper?
	
B	 No, for TV. What about you? (pause)
3	 D	 I’m on holiday now. 
	
B	 Me too. (pause)
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
	 Tell Sts that they will be using these phrases later, in the 
Speaking activity.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read the conversation in c.
	 If there’s time, get them to swap roles.
f	 e 3.20  Focus on the instructions and give Sts some time 
to read the six sentences. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  D    ​2  B    ​3  D    ​4  D    ​5  B    ​6  D
e 3.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
B	 Hi. It’s me. Becca.
D	 Hi. It’s the first floor. 
B	 Hi, Dave. Very nice flat. 
D	 Do you like it? It has a big kitchen.
B	 Mmm. Nice smell. Er, where’s Dolly?
D	 She isn’t here. Er, Becca, I need to tell you something. Dolly isn’t 
my dog. She’s my friend’s dog. I sometimes help and take her for a 
walk.
B	 You don’t have a dog?
D	 No. Er…I don’t like dogs very much. And my flat’s quite small. I’m 
so sorry. I know you love dogs.
B	 Don’t worry! Barry isn’t my dog either! He’s my sister’s dog. I like 
dogs, but…in fact…I have two cats. How do you feel about cats?
D	 I love cats – in fact, I prefer cats to dogs! Come and sit down. It’s 
nearly ready.
B	 What’s for lunch?
D	 Spaghetti carbonara – and then chocolate ice cream.  
Home-made!
B	 All for me this time! 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to the three parts of the audio with the scripts in the 
main lesson and on p.119, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
g	 Focus on the question and make sure Sts understand it.
	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions. Say 
what you think, too. You could also ask Sts if they prefer 
cats or dogs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 51@@
51
3C
EXTRA SUPPORT   Point out that in the first question they 
might need to change work to study. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell the Sts B to close their books, and 
get the Sts A to ask the questions in a different order.
	 Monitor and help as necessary. Then get Sts to swap roles.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions with the class. Then focus on the 
prompts. Elicit that in the first, second , and third group 
they need to add do you between the question word or 
phrase and the verb, and in the fourth group, they need to 
add is / ’s after Who or What.
	 Then elicit the questions from the first and second groups, 
e.g. Where do you live? Where do you work? What kind of 
films do you like?, etc.
b	 Focus on the instructions. You could model the example 
conversation with a strong student. Remind Sts of the 
ways of showing interest that they saw earlier in the 
lesson, e.g. How interesting!
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably with a student they 
don’t usually work with. Sts interview each other.
!   If you have an odd number of Sts in the class, have one 
group of three. Choose strong Sts who will have time to do 
the interview three times. 
	 Get some feedback from the class. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage the Sts who are asking the 
questions to ask extra questions if they can, e.g.  
A What car do you have? 
B I have a Mini.  
A What colour is it? / Do you like it?, etc. (extra questions)
Encourage the Sts who are answering the questions to give 
extra information, e.g.  
A Where do you work? 
B I work in a shop. I’m a…
Round off the activity by asking various pairs what they have 
in common. 
6	WRITING  a personal profile
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A personal profile on p.113.
a	 Focus on Fiona’s profile and give Sts time to read it. 
	 Go through the different sections with Sts. Highlight and 
check the meaning and pronunciation of: 
– occupation (= what they do, e.g. their job) 
– interests (= hobbies)
	 Tell Sts to cover the profile and ask them questions about 
Fiona, e.g. Where is she from? What does she do? What 
languages does she speak? What kind of music does she 
like?, etc.
	 Then ask Sts if they have similar interests to Fiona.
b	 Focus on the and, but, or box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Get Sts to do the writing in class or set it for homework. 
c	 Remind Sts to check their profiles for mistakes, e.g. with 
capital letters or spelling, and the use of and, but, and or. 
3	VOCABULARY  question words
a	 Focus on the question words and phrases, and questions 
1–8. Point out that the first one (What) has been done 
for them.
	 Give Sts time to complete the questions.
b	 e 3.24  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
See words in bold in script 3.24
e 3.24
1	 What phone do you have?
	
I have a Samsung.
2	 How many brothers and sisters do you have?
	
I have two sisters.
3	 Which do you prefer, cats or dogs?
	
Cats, I think.
4	 Where do you work?
	
In a restaurant in the city centre.
5	 When do you have language classes?
	
On Mondays and Wednesdays.
6	 What kind of music do you like?
	
I like pop and reggae. 
7	 Who’s your favourite actor?
	
Benedict Cumberbatch.
8	 Why do you like him?
	
Because he’s a fantastic actor.
	 Now either put Sts in pairs to answer questions 1–3 or do 
it as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
1	 /h/
2	 /w/
3	 We use What…? when there’s a large number of possibilities. 
We use Which…? when there’s a small number, often two.
4	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
Sts have already seen how within a word one syllable is 
stressed more strongly than the others. They also need 
to be aware that within a sentence, some words are 
stressed more strongly than others. Stressed words are 
usually ‘information’ words, i.e. nouns, adjectives, verbs. 
Unstressed words are usually shorter words such as 
pronouns, articles, prepositions, and auxiliary verbs. 
This mixture of stressed and unstressed words is what 
gives English its rhythm. 
a	 e 3.25  Tell Sts that in sentences we stress the important 
words and that the words in big bold print in the four 
questions are important words and are stressed. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the four questions. 
e 3.25
See questions in Student’s Book on p.27
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat, 
copying the rhythm.
b	 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B. A asks the questions in 3a 
and B gives his / her own answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 52@@
	 1	
Practical English
EPISODE
52
PE2
e 3.26
Time, 1 Telling the time
3	 It’s quarter past six.
5	 It’s six o’clock.
1	 It’s quarter to seven.
8	 It’s ten past six.
7	 It’s five to seven.
4	 It’s twenty-five to seven.
2	 It’s half past six.
9	 It’s three minutes past six.
6	 It’s twenty past six.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight:
•	 that from 12 o’clock to half past (the right-hand side of 
the clock) all the times are expressed with past, and that 
from half past to 12 o’clock (the left-hand side) all the 
times are expressed with to.
•	 the pronunciation of half /hɑːf/ (highlighting the  
silent l) and quarter /ˈkwɔːtə/.
•	 the origin of o’clock (originally ‘of the clock’).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again and get Sts to repeat 
the times. 
	 Now focus on the Time box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Finally, focus on the instructions for Activation. Get Sts to 
cover the phrases with a piece of paper and, in pairs, to 
point at the clocks and ask and say the times.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What’s the time?, A on p.104,  
B on p.109. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. Go through the 
instructions with them carefully, and drill the question 
What’s the time? (or What time is it?).
	 At the end of the activity, get Sts to compare their clocks 
to make sure they have drawn the right times.
	 Finally, elicit the time on some of the clocks from the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson.
2	r ROB AND JENNY MEET
a	 e 3.27  Focus on the photo and elicit who the people 
are and where they are (Rob and Jenny in the hotel).
	 Then focus on the instructions and the question. Play the 
video / audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
They go for a coffee.
Function  buying a coffee
Vocabulary  telling the time
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn to tell the time and how to buy a 
coffee (or other drink) in a coffee shop or bar. The Rob and 
Jenny story develops. They meet at the hotel, and go to buy 
a takeaway coffee. They then go to the office and Jenny 
meets Karen, the administrator, and Daniel, the boss.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Vocabulary  Practical English 2 Time p.264  
(instructions p.254)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 2 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 2 
                     Can you remember? 1–3
Online Practice  Practical English 2 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 2, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 1. Ask them Who’s Rob? Where does he work / 
live? Who’s Jenny? Where is she from?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 1.
1	r VOCABULARY  telling the time
a	 Books open. Focus on the clock and the question. Elicit 
the answer It’s nine o’clock and write it on the board. You 
may want to point out here that we often just say, e.g. 
The meeting is at nine (rather than at nine o’clock), but if 
someone asks you the time, it’s more common to answer 
It’s nine o’clock.
	 Note: there is no difference in exactness between It’s nine 
and It’s nine o’clock. If you want to emphasize an exact time, 
you need to add the word exactly, e.g. It’s exactly nine o’clock. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Time on p.157 and get 
them to do Part 1.
	 Focus on 1 Telling the time and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.26  Now focus on b. Play the audio for Sts to listen 
and check.
	 Check answers. You may also want to point out that British 
people often leave out the a before quarter past and 
quarter to, e.g. It’s (a) quarter to ten.
EPISODE
EPISODE
	 2	
Practical English  Coffee to take away
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 53@@
53
PE2
b	 e 3.28  Focus on the task and on questions 1–3. Elicit / 
Explain that question 3, How much is it?, means What is the 
price?
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write the 
three questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the 
questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. Then 
play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Jenny has a double espresso and Rob has a large latte.
2	 Jenny doesn’t have anything. Rob has a brownie and a 
croissant. 
3	 £12.45
e 3.28 e 3.29
B = barista, R = Rob, J = Jenny
B	 Can I help you?
R	 What would you like, Jenny? (repeat)
J	 An espresso, please. (repeat)
B	 Single or double? 
J	 Double. (repeat)
R	 Can I have a latte, please? (repeat)
B	 Regular or large?
R	 Large. (repeat)
B	 To have here or take away?
R	 To take away. (repeat)
B	 Anything else?
J	 No, thanks. (repeat)
R	 A brownie for me, please…and a croissant… (repeat)
B	 OK.
R	 How much is that? (repeat)
B	 That’s twelve forty-five, please.
R	 Sorry, how much? (repeat)
B	 Twelve forty-five. Thank you. And your change.
R	 Thanks. (repeat)
c	 Focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who says 
the You hear phrases (the barista) and who says the You 
say phrases (the customer, or here Rob and Jenny). These 
phrases will be useful for Sts if they need to order food or 
a drink. Point out the Glossary on the page. Barista is an 
imported Italian word.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Then play 
the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  help    2  Single    3  Regular    4  here    5  change
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. Remind Sts that What would you like? is a 
common way of offering a drink to someone, and Can I 
have…? is a common way of asking for what you want.
	 Highlight that to ask for a (total) price we can say either 
How much is it? or How much is that?.
e 3.27
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 Erm…Jennifer?
J	 Rob?
R	 Yes, hello. Nice to meet you, Jennifer.
J	 Call me Jenny. Good to meet you, too.
R	 Welcome to London. Am I late?
J	 Erm…just a little.
R	 What time is it?
J	 Nine fifteen.
R	 I’m really sorry. The traffic is terrible today.
J	 No problem.
R	 How are you? How’s the hotel?
J	 The hotel’s very nice. But breakfast isn’t great. I’d like a good cup 
of coffee. Not hotel coffee – real coffee.
R	 OK, let’s get a coffee.
J	 Do I have time? I have a meeting at nine thirty.
R	 With Daniel?
J	 Yes.
R	 Don’t worry. We have lots of time – the office is very near. So, 
Jenny, where do you live in New York?
b	 Focus on questions 1–4 and go through them with Sts, 
eliciting / explaining new words, e.g. late. 
	 Now play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Because the traffic is terrible.
2	 Because the hotel coffee isn’t great.
3	 Because she has a meeting with Daniel.
4	 Because they have lots of time. The office is very near.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
3	r BUYING A COFFEE
a	 Focus on the photo and ask where Rob and Jenny are 
(in a coffee shop). Then focus on the menu and check 
Sts understand all the items on it. You may want to 
point out that in coffee shops in the UK they now use 
the Italian words for different types of coffee, e.g. latte, 
cappuccino, etc.
	 Explain that regular means normal size, and that large is 
another word for big.
	 Elicit / Explain that although the prices are just numbers, 
as the coffee bar is in the UK the prices are in pounds and 
pence (3.00 = three pounds, 2.80 = two (pounds) eighty). 
Saying prices is practised in more detail in Practical 
English 3.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to practise in pairs like this: 
A	How much is a single espresso? 
B	 Two (pounds) forty-five. How much is a regular cappuccino?, 
etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 54@@
54
PE2
e 3.30
R = Rob, J = Jenny, K = Karen, D = Daniel
R	 Here we are. This is the office. And this is Karen.
J	 Hello, Karen.
R	 Karen, this is Jennifer Zielinski from the New York office.
K	 Hello, Jennifer. 
J	 Nice to meet you.
R	 Karen is our administrator. We all depend on her. 
K	 Don’t listen to Rob. 
R	 But it’s true!
K	 Is this your first time in the UK, Jennifer?
J	 Yes, it is. But it isn’t my first time in Europe. I have family in Poland. 
K	 Really? And where do you live in New York?
J	 In Manhattan. Do you know New York?
K	 Yes. My sister lives in Brooklyn.
J	 I have family in Brooklyn, too. Where does your sister live?
D	 Jennifer! 
J	 Daniel?
D	 How nice to meet you, at last. Would you like something to drink? 
Tea, coffee, water? 
J	 Oh no, I’m fine, thanks.
D	 Great. Oh, Karen. What time is my next meeting? 
K	 At twelve o’clock.
D	 That’s good – we have time. OK, come into my office, Jennifer.
J	 Thank you.
D	 Talk to you later, Rob.
R	 Yeah. Sure.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
b	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says them.
c	 e 3.31  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen to 
the four phrases and check their answers to b. 
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases. 
1  R    ​2  K    ​3  D    ​4  D
e 3.31
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.29
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    ​B  4    ​C  2    ​D  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
d	 e 3.29  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell 
Sts they’re going to watch or listen to the conversation 
again. They should repeat the You say phrases when they 
hear the beep. Encourage them to copy the rhythm and 
intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. 
e 3.29
Same as script 3.28 with repeat pauses
e	 Put Sts in groups of three, A, B, and C. A is the barista. Get 
Sts to read the conversation aloud and then swap roles.
f	 Now assign a role to each student in their groups and 
focus on the instructions.
	 A keeps his / her book open and is the barista. B and C 
both close their books. B invites C to have a drink and 
something to eat.
	 Elicit that A begins with Can I help you? and B then asks C 
What would you like?.
	 Sts now role-play the conversation. When they have 
finished, they swap roles.
	 You could get a few groups to perform in front of the 
class.
4	r FIRST DAY IN THE OFFICE
a	 e 3.30  Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where is Jenny now? Who do you think the other people 
are? (You may want to teach / revise maybe and I think to 
encourage speculation.).
	 Go through questions 1–6. 
	 Now play the video / audio once for Sts just to watch or 
listen. 
	 Then play it again, pausing for Sts to answer the questions. 
Play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  She is an administrator.    ​
2  In Poland.   
​3  In Manhattan.    ​
4  Yes, a sister in Brooklyn.    ​
5  Tea, coffee, or water.    ​
6  Twelve o’clock.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 55@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
55
4A
	4A	 Family photos
 G   possessive ’s, Whose…?
 V   family: sister, aunt, etc. 
 P   /ʌ/, the letter o
Lesson plan 
The main context for this lesson is pictures of people in the 
public eye who have been photographed with a member 
of their family or partner who is not well known. This 
provides a natural context for presenting the grammar of the 
possessive ’s (e.g. Who is he? He’s Brad Pitt’s brother.) and the 
question word Whose…?. Sts then learn the vocabulary of 
family members, which leads into a focus on the /ʌ/ sound, 
and the most common pronunciations of the letter o.  
The lesson ends with Sts listening to a woman showing her 
friend photos of members of her family, which Sts then do 
themselves. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  possessive ’s, Whose…? p.177 
Vocabulary  The family p.265 (instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Everyday objects p.223  
(instructions p.206)
For students
Workbook  4A
Online Practice  4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Draw a simple family 
tree on the board, preferably of your family, or a well-known 
family, showing two generations: mother / father + children, 
e.g. 
ALAN = MARIAN
ROBERT
ME
SUSAN
Ask Who’s Alan? to elicit He’s your father, and do the same 
with the other names to elicit mother / brother / sister. Use 
Alan and Marian to teach husband and wife.
Get Sts to spell the words to you and write them on the 
board. Model and drill pronunciation. 
1	GRAMMAR  possessive ’s, Whose…?
a	 Books open. Ask Sts Do you read magazines like Hello! or 
OK!? What kind of people are in them? (Famous people and 
their families).
	 Focus on the title of the article and the photo. Ask the 
question about Doug to the class, but don’t confirm any 
ideas yet. Then ask if they think it’s good or bad to have a 
famous person in the family and elicit opinions.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article and see if they still think 
their guess in a is correct or if they have changed their 
minds. Get them to answer the second questions as well.
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts how they guessed 
whilst reading the article. Also find out if Sts know any 
information about Brad Pitt.
His brother is the actor Brad Pitt.
Yes, he does.
	 Deal with any new vocabulary.
c	 Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to think about the other 
person’s age and appearance.
	 Now focus on the photos and give Sts time, in pairs, 
to read sentences 1–5 and choose a or b for each one. 
Remind them of the expressions I think… and Maybe…
d	 e 4.1   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers by eliciting full sentences and elicit / 
explain that ’s = of, i.e. of Carey Mulligan. Ask Sts if they 
know the people. Some Sts may know that in fact Carey 
Mulligan’s husband is famous in his own right (he is 
Marcus Mumford, lead singer of the band Mumford & 
Sons), and Maggie Gyllenhaal, Jake’s sister, is also a  
well-known actress. 
e 4.1
1	 He’s Carey Mulligan’s husband.
2	 She’s Meryl Streep’s daughter.
3	 She’s Jake Gyllenhaal’s sister.
4	 He’s Morgan Freeman’s son.
5	 He’s Mary-Kate Olsen’s husband. 
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.130. 
Grammar notes
Elementary Sts tend not to have too many problems 
with the possessive s being used in English with things / 
places, e.g. Harry’s bar, and with people, e.g. Jane’s brother. 
However, they may be less clear about not using it in 
phrases like The end of the film or in compound noun 
phrases like bus stop (if this is an of construction in 
their L1).
Names that end in s
James’s or James’? After names ending in s, you can add 
either ’s or just an apostrophe. We teach the first form 
because it is more common and follows the basic rule. 
The pronunciation is /ɪz/, e.g. /ʤeɪmzɪz/.
	 e 4.2   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the ’s and Whose / Who’s box and go through it 
with the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 4A on p.131. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. With a, go through the 
instructions with Sts first, to make sure they understand 
exactly what they have to do. 
	 Check answers. For a, ask Sts for the answers, and then 
write the sentences on the board, so they can see where 
they have to put the apostrophes. Elicit each time 
whether the ’s is the contraction of is or the possessive s.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 56@@
56
4A
a
1  They’re Hillary’s cars.    ​2  It’s Hillary’s purse.    ​3  They’re Bill’s 
magazines.    ​4  It’s Hillary’s watch.    ​5  They’re Bill’s glasses.
b
1  my mother’s birthday    ​2  her parents’ house   
​3  the end of the day    ​4  my sister’s friends    ​
5  The door of the classroom    ​6  the students’ desks
c
1  Whose    ​2  Whose    ​3  Who’s    ​4  Who’s    ​5  Whose    ​6  Who’s
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Ask Sts to focus on the things from the photos. Model and 
drill their pronunciation. Then tell Sts that they belong to 
the famous people in c.
	 Focus Sts’ attention on the speech bubbles. Give Sts, in 
pairs, a few minutes to practise asking and answering the 
questions. 
	 Check answers.
It’s Jake Gyllenhaal’s watch.
It’s Carey Mulligan’s bag.
They’re Meryl Streep’s glasses.
It’s Mary-Kate Olsen’s ring.
EXTRA IDEA   Try to find some photos of famous people’s 
relatives who your Sts will know. You could find these on the 
internet or in celebrity magazines. Ask who the people are.
2	VOCABULARY  family
a	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The family on p.155. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that in English, unlike in some other languages, 
we don’t use the masculine word in the plural to refer to 
masculine and feminine family members, i.e. brothers only 
refers to males. For this reason, we normally ask, e.g. Do 
you have any brothers and sisters?.
	 Focus on the instructions for a and the first family tree. 
Make sure that Sts realize that they have to number the 
people in relation to Richard.
	 Ask Sts Who is Gary? and elicit He’s Richard’s father. Then 
show them where to find the word father and point out 
that number 1 is in the box next to Gary. 
	 Give Sts, in pairs, five minutes to write the numbers on the 
two family trees.
!   Tell Sts they will need to use one of the words (cousin) twice.
	 Don’t check answers at this stage.
	 Focus on b. Give Sts time to complete gaps 1–5. Don’t 
check answers at this stage.
	 e 4.3   Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check answers to a and b. 
	 Check answers.
e 4.3
The family
a	 7	 John is Richard’s grandfather.
	
8	 Jennifer is Richard’s grandmother. 
	
2	 Carol is Richard’s mother.
	
1	 Gary is Richard’s father.
	
9	 Sue is Richard’s aunt.
	 10	 Nick is Richard’s uncle.
	
4	 Kate is Richard’s sister.
	
3	 Steven is Richard’s brother.
	 13	 Hugh is Richard’s cousin.
	 13	 Sarah is Richard’s cousin.
	 14	 Emma is Richard’s wife.
	
5	 Chloe is Richard’s daughter.
	
6	 Jake is Richard’s son.
	 12	 Ruby is Richard’s niece.
	 11	 Oliver is Richard’s nephew.
b	 1	 my father and my mother (pause) my parents
	
2	 my wife’s mother and father (pause) my parents-in-law
	
3	 my grandfather and my grandmother (pause) my grandparents
	
4	 my son and my daughter (pause) my children
	
5	 a husband and wife (pause) a couple
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce, 
e.g. cousin, daughter, niece, and nephew.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You might want to get Sts just to repeat 
the family words.
	 Focus on the More family words box and go through it 
with the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may also want to teach half-brother / 
-sister (someone who has the same mother as you but a 
different father, or the same father but a different mother).
	 Focus on Activation. Demonstrate by asking individual 
Sts, e.g. Who’s Jennifer? (She’s Richard’s grandmother.). Then 
get Sts to continue in pairs, covering the words in a and b. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
b	 Focus on the questions and point out that the first one 
(grandmother) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts two minutes to answer them in pairs. 
	 Check answers.
2  uncle    ​3  niece    ​4  cousin    ​5  brother-in-law    ​6  nephew
3	PRONUNCIATION  /ʌ/, the letter o
Pronunciation notes
The /ʌ/ sound
The most common spelling of this short sound is u 
between consonants, e.g. up, husband, sun, etc. However, 
o can also make this sound as in the family words mother, 
brother, etc., and also ou, e.g. young.
The letter o
Following on from the /ʌ/ sound, this exercise focuses on 
the two most common pronunciations of the letter o, /ɒ/ 
(e.g. clock) and /əʊ/ (e.g. phone), and two less common 
ones, /ʌ/ (e.g. up) and /uː/ (e.g. boot).
Highlight that clock and up are short sounds, boot is a long 
sound, and phone is a diphthong. For these sounds, you 
may want to help Sts by using the videos showing mouth 
positions, or by demonstrating the positions yourself.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 57@@
57
4A
e 4.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
A = Anna, G = Grace
A	 Who’s that?
G	 That’s my boyfriend, Mark.
A	 He’s good-looking. How old is he?
G	 Twenty-six.
A	 What does he do?
G	 He’s a medical student. He finishes this year – I hope! 
A	 Where does he study?
G	 At University College London. 
A	 Does he like it?
G	 Yes, he loves it. And this is my sister Celia and her kids.
A	 Ah. She looks like you.
G	 Yes, she does.
A	 How old is she?
G	 She’s thirty-five.
A	 How old are the children?
G	 Carlos, the little one, is two, and Daniel, the older one’s, er, six, I 
think. They live in Chile, so I don’t see them very often.
A	 Is that another sister?
G	 No, she’s my sister-in-law, Miriam. She’s married to my brother 
Tim.
A	 What does Tim do? 
G	 He’s a lawyer, and Miriam’s a teacher.
A	 How old are their children?
G	 Alex is four and Helen’s thirteen months now.
A	 They look lovely!…So how about you and Mark? When’s the 
wedding?
G	 Wedding! No, thanks! I’m too young!
b	 Focus on the instructions. Play the audio again, pausing 
after each person has been described, to give Sts time to 
write. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
Mark: He is good-looking. He’s 26. He’s a medical student at 
University College London. He loves it.
Celia: She looks like Grace. She’s 35. She has two sons. Carlos is 
two; Daniel is six. They live in Chile.
Miriam: She is married to Tim, Grace’s brother. Tim is a lawyer; 
Miriam is a teacher. Their children are Helen, 13 months old, and 
Alex, four.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.119, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the examples. If Sts have, 
e.g. their phones or tablets with them, ask them to show 
each other photos of friends or people in their family. 
They must ask each other three questions about each 
person. If not, they could write the names of some of their 
relatives and friends on a piece of paper. They swap pieces 
of paper, and then A asks B three questions about each 
person.
	 They then swap roles.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate by bringing in some photos 
of your family / friends. If possible, blow them up or project 
them onto the board, and then elicit questions from Sts.
a	 e 4.4  Focus on the sound picture (up) and play the 
audio for Sts just to listen to the sound and example 
words.
e 4.4
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.31
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
b	 Focus on the Remember! box and go through it with 
the class. This exercise focuses on the two most common 
pronunciations of the letter o, /ɒ/ (e.g. not) and /əʊ/ (e.g. 
photo), and two less common ones, /ʌ/ (e.g. mother) and  
/uː/ (e.g. two).
	 Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the four words and 
sounds, e.g. clock /ɒ/, phone /əʊ/, etc. Point out the four 
examples.
	 Give Sts two or three minutes to put the 11 words into 
the correct columns according to the pronunciation of 
the pink o. Encourage Sts to say the words out loud to 
themselves to help decide where to put them.
!   Two of the words, i.e. doctor and London, have a second o 
in them, which is not pink. This is the schwa sound.
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts you could tell them how many 
words go into each column (excluding the example): /ɒ/ has 
four, /əʊ/ has three, /ʌ/ has three, and /uː/ has one.
c	 e 4.5   Get Sts to compare with a partner.  
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Elicit the answers onto the board. 
e 4.5
clock /ɒ/	
doctor, job, model, Scotland, strong
phone /əʊ/	
don’t, go, home, no
up /ʌ/	
come, London, money, one
boot /uː/	
do, who
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word or column 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
d	 Model the example conversations with a strong student 
or two.
	 Get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs. 
	 Then get a few pairs to read out loud for the class.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  identifying the  
main / supporting information
a	 e 4.6   Focus on the instructions and on the photos on 
Grace’s phone. Now focus on the chart and tell Sts they 
need to listen to find out who Mark, Celia, and Miriam are 
in relation to Grace. Point out that the first one for Mark 
has been done for them (He’s Grace’s boyfriend).
	 Play the audio once or twice. 
	 Check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Celia is Grace’s sister.  Miriam is Grace’s sister-in-law.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 58@@
	 1A	
Welcome to the class
58
4B
	4B	 From morning to night
e 4.7
(sound effects of the following)
1	 alarm clock ringing, groans, noises of someone waking up
2	 somebody having a shower
3	 somebody opening wardrobe, taking out shirt on hanger, putting  
it on
4	 pouring a coffee, drinking
5	 pouring cereal and milk, eating breakfast, etc.
6	 banging front door, walking down drive, getting into car, car  
driving off
b	 Focus on the task and example. Demonstrate it yourself 
by using phrases 1–6 in a to tell the class your typical 
morning.
	 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to do the same. 
	 Get feedback from some pairs to find out if they do things 
in the same order. 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Daily routine on 
p.156. 
Vocabulary notes
Make sure Sts know the difference between go to work 
(= leave the house), get to work (= arrive at work), go home  
(= leave school / work and go to your house), and get 
home (= arrive home). 
	 Focus on the names Busy Belinda and Chilled Charlie, and 
get Sts to guess from the pictures what busy and chilled 
mean. Model and drill pronunciation (/ˈbɪzi/ and  
/tʃɪld/). Then get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 4.8  Now do b. Tell Sts that they will hear the answers 
in the order that Belinda and Charlie do the things, not in 
the order of the verbs. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.8
Daily routine
Busy Belinda
1	 wake up at seven o’clock
2	 have a shower
3	 get dressed
4	 put on make-up
5	 have a coffee
6	 go to work by bus
7	 get to work
8	 start work at eight thirty
9	 have lunch at work
10	 finish work at six thirty
11	 go shopping
12	 get home late
13	 do the housework
14	 have pizza for dinner
15	 check emails
16	 go to bed 
Chilled Charlie
17	 get up at eight o’clock
18	 have a shave
19	 take the dog for a walk
20	 have breakfast
21	 walk to work
22	 go home early
 G   prepositions of time (at, in, on) and place (at, in, to)
 V   daily routine: get up, get dressed, etc.
 P   linking 
Lesson plan
This lesson is based on the daily routine of two real people 
with busy lives (Marjan Jahangiri is a professor of cardiac 
surgery in London, and the article about her appeared in The 
Sunday Times. Her son, Darius, is in his last year of secondary 
school.). Sts begin by learning verb phrases to talk about 
daily routines. There is then a pronunciation focus on linking, 
which will help Sts to understand spoken English. Sts then 
read about Marjan’s day and listen to an interview with her 
son, and decide whose day they think is more tiring. This is 
followed by a grammar focus on prepositions of time and 
place, which are commonly used when we describe a typical 
day. The lesson ends with a Speaking activity where Sts ask 
each other about their typical weekdays, and they then write 
a description of their favourite day of the week.
!   This lesson also revises telling the time. This was taught at 
the beginning of Practical English Episode 2 on p.52. If you 
did not do this lesson, you will need to do this section first 
instead of the Optional lead-in.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  prepositions of time and place (in, on, at, to)  
p.178 
Vocabulary  A day in the life of a fitness instructor p.266 
(instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Prepositions questionnaire p.224 
(instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook  4B
Online Practice  4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Revise telling the time. 
Draw a clock on the board and then draw different hands 
and ask Sts What time is it?.
Ask Sts What time does this class start? and elicit the answer 
It starts at (X). Highlight that we use the preposition at when 
we say what time something happens.
1	VOCABULARY  daily routine
a	 e 4.7   Books open. Focus on the phrases and give Sts 
time to look at them. 
	 Play the audio (sound effects), pausing after each one for 
Sts to guess which one it is. Point out that the first one 
(wake up) has been done for them.
	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases.
2  have a shower    ​3  get dressed    ​4  have a coffee / tea    ​
5  have breakfast    ​6  go to work / school
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 59@@
59
4B
3	READING & LISTENING  inferring feelings, 	
	 understanding specific information
a	 Focus on the title of the article, Busy lives Mother…and 
son, and the photos. Read the introduction about Marjan 
together and make sure Sts understand it all. Tell Sts they 
will now read about a typical (working) day in Marjan’s life 
and then listen to an interview with Darius about a day in 
his life. Model and drill Marjan’s name /ˈmɑːdʒæn/.
	 Focus on the adjectives in the list and make sure Sts can 
remember what they mean.
	 Go through the Glossary and model and drill the 
pronunciation of the words and phrases, and make sure 
Sts understand their meaning.
	 Set Sts a time limit and tell them that all they have to do is 
find out how they think Marjan feels at the end of the day. 
	 When the time limit is up, get feedback. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Suggested answer
Marjan probably feels (very) tired, but happy.
b	 Tell Sts they need to read the article again and then 
answer questions 1–8. Make sure Sts can remember what 
a 9–5 job is (They saw it in 3B).
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to read the article, then cover 
it and answer the questions with their partner.
	 Check answers.
1	 Between 6.00 and 6.30 a.m.
2	 She has meetings and lectures. She does operations. 
3	 At her desk
4	 She has dinner with her son. She does research. She watches 
the news on TV. She plays the piano. Sometimes she does 
operations.
5	 No. She works long hours, sometimes during the night, and 
she often works at weekends.
6	 She sees her son a lot, but not her husband.
7	 She plays the piano every day, late at night. She also goes to 
the hairdresser.
8	 Yes, she loves it.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
EXTRA IDEA   Write the following phrases from the article on 
the board and elicit the verbs: 
AWAY / AT HOME 
RESEARCH 
TO THE HAIRDRESSER 
A BREAK / A MEETING 
THE PIANO 
ON THE PHONE 
TIME WITH SOMEONE
be away / at home 
do research
go to the hairdresser
have a break / a meeting
play the piano
speak on the phone
spend time with someone
23	 go to Italian classes
24	 see friends
25	 make dinner
26	 relax
27	 have a bath 
28	 sleep for eight hours
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
each verb / phrase, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the have box and go through it with the class.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and tell Sts they are now 
going to tell each other about Belinda and Charlie, and 
they must make full sentences, e.g. She wakes up at seven 
o’clock. Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A should cover the 
verb phrases about Belinda and look at the pictures to 
see if they can remember the expressions. Sts B can look 
at the verb phrases and help if necessary. Sts then swap 
roles, and Sts B do the same with Charlie.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they are more like Busy Belinda 
or Chilled Charlie and why.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  linking
a	 e 4.9  Focus on the Connected speech box and remind 
Sts about linking in spoken English (They saw it in 2C). 
Tell Sts they are going to hear five sentences, each read at 
natural speed. Point out that for each sentence they can 
see how many words there are.
	 Tell them the first time you play the audio they should just 
listen. Play the audio once. 
e 4.9
1	 He wakes up at eight.
2	 She works in an office.
3	 She has a coffee at eleven.
4	 He has a lot of homework.
5	 She has an interesting day.
	 Now play it again, pausing for Sts to write the five 
sentences. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See sentences in script 4.9
b	 e 4.10   This exercise practises sentence stress and 
rhythm. Focus on the sentences and tell Sts that the 
words in bigger bold print are the words that are stressed.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat, copying the rhythm.
e 4.10
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.32
	 In pairs, Sts practise the sentences, paying attention to 
linking and rhythm.
	 Get a few Sts to read some of the sentences aloud.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 60@@
60
4B
EXTRA IDEA   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen again 
with the script on p.119, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Finally, put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss the 
questions. Make sure they know the meaning of the 
phrase to have something in common (= to be like 
somebody in a certain way or to have the same interests 
as somebody).
	 Elicit some feedback.
Marjan and Darius both have long days and work hard. They 
both like what they do.
Marjan is probably more tired. She has less time to relax, and has 
more responsibility.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask the class if they think busy people are 
usually happy. Encourage them to try to say why (even if 
they make mistakes). 
4	GRAMMAR  prepositions of time and place
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the sentences about Darius’s day with a preposition. 
b	 e 4.12   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  at    ​2  to    ​3  at    ​4  in    ​5  on
e 4.12
1	 I get up at half past seven.
2	 I usually go to school by Tube.
3	 I have lunch at school.
4	 I usually have two or three lessons in the afternoon.
5	 I sing in the school choir on Tuesdays.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.130.  
Grammar notes
There are three main prepositions of time: at, in, on.
There are simple rules for in and on. The rules for at require 
a little bit more effort to remember because these include 
the exceptions at night and at the weekend. 
Some uses are not yet practised (in + months and year, on 
+ dates) because Sts do not have this lexis yet, but they 
are focused on later when Sts learn dates in 6B.
Under prepositions of place, Sts focus on at or in, and to. 
The main aim is for Sts to be clear that at and in are used 
for position whereas to is used for movement. Sts also 
learn that in / at are often alternatives when talking about 
place, e.g. I was in a restaurant / at a restaurant last night. 
Sometimes there is a subtle difference between the two 
prepositions in this context, but it is not necessary to go 
into this at this level.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 4.13 and e 4.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go 
through the rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 4B on p.131. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
c	 e 4.11   Focus on the photo of Darius and read the 
instructions. Point out the Glossary and go through it 
with the class. Model and drill the pronunciation of the 
words, especially choir /ˈkwaɪə/.
	 Give Sts a couple of minutes to read the information 
about Darius’s day. Tell them to think about what the 
missing words / phrases could be. Point out that the first 
one (7.30) has been done for them.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. Then play it again 
for Sts to complete the gaps, pausing if necessary to give 
them time to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2  gets    ​3  four…five    ​4  school    ​5  1.45    ​6  go home    ​
7  sings    ​8  Thursdays    ​9  plays    ​10  has…shower    ​ 
11  two…three    ​12  10.30
e 4.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
I = interviewer, D = Darius
I	 What time do you get up in the morning?
D	 I get up at about half past seven.
I	 How do you feel when you get up?
D	 I know half past seven isn’t that early, but it’s early for me and I 
usually feel tired and in a bit of a bad mood.
I	 Do you have breakfast? 
D	 Absolutely. I have cereal and milk, and some bread with honey or 
jam. I love honey!
I	 Do you walk to school?
D	 No, it’s quite far away. I go to school by Tube. I usually get to 
school about twenty past eight. I like to be early.
I	 What time does your first lesson start?
D	 It starts at nine. I have four or sometimes five lessons before 
lunch.
I	 Where do you have lunch? 
D	 I usually have lunch at school at about one o’clock. I know people 
usually say that school food is terrible, but actually at my school 
the food is really good.
I	 And after lunch?
D	 We start lessons again at one forty-five. I usually have two or three 
lessons in the afternoon. 
I	 What time does school finish?
D	 At four fifteen. But I don’t go home then. I stay at school to do 
extra things – I study in the library or play music.
I	 What kind of music?
D	 Well, I sing in the school choir on Tuesdays, and on Thursdays, 
I play percussion in the orchestra. I love music – it’s my main 
hobby.
I	 So what time do you usually get home?
D	 At about six o’clock.
I	 What’s the first thing you do?
D	 I have a shower, and then I have dinner. And then, of course, 
homework.
I	 How much homework do you have?
D	 Two or three hours. It’s my last year at school and I have my A 
levels this summer. I need to get really good marks to get into 
university.
I	 Do you watch TV in the evening?
D	 No, never. I don’t have time. When I finish my homework I practise 
the piano and then I go to bed.
I	 What time do you go to bed?
D	 At about half past ten. I’m usually so tired I go to sleep straight 
away. All I really do these days is study, eat, and sleep.
I	 So no social media or anything like that?
D	 Well…I do spend a bit of time on Facebook. But not much, I 
promise!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 61@@
61
4B
c	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An article on p.114.
	 The aim here is to give Sts practice describing habitual 
actions. Sts learn to recognize and use common 
connectors and common sequencers.
	 Focus on the title and elicit the meaning and 
pronunciation of favourite.
	 Now focus on a and give Sts time to read the article and 
answer questions 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  Saturday, because it’s the first day of the weekend.    ​
2  I stay in bed until about 10.30. Then I usually go  
shopping with a friend.    ​
3  I often have lunch at my mother’s house, with her and my 
brother. After lunch I sometimes study from about 4.00 to 6.00.
​4  I usually go out with my friends. We often go to the cinema, 
and after that, we have a pizza or tapas.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask a few Sts Is Cristina’s Saturday like yours?
	 Now do b and go through the after and then box with 
the class. Highlight that:
•	 after and before are prepositions and opposites. They are 
used with a noun or a verb phrase: I always have a cup of 
coffee after lunch.
•	 then is used with a verb phrase. It can go at the beginning 
or in the middle of a sentence: I have a bath. Then I go to 
bed. I have a bath and then I go to bed. 
•	 after that is an alternative to then. However, highlight that 
you can’t use after to connect two clauses, e.g. NOT I get 
up, and after I have breakfast.
	 With a partner, Sts check they know the highlighted 
words in the article, and then they complete the six 
sentences.
	 Check answers.
1  Then    ​2  After    ​3  before    ​4  During, from, to    ​5  that    ​
6  until
	 Focus on the task in c and the instructions. Elicit / Explain 
that the article has four paragraphs and each one 
describes one main idea. Give Sts a few minutes to make 
some notes for each paragraph.
	 In d, Sts write their article. They can do this in class if 
there is time or for homework. Monitor and help Sts, 
encouraging them to use the highlighted words from the 
article.
	 In e, Sts spend a few minutes checking their article and 
the use of the highlighted words.
	 Now do f and get Sts to exchange articles. They read each 
other’s articles and try to find something in common.
	 Elicit some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You may want to focus on the rules for 
prepositions of time, and then do a, followed by the rules for 
prepositions of place and b.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences for b. 
a
1  in    ​2  on    ​3  in    ​4  at    ​5  at    ​6  on    ​7  at    ​8  in    ​9  in    ​
b
1  at    ​2  to    ​3  in    ​4  at    ​5  to    ​6  in    ​7  in    ​8  at    ​9  in    ​
10  at
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 e 4.15   Tell Sts they are going to hear some time phrases 
and they must repeat the time phrase with a preposition. 
Focus on the example.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each time phrase for Sts to 
listen and repeat with the correct preposition. 
e 4.15
1	 the weekend (pause) at the weekend
2	 the morning (pause) in the morning
3	 seven o’clock (pause) at seven o’clock
4	 Sunday (pause) on Sunday
5	 night (pause) at night
6	 the evening (pause) in the evening
7	 midnight (pause) at midnight
8	 the summer (pause) in the summer
9	 Tuesday morning (pause) on Tuesday morning
10	 Christmas (pause) at Christmas
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
5	SPEAKING & WRITING  an article
a	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them they are going to interview 
their partner. Stress that they are going to talk about a 
typical weekday (Monday to Friday). 
	 Focus on the questions and elicit that Sts need to add do 
you each time there is a /.
	 Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you two 
or three questions. Remind Sts of the typical rhythm of 
questions, and encourage them not to stress do you, e.g. 
What time do you get up?.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. Monitor and help, correcting especially any 
mistakes with the time and prepositions.
	 In their pairs, Sts decide what they have in common.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 62@@
	 1A	
Welcome to the class
62
4C
	4C	 Blue Zones
July, September, October, November, December
c	 Tell the class the month of your birthday and write on the 
board MY BIRTHDAY IS IN… 
	 Now tell Sts in turn to say their birthday month in the 
same way, and find out if there is a month in which many 
Sts have their birthdays. Make sure they only say the 
month and not the date.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to do this as a mingle and ask each 
other When’s your birthday? Find out if any Sts found 
someone born in the same month as them. 
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Time on p.157 and get 
them to do Parts 2 and 3. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that once and twice are irregular forms. For all 
other numbers, we use a number + times, e.g. five times, 
ten times. 
	 Focus on 2 Expressions of frequency and get Sts to do 
a individually or in pairs. Make sure Sts are clear about 
the meaning and pronunciation of How often…? (which 
is used when you want to ask someone about the 
frequency with which they do an activity) and every.
	 e 4.17   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 4.17
 2 Expressions of frequency
1  every day    2  every week    3  every month    4  every year
5  once a week    6  twice a week    7  three times a week    8  four 
times a year
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the instructions for Activation. Get Sts to cover 
the left-hand column with a piece of paper, leaving the 
rest visible to see if they can remember the expressions.
	 Focus on 3 Adverbs of frequency and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
If Sts don’t have an exact equivalent in their L1, you may 
want to point out that these words don’t have an exact 
meaning in terms of frequency – the meaning depends 
on the activity, e.g. in I often have fruit for breakfast, often 
probably means three times a week, whereas in I often 
travel abroad for work, often may mean once a month.
	 e 4.18   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
See letters in bold in script 4.18
 G   position of adverbs, expressions of frequency
 V   months, adverbs and expressions of frequency: minute, 
hour, etc.
 P   the letter h
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is lifestyle choices which may 
determine whether you have a longer or shorter life. Sts 
begin by learning the vocabulary for months and adverbs 
and expressions of frequency. A study carried out recently 
which investigates why American teenagers may not live 
as long as their parents provides the context for Sts to learn 
the word order for adverbs and expressions of frequency. 
Pronunciation focuses on the letter h. In the second half 
of the lesson, Sts read about the so-called ‘Blue Zones’, five 
places in the world which have a very high proportion of 
centenarians, and about the lifestyles in two of them, which 
they compare to their own country. The lesson ends with a 
video listening about a third one, Okinawa, in Japan.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  adverbs and expressions of frequency p.179 
Communicative  How often? Board game p.225 
(instructions p.207)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The island of Okinawa
For students
Workbook  4C
Online Practice  4C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Write on the board  
HOW CAN I LIVE TO BE 100? Invite suggestions from the class and 
write them on the board, e.g. Don’t smoke, Do exercise every 
day, etc. 
1	VOCABULARY  months, adverbs and expressions 
of frequency
a	 e 4.16   Books open. Focus on the months. In pairs, Sts 
complete the words.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Elicit the months onto the board.
See letters in bold in script 4.16
e 4.16
January   February   March   April   May   June   July   August 
September   October   November   December
b	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. Give 
further practice of any months your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now ask the class which five months are stressed on the 
second syllable.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 63@@
63
4C
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4C on p.130. 
Grammar notes
The normal position for adverbs of frequency is before the 
main verb, but after be. However, sometimes and usually 
can be used at the beginning of a sentence or clause for 
emphasis, e.g. Sometimes I wake up really early…
Similarly, the normal position for expressions of frequency 
is at the end of a sentence or verb phrase, but they are 
sometimes placed at the beginning for emphasis, e.g. 
Every day I check my emails first thing in the morning.
	 e 4.20   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 4C on p.131. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  I always walk to work.   
2  Do you usually wear glasses?
3  I’m hardly ever bored.
4  She sometimes does housework.
5  We hardly ever go to the cinema.
6  Why are you always late?
7  My girlfriend is never stressed.
8  Does it often rain in December?
b
1  I am never late for class.
2  We hardly ever eat fast food.
3  What time do you usually finish work?
4  My parents don’t often go out at night.
5  My brother is always hungry at lunchtime.
6  We don’t always do our homework.
7  Do you usually drive to work?
8  Our teacher is hardly ever angry.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4C. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Tell Sts that they will now find out if they are going to 
live a short or long life, by answering a questionnaire. Tell 
them to go to Communication Short life, long life? on 
p.104.
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Put them in 
pairs. Give Sts A time to interview Sts B and to circle their 
partner’s answers.
	 Now the pairs swap roles, and Sts B interview Sts A and 
circle their answers.
	 When they have finished, they should calculate their 
partner’s score and tell him / her the result.
	 Get feedback from the class, finding out who is going to 
live the longest.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4C.
e 4.18
3 Adverbs of frequency
1b	I always get up at seven o’clock during the week. I start work at 
eight o’clock every day.
2a	 I often go to the cinema after work. About seven or eight times a 
month.
3c	 I usually finish work at six o’clock. But on Fridays we stop at three 
o’clock.
4f	 I sometimes meet a friend for lunch. About once or twice a 
month.
5e	 I hardly ever go to the theatre. Only once or twice a year.
6d	I never have coffee. I don’t like it.
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the meaning of the six highlighted adverbs. 
	 e 4.19  Focus on c and play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat the adverbs. Give further practice of any adverbs 
your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
e 4.19
See highlighted adverbs of frequency in Student’s Book on p.157
	 Focus on the normally box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Finally, focus on the instructions for Activation. Get Sts 
to cover sentences 1−6 with a piece of paper, leaving a−f 
visible to see if they can remember the sentences and 
especially the adverb of frequency.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4C.
2	GRAMMAR  position of adverbs, expressions of 
frequency
a	 Focus on the photo. Ask Sts how old they think the girl 
is, and elicit the meaning of teenagers (= young people 
between the ages of 13 and 19). 
	 Focus on the text. You may want to pre-teach a screen 
(= the flat, square part of a television or computer, where 
you see pictures or words) and sugary (= containing a lot 
of sugar). 
	 Read the introduction together and make sure Sts 
understand the phrase unhealthy lifestyles. Elicit the 
opposite of unhealthy.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the rest of the text. 
	 Ask the class which situations they think are probably 
similar in their country and elicit opinions.
b	 Get Sts to read the text again, focusing on the position of 
the highlighted words, which all express frequency. They 
then circle the correct word in rules 1 and 2.
	 Check answers.
1  before a main verb, after the verb be    ​2  at the end of a 
phrase or sentence​
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 64@@
64
4C
4	READING & SPEAKING  retelling the main 	
	 information from a short text
a	 Focus on the photos and the title. Elicit / Explain the 
meaning of secret (= something you do not or must not 
tell other people). 
	 Get Sts to read the text or read it aloud. Ask Sts to predict 
anything that they think the places might have in 
common. Elicit possible answers (e.g. their lifestyle, the 
weather, etc.). You might want to pre-teach diet (here 
meaning daily food).
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
The ‘Blue Zones’ are five places where many people live for a 
long time.
Alexis is 102 and María is 97.
	 If you think your Sts might be interested, you could tell 
them that ‘Blue Zones’ were first identified in 2004 by 
National Geographic and a team of longevity researchers.
EXTRA IDEA   If you have a world map in the class, get Sts to 
find the five ‘Blue Zones’.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication, A Ikaria on p.104, B Nicoya on p.110. 
	 Go through the instructions carefully. Make sure Sts 
understand the word(s) in the Glossary. You may want to 
point out that beans can also refer to the green variety.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. When they have 
finished reading their articles and have answered the 
questions, Sts B starts by describing life in Nicoya to Sts A. 
Tell them to try to use their own words.
	 When Sts B have finished, they swap roles.
	 Sts then decide what the two places have in common. 
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts if they would like to live 
in either Ikaria or Nicoya.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read their article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
People in both places spend a lot of time outside. They are very 
active; they walk everywhere. They eat beans. They don’t eat 
much meat.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4C.
c	 Tell Sts to work with a partner and write words or phrases 
they can remember from their articles related to the two 
categories. Point out the two examples.
	 Check answers.
food and drink: potatoes, green vegetables, fish, sugar,  
herbal tea, red wine, rice, sweet potatoes, egg, cheese, meat, fruit 
(marañón), water
physical exercise: do exercise, work in their gardens, go to a 
gym, walk everywhere, ride horses
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
3	PRONUNCIATION  the letter h
Pronunciation notes
How difficult this sound is will depend on your Sts’ L1 and 
you should spend more or less time here accordingly.
The main problem with the letter h is that in many 
languages it is silent at the beginning of a word. Highlight 
that in English it is almost always pronounced like the /h/ in 
hotel and How. There are very few exceptions. The only one 
which is relevant at this level is hour, but don’t focus on this 
until after Sts have done b.
a	 e 4.21   Focus on the sound picture (house) and 
sound /h/.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the sound and 
example words. 
e 4.21
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.34
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
b	 e 4.22  In pairs, Sts read the sentences aloud and try to 
find in which word the letter h is not pronounced. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check the answer. 
In the word hour the h is not pronounced.
e 4.22
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.34
	 Now, in their pairs, Sts practise saying the sentences.
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis in the verb phrases.
	 Demonstrate the activity first by making true sentences 
about yourself. 
	 Sts should write true sentences about themselves, 
using the verb phrases and an adverb or expression of 
frequency. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit adverbs and expressions of frequency 
and write them on the board for Sts to refer to. 
	 They then say their sentences to a partner. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to make sentences orally with a 
partner, without writing them down first.
	 Get feedback, asking two or three pairs if they were similar 
or different.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 65@@
65
4C
b	 Now play the video again for Sts to correct the 
F sentences in a.
	 Get Sts to compare answers with a partner, and then 
check answers.
1	 The island of Okinawa is south of Japan.
4	 They eat fish.
6	 They do t’ai chi or martial arts every day.
7	 They are never in a hurry.
8	 When they reach 97, they have a ceremony called kajimaya.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles / showing the script, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand.  
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 In pairs or small groups, Sts discuss the questions.
	 Check the answer to the first question.
A healthy diet, a lot of exercise, a good social life
	 Elicit some answers to the other questions from the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs to answer the questions 
and then get feedback from various pairs.
5	r VIDEO LISTENING  comparing and 	
	 contrasting
a	 Now tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary 
about a third Blue Zone, the island of Okinawa in Japan. 
Focus on the task and go through 1–8 with Sts. Elicit / 
Explain any new vocabulary, e.g. seaweed.
	 Play the video for Sts to watch or listen and mark each 
statement T (true) or F (false). Remind them that they 
don’t need to correct the F sentences at this stage. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen. 
1  F    ​2  T    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F    ​7  F    ​8  F
The island of Okinawa
Okinawa is an island about four hundred miles south of Japan. Its 
a beautiful island, with wonderful beaches and clear blue water. It 
also has more centenarians – people who are a hundred years old or 
more – than anywhere else in the world. What’s more, they seem to 
age more slowly than other people. According to scientists, people 
there who are actually seventy often have the bodies of fifty-year-
olds. Many of them are very healthy all through their lives. 
What’s their secret? Most people think it’s because of their healthy 
lifestyle. They don’t have big meals – they have a cultural habit 
called hara hachi, which means they always stop eating before 
they’re full. They usually just have fish and vegetables, especially 
sweet potatoes, and they eat a lot of seaweed, which is one of the 
healthiest foods that there is.  
But diet isn’t the only reason why they live so long. The Okinawans 
are very active, and they often work in their gardens until they’re 
eighty or more. Many of them also do t’ai chi or martial arts, every 
day. They have a good social life. They visit friends or family, and a 
lot of them belong to community centres. Some play the traditional 
Okinawan guitar, an instrument similar to a banjo. 
The old people of Okinawa are very positive and happy with their 
lives. They aren’t stressed, because they’re never in a hurry. Their 
spiritual lives are important to them, especially the women, and 
many of them meditate every day. 
In Okinawa, people say you’re a child until you are fifty-five. And 
when you reach ninety-seven, your local town holds a special 
ceremony called kajimaya to celebrate the fact that now it’s time to 
be young again, to be free of all responsibilities and to simply enjoy 
life.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 66@@
	 1A	
Welcome to the class
66
Revise and Check
	3&4	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  b 
e 4.23
1	 Talitha 
I = interviewer, T = Talitha
I	 What do you do?
T	 I work in Marketing.
I	 How many hours a week do you work?
T	 I work for thirty-seven hours a week. 
2	 Joelle 
I = interviewer, J = Joelle
I	 Do you have a big family?
J	 No, I have a small family. One sister and parents. 
I	 How old is your sister?
J	 My sister is thirteen.
3	 Sophie 
I = interviewer, S = Sophie
I	 What time do you get up in the morning?
S	 Usually around half past seven.
I	 What about at weekends?
S	 Much later. Probably half past nine, ten o’clock.
4	 Brian
I = interviewer, B = Brian
I	 How often do you do sport or exercise?
B	 I tend to do sports three or four times a week. 
I	 What do you do?
B	 Gym three times and then I normally do some yoga.
5	 Tom 
I = interviewer, T = Tom
I	 Do you like about New York?
T	 New York? The variety. The people. Change.
I	 What don’t you like?
T	 What don’t I like? No, not much.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4 
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  b    ​6  c    ​7  b    ​8  a    ​9  b    ​10  c    ​
11  c    ​12  b    ​13  b    ​14  a    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a
1  On    ​2  at    ​3  up    ​4  in    ​5  to
b
1  get    ​2  take    ​3  have    ​4  do    ​5  go    ​6  play    ​7  listen    ​
8  see    ​9  read    ​10  wear
c
1	 niece (the others are male relatives)
2	 husband (the others are female relatives)
3	 factory (the others are jobs)
4	 early (the others are adverbs of frequency)
5	 Monday (the others are months)
d
1  Where    ​2  What    ​3  Who    ​4  How many    ​5  Why
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  brother /ʌ/    ​2  nephew /f/    ​3  teacher /ə/    ​4  which /w/    ​
5  work /ɜː/
d
1  because    ​2  dentist    ​3  unemployed    ​4  policeman    ​
5  grandmother
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
He wakes up at 1.00 p.m. His work starts in the evening. He 
arrives in secret at the club. He finishes work at 4.00 a.m.
b
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  T    ​5  T    ​6  F    ​7  T
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 67@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
67
5A
	5A	 Vote for me!
 G 	 can / can’t
 V 	 verb phrases: buy a newspaper, etc.
 P 	 sentence stress
Lesson plan
This lesson is based on TV shows like The X Factor, where 
amateur musicians compete in the hope of winning and 
becoming famous. The lesson starts with the introduction 
of more verb phrases. Then a picture story of a contestant 
waiting for her first audition (based on a real participant’s 
blog) introduces Sts to sentences with can. Can is a very 
versatile verb in English and is used to express ability, 
possibility, permission, and to make requests. Sts will have 
met can for requests and permission in Practical English 1, 
and should already be familiar with the verb. The use of 
can for ability, presented here, along with the other uses, 
may be expressed by a different verb in your Sts’ L1. In 
the second half of the lesson, special attention is given 
to the pronunciation of can and can’t when stressed and 
unstressed. Sts then practise orally with a questionnaire. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  can / can’t p.180 
Vocabulary  More verb phrases p.267 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  What can you do? p.226  
(instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook  5A
Online Practice  5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise the uses of can that Sts have already met. Write on 
the board:  
WHAT DO YOU SAY BEGINNING WITH CAN IF…? 
1	 YOU WANT A PHOTOCOPY 
2	 YOU’RE IN A CAFÉ AND YOU WANT A COKE 
3	 YOU WANT ANOTHER PERSON TO SIGN SOMETHING 
4	 YOU WANT ANOTHER PERSON TO OPEN THE WINDOW
Give Sts a few minutes to discuss in pairs. Check answers.
1	 Can I have a photocopy, please?
2	 Can I have a Coke, please?
3	 Can you sign this, please?
4	 Can you open the window, please?
Elicit / Explain that we often use Can I have…? to ask for 
something and Can you…? to ask another person to do 
something. Tell Sts that in this lesson they will learn other 
uses of can.
1	VOCABULARY  verb phrases
a	 Books open. Ask Sts to match the verbs in blue to the 
words / phrases in green.
	 Check answers.
go to the gym, play the guitar, do exercise, watch TV, have a 
coffee, listen to music
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank More verb phrases 
on p.158 and get them to do a individually or in pairs. 
Many of these verbs may already be familiar to them. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that it is more useful to remember complete 
phrases, e.g. meet a friend (instead of just meet).
Sts sometimes confuse forget and leave when talking 
about something they didn’t bring with them.  You may 
want to explain that with leave we always say the place 
where we left something, but not with forget, e.g.
Don’t forget your bag. Don’t leave your bag in class.
	 e 5.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 5.1
More verb phrases
3	 buy a newspaper 
2	 call a taxi
1	 dance the tango
 24	 draw a picture
7	 find a parking space
8	 forget somebody’s name
 11	 give somebody flowers
 14	 hear a noise
 16	 help somebody
6	 leave your bag on a train 
 19	 look for your keys
 20	 meet a friend
 21	 paint a picture
9	 remember somebody’s name
 23	 run a race
 25	 see a film
 18	 send a text message
 13	 sing a song
4	 swim in the sea
 15	 take a photo
 12	 talk to a friend
 10	 tell somebody a secret
5	 try to do something difficult
 17	 use the internet
 22	 wait for a bus
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words or phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the verbs and use 
the photos to test themselves or their partner. Encourage 
them to say the complete phrase, i.e. verb + collocate.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 68@@
68
5A
2	LISTENING  focusing on practical information
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell Sts if 
you watch this kind of programme and why (not).
b	 e 5.2   Focus on the picture story and go through the 
instructions with Sts. Elicit / Explain the meaning of 
audition (= a short performance by an actor, a singer, etc., 
so that somebody can decide if they are suitable to be in  
a play, a concert, etc.).
	 You might want to pre-teach some vocabulary, e.g. 
nervous and It’s your turn (= the time when you can or 
should do something).
	 Now tell Sts to look at the pictures and read the questions. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the questions. 
If necessary, play the audio again, pausing after each 
question has been answered, and elicit the answer from 
the class.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  She needs ID.    ​2  Her passport    ​3  She waits with Amy.    ​
4  Three    ​5  Good luck, Amy! You can do it!    ​6  She leaves it 
with her friend.    ​7  One Day    ​8  It isn’t on.    ​9  Oh no! I can’t 
remember the first line.
e 5.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.119) 
A = Amy, G = guard, O = organizer, F = friend, J = judge
A	 Half past twelve. In a long queue outside the Conference Centre 
in Manchester.
G	 Remember, you need ID. You can’t come in if you don’t have ID.
A	 Here’s my passport.
G	 Thanks. Amy Jones. Yes, that’s you! OK, come in. Next, please! 
A	 Twelve forty-five. In the waiting area with three hundred and fifty 
other singers!
O1	OK, Amy, sit here and wait until we call your name. 
A	 Thanks.
O1	Are you here for the audition, too? 
F	 No, I’m not. I’m Amy’s friend. Can I wait with her?
O1	Yeah, sure. 
F	 Thanks. 
A	 Let’s sit here. I’m so nervous…
O2	Mike Smith, Pat Jones, Tony Cash, come with me. This way.
A	 Good luck! 
A	 Four o’clock. Three hours later! My turn at last!
O2	Amy Jones, Naomi Williams, Justin Elliot? Can you come with me, 
please? It’s your turn now.
A	 Oh help! It’s my turn.
F	 Good luck, Amy! You can do it!
A	 Excuse me. Can my friend come with me?
O2	No, she can’t. She can wait there. And you can’t take your bag into 
the audition. Leave it with your friend.
A	 OK. 
A	 Quarter past four. In the audition, with three judges. Really 
nervous!
J	 Amy…Jones? What’s your song?
A	 One Day.
J	 We can’t hear you. Is the microphone on?
A	 Sorry…Sorry. Can you hear me now?
J	 Yes, that’s fine.
A	 My song’s One Day.
J	 Can you start, please?
A	 Oh no! I can’t remember the first line.
J	 Take your time.
A	 I’m OK now!
c	 e 5.3  Tell Sts that they are going to hear Amy and two 
other contestants sing. They will then vote to see which of 
the three they want to win a place in the show.
	 Play the audio and pause it after each singer has finished. 
Ask Sts in pairs to give each singer a score out of ten.
e 5.3
Amy
Extract of audition song 1 
Justin
Extract of audition song 2 
Naomi
Extract of audition song 3 
	 Now ask Sts to vote (with a show of hands) for their 
favourite. Write the scores on the board.
d	 e 5.4  Focus on the questions and play the audio.
	 Elicit what the judges said about each person and write it 
on the board.
	 Check answers, and see how many Sts agreed with the 
judges.
The judges think Amy is very good, Justin is terrible – he can’t 
sing – and Naomi has a good voice, but doesn’t have feeling. 
They want to see Amy on the show next week.
Amy feels very happy.
e 5.4
J = judge, A = Amy
J1	 Justin, Naomi, Amy, come and stand here. OK Amy. Very nervous 
at the beginning! But in the end, very good!
J2	 Yes, a great performance. Well done.
J1	 Justin. In a word…terrible!
J2	 Justin, I’m sorry. You’re good-looking, you move well, but you 
can’t sing!
J1	 Naomi. Quite good. You have a nice voice.
J2	 Naomi, you have a good voice, but I can’t hear the feeling.
J1	 OK. Justin and Naomi – thank you very much, but no, thank you. 
Amy, congratulations! See you on the show next week.
A	 Fantastic! That’s great. Thank you.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to 5.2 with the script on p.119, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
3	GRAMMAR  can / can’t 
a	 Tell Sts to look at four sentences taken from Amy’s story. 
Get them to match each one to its meaning and then to 
compare answers in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  d    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  b
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.132.
Grammar notes
Can is the first modal verb that Sts are introduced to. 
Modal verbs, unlike normal verbs, do not add s in third 
person singular (he / she can, NOT he / she cans).  
Questions are made by inverting the verb and subject, not 
with do / does, e.g. Can you come? NOT Do you can come? 
Negatives are formed by adding n’t (not), not with don’t / 
doesn’t, e.g. I can’t swim NOT I don’t can swim.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 69@@
69
5A
!   If your own pronunciation of can / can’t is different 
from what is on the audio, you may want to model the 
conversations yourself.
	 Get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs. Encourage 
them to stress the bigger words more strongly and say the 
other words more quickly and lightly. 
b	 e 5.7  This exercise gives Sts practice in distinguishing 
between positive and negative can statements. 
	 Focus on the instructions. Play the audio for Sts to hear 
the sentences. Elicit that can is unstressed and has a short 
sound, but can’t is stressed and has a long sound.
e 5.7
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.39
c	 e 5.8   Focus on the instructions. Play the audio at least 
twice. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by playing the audio again, stopping after each 
sentence, and asking Sts if it’s positive or negative. 
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  b    ​6  a
e 5.8
1	 I can’t sing.
2	 She can dance very well.
3	 He can cook.
4	 I can’t come to the meeting.
5	 You can’t park here.
6	 I can drive.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   As a follow-up, get Sts, in pairs, to write 
four can sentences each (two positive and two negative, 
in jumbled order). They take turns to say their sentences to 
each other as clearly as possible and decide if their partner 
has said a positive or negative sentence, e.g.  
A	I can’t cook.  B	 Negative.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Point out what the numbers 1, 2, 
and 3 represent. 
	 Focus on the title and elicit / explain the meaning of talent 
(= a natural ability to do something very well). 
	 Read the introduction together and explain any 
vocabulary Sts might not know. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. 
Remind them to mark their partner’s answers in the 
questionnaire, not their own.
b	 Now tell Sts to look at the answers their partner gave 
them and say what their talent is. Sts tell each other of any 
competitions or TV shows they can enter.
c	 Put Sts in new pairs and tell them to look at their 
questionnaires and tell their new partner what they found 
out from their first partner.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
The normal form of a second verb after a modal verb is 
the infinitive without to. This can be hard to remember 
for many Sts who are used to thinking of the infinitive as 
with to (to be or not to be…), and adding to after can is a 
common error.
Although other languages may have an equivalent verb 
to can (= be possible / permitted), they probably do 
not use this same verb to also talk about ability (I can 
sing, I can play the piano), and would express this with an 
equivalent of know how to. 
	 e 5.5   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 5A on p.133. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  can speak    ​2  Can…help    ​3  can’t see    ​4  Can…close    ​
5  Can…repeat    ​ 6  can’t park    ​7  can’t swim    ​8  Can…use
b
1	 She can meet me after work.
2	 Can you open the door, please?
3	 My boyfriend can’t ski.
4	 Can I use your car?
5	 You can’t take photos here.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
There are two main pronunciation problems related to 
can / can’t:
Can is usually unstressed = /kən/ in positive sentences like 
I can sing. Your Sts may find this difficult to hear and to say. 
If they stress can, the listener may think they are saying a 
negative sentence.
The negative can’t is always stressed. Not stressing it 
can cause a communication problem (the listener may 
understand can, not can’t). The pronunciation of this word 
varies among different groups of native English speakers. 
The standard pronunciation is /kɑːnt/, but there are 
regional variations. The important thing for Sts is to make 
sure that they stress /kɑːnt/ quite strongly.
a	 e 5.6   Focus on the conversations, which give examples 
of positive, negative, and question forms of can / can’t. 
Remind Sts that the bigger words in the conversations are 
stressed, and the underlining shows stress within a word. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to the three conversations. 
e 5.6
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.39
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to try to copy the rhythm. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 70@@
70
5B
	5B	 A quiet life?
b	 e 5.9  Focus on the instructions and the forum, and give 
Sts a few minutes to read the kinds of noises that family 
members and noisy neighbours make. Get them to try to 
guess the meaning of the new verbs and verb phrases.
	 Tell Sts they will hear eight sounds, each representing one 
of the problems, and they must write 1−8 as they hear 
them. Play the audio once the whole way through.
e 5.9
(sound effects of noisy neighbours / family)
1	 couple next door arguing
2	 neighbours’ dog barking
3	 baby in the flat upstairs, crying
4	 TV on very loud
5	 builders making a lot of noise
6	 people next door having noisy parties
7	 learner practising the piano
8	 teenager playing loud music
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sound 
effect to elicit the answer. Make sure Sts understand the 
meaning of the new verbs and verb phrases. Model and 
drill pronunciation.
1	 The couple next door argue a lot.
2	 The neighbours’ dog barks all day – and all night!
3	 The baby in the flat upstairs cries all the time.
4	 The old people in the flat next door have the TV on very loud 
– and their living room is next to my bedroom!
5	 The people next door have builders who make a lot of noise.
6	 The people next door often have noisy parties until 3.00 a.m.
7	 My sister practises the piano for hours.
8	 My son plays loud music in his room – awful music, too.
	 When you check My sister practises the piano for hours, elicit 
the names of some instruments that can be particularly 
irritating e.g. violin, drums (these will then be used later 
in the lesson). When you check My son plays loud music, 
elicit / explain that play here means putting on music on 
a device, e.g. a music system or tablet – he is not actually 
making the music himself.
c	 Focus on the three questions and go through them. 
	 Get Sts to interview you first. Give as much (simple) 
information as you can to model the way you want Sts to 
answer the questions. 
	 Sts interview each other in pairs or groups of three. 
Monitor and help with any new vocabulary they need. 
	 Get some feedback.
 G 	 present continuous: be + verb + -ing
 V 	 noise: verbs and verb phrases: make a noise, etc. 
 P 	 /ŋ/
Lesson plan
The first part of this lesson is based on a UK online forum 
about noisy family members and neighbours. Sts begin 
by learning new verbs and verb phrases and talk about 
noise problems in their families or with their neighbours. 
Then the present continuous (used for what is happening 
now or for temporary actions / situations) is presented 
through conversations between family members and noisy 
neighbours. Pronunciation focuses on the /ŋ/ sound, used 
in all present continuous endings, and Sts then do a ‘spot 
the differences’ Speaking activity, where they practise the 
new grammar. The lesson ends with Sts listening to six 
conversations and guessing what the people are doing.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present continuous: be + verb + -ing p.181 
Communicative  Guess what I’m doing! p.227  
(instructions p.207)
For students
Workbook  5B
Online Practice  5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Do something which makes a noise, e.g. put some music on 
very loudly, bang the desk, etc., and elicit / teach the word 
noise. Then elicit / teach the verb we use with noise, make a 
noise, and the adjective noisy. 
Now elicit / teach the word neighbours (= people who live in 
the flats / houses near you). Model and drill pronunciation 
/ˈneɪbəz/. Then give Sts in pairs a few moments to think of 
three things noisy neighbours do. 
Get feedback and write Sts’ ideas on the board. 
1	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  noise: verbs and 
verb phrases
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and, if you didn’t do 
the Optional lead-in, teach / elicit the words neighbours 
and noisy. Model and drill pronunciation. 
	 Now focus on the questions. 
	 Get Sts to interview you first. Give as much (simple) 
information as you can to model the way you want Sts to 
answer the questions. 
	 Sts interview each other in pairs or groups of three. 
Monitor and help with any new vocabulary they need. 
	 Get some feedback about their family members and 
neighbours. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 71@@
71
5B
e 5.11 
(script in Student’s Book on p.119) 
W = woman, P = Paul
W	 Oh, hello Paul. Jack, it’s Paul, from next door. Come in! We’re 
having a party. It’s my birthday.
P	 Oh! Er, Happy Birthday!
W	 Thanks. Would you like a drink?
P	 Actually, I want to talk to you about the noise.
W	 Sorry?
P	 The NOISE. It’s very noisy.
W	 Yes. We’re having a great time! Do you want a beer? Or a glass of 
wine?
P	 Oh, well, yes, OK. A beer, please.
W	 Here you are. Come and meet our friends. Hey, everyone, say 
hello to Paul. He’s our neighbour.
All	Hello, Paul.
P	 Hello.
W	 Do you want to dance, Paul?
d	 Ask Sts to read the two sentences and question, and 
complete them.
	 Check answers. 
+  They’re / are having a party next door.
?  Are they playing music?
−  No, they aren’t playing music. They’re talking.
e	 Ask Sts to read the rule and circle the correct option. 
	 Check the answer. Elicit / Teach that we use this form 
of the verb (present continuous) for something that’s 
happening now, at the moment of speaking. Give a few 
more examples, e.g. We’re having a class. I’m talking to you 
and you’re listening.
now
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.132. 
Grammar notes
Sts don’t usually find the form of the present continuous 
difficult (be + -ing form of the verb), but they may have 
problems using it correctly, especially if they do not have 
an equivalent form in their L1. A common mistake is to 
use the present simple, not continuous, for things which 
are happening now / around now, or for temporary 
situations, e.g. Hello. What do you do here? I work at home 
this week.
The present continuous is contrasted with the present 
simple in the next lesson (5C).
The use of the present continuous to express future 
arrangements is presented in English File Pre-intermediate. 
Spelling rules for the -ing form
In the -ing form, remind Sts that verbs ending in y don’t 
change the y for an i as they do in third person singular 
(e.g. study – studying NOT studing). Highlight also that 
there are a few exceptions to the rule about dropping the 
final e before adding -ing. These are be, and verbs ending 
in -ee, e.g. see and agree.
	 e 5.12   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 5B on p.133. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
2	GRAMMAR  present continuous
a	 e 5.10   Ask Sts to look at the picture of the houses and 
elicit ideas why Max and his mother are unhappy.
	 Tell Sts to cover the conversations in b with a piece of 
paper and listen to the audio.
	 Play the audio once and check answers.
Max is unhappy because he can’t study. His family are making a 
lot of noise.
His mother is unhappy because of the noise from the 
neighbours’, and their dog.
e 5.10
M = Max, L = Lucy, I = Isabel, P = Paul
1	 M	 Hey, Lucy. I’m trying to study, and you’re making an awful noise.
	
L	 It isn’t a noise, it’s Beethoven. I’m practising – I have a school 
concert tomorrow. You can study downstairs.
	
M	 I can’t, Jake’s playing a video game.
	
L	 What about the kitchen?
	
M	 No, Mum’s cooking dinner, and she’s listening to the radio. It’s 
impossible to work in this house!
2	 I	 Paul! Come here.
	
P	 Yes, dear? What’s the matter?
	
I	 What’s happening next door? Why’s their dog barking? I can’t 
hear the radio. 
	
P	 They’re having a party in the garden.
	
I	 Not again! Can you go and talk to them?
	
P	 Yes, good idea. It’s their second party in three weeks!
EXTRA SUPPORT   Pause the audio after each conversation 
and elicit the problem.
b	 Now get Sts to uncover the conversations and focus on 
the verbs in the list. Give Sts a few minutes to read the 
conversations and the list.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the gaps first and 
then listen and check their answers.
	 Then play the audio once or twice more for Sts to 
complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  trying    ​2  making    ​3  practising    ​4  playing    ​5  cooking    ​
6  listening    ​7  happening    ​8  barking    ​9  having
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts, in pairs, to read the conversations out 
loud.
c	 e 5.11  Focus on the question and elicit a few ideas. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and find out what happens.
	 Check the answer.
The neighbours invite him to the party and offer him a drink.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 72@@
72
5B
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  /ŋ/
a	 e 5.14   Focus on the sound picture and elicit the word 
and sound (singer /ŋ/).
	 Now focus on the example words next to the sound 
picture, e.g. singing. Remind Sts that the pink letters are 
the same sound as the picture word. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to the sound and example 
words. 
e 5.14
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.41
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Correct pronunciation and give further practice if 
necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the example. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to look at the houses on 
pp.40–41 and ask and answer questions about the people.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Spot the differences, A on p.105,  
B on p.110. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. Highlight 
that when we describe a picture, we use the present 
continuous for actions which are happening in the 
picture. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A describes what is 
happening in flats 1−4 and the garden on the left. B must 
say if there are any differences.
	 B now describes what is happening in flats 5−8 and the 
garden on the right. A tells his / her partner if there are 
any differences.
	 When they have found all eight differences, tell them to 
compare pictures to see if they have correctly identified 
the differences.
	 Check by getting pairs to explain the differences, e.g. 
	 A	In my picture the woman in flat 2 is painting the walls.
	 B	In my picture she’s reading. 
The garden on the left: In A two dogs are barking; in B there 
are no dogs.
Flat 2: In A the woman is painting the wall; in B she is reading.
Flat 3: In A the boy is playing the violin; in B he is playing the 
piano.
Flat 4: In A the couple are watching TV; in B they are listening to 
the radio.
Flat 6: In A the man is cooking; in B he is doing housework.
Flat 7: In A the boy is listening to music; in B he is studying / 
doing his homework.
Flat 8: In A the baby is crying; in B the baby is sleeping.
The garden on the right: In A the garden is empty; in B some 
people are having a party. 
	
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1	 What’s she doing? She’s crying.
2	 What are they doing? They’re watching TV. 
3	 What’s he doing? He’s playing basketball.
4	 What are they doing? They’re singing.
5	 What’s it doing? It’s eating.
b
1  ’m staying    ​2  are…doing    ​3  ’m looking for    ​4  ’m looking    ​
5  Are…living    ​6  ’s…doing    ​7  Is…studying    ​8  ’s working    ​
9  isn’t enjoying    ​10  ’s looking for
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g	 e 5.13   Focus on the task and example. Explain that 
if Sts don’t know if it’s a man or a woman, they should 
use Somebody. Point out that the first one (Somebody’s 
cooking) has been done for them.
	 Now tell Sts to close their books and listen to eight 
sounds. They have to decide what they think is happening 
and write a sentence for each sound. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. Then play it again, pausing after each sound effect, 
and give Sts, in pairs, time to write a sentence. Emphasize 
that they should write full sentences, not just the -ing 
form, e.g. It’s raining. 
	 Elicit answers, accepting all appropriate sentences. Get Sts 
to write their sentences on the board or to spell the verbs.
2	 Somebody’s sending messages / texting.
3	 Somebody’s having a shower and singing.
4	 It’s raining.
5	 Somebody’s eating spaghetti.
6	 Somebody’s making a coffee.
7	 Somebody’s crying.
8	 Somebody’s doing the housework.
e 5.13
(sound effects of the following)
1	 a person cooking
2	 someone sending and receiving WhatsApp messages
3	 someone having a shower and singing
4	 rain
5	 someone eating pasta noisily
6	 a coffee machine grinding, clunking, hot water pouring...
7	 someone crying
8	 sounds of hoovering, dusting, wiping surfaces...
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 73@@
73
5B
e 5.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
1	 A	 Can I help you?
	
B	 Yes, I’d like a latte, please.
	
A	 Regular or large?
	
B	 Large, please.
	
A	 To have here or take away?
	
B	 To have here.
	
A	 That’s three pounds forty, please.
	
B	 Here you are. Three pounds forty.
2	 A	 Where are my car keys? I can’t find them anywhere.
	
B	 I don’t know. In your jacket pocket?
	
A	 No, they aren’t there.
	
B	 How about on the hall table?
	
A	 No.
	
B	 Are you sure you don’t have them?
	
A	 Absolutely sure.
	
B	 Look in the living room.
3	 A	 Oh no, it’s twenty minutes late.
	
B	 Is there a waiting room somewhere? It’s really cold here on the 
platform.
	
A	 No, I don’t think so. 
	
B	 What’s the time now?
	
A	 Six fifteen. We can take the six twenty, but it’s a slow train.
	
B	 No, let’s wait, then.
4	 OK, come on everyone, out here. Right, stand together under the 
tree. OK! Are you ready? Carole, I can’t see you. Can you stand 
next to Jim? OK, ready? Say cheese! 
5	 A	 ...So, Mr Bartlett, do you have any questions you’d like to ask?
	
B	 Er, yes. On the website it says the hours are from ten to six. 
What about the weekends?
	
A	 The hours are ten to six at the weekends too, but you get paid 
overtime on Sundays. Saturday counts as a normal day. But if 
you work on a Saturday, you have a weekday free. The contract 
says clearly five days a week, with possibilities of overtime. 
	
B	 Oh, right.
d	 Tell Sts they will listen again and this time they must write 
down two words or phrases which helped them guess 
each answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Possible answers
1	 latte, regular or large, here or take away, £3.40
2	 Where are my car keys?, I can’t find them, Look in the living 
room.
3	 a waiting room, the platform, a slow train
4	 stand together, Are you ready?, Say cheese!
5	 the hours, overtime, work, the contract
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on pp.119–120, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA IDEA   For some personalization with the present 
continuous, write the names of five friends or family 
members on the board, e.g. MY MOTHER, DAVID (MY BROTHER), 
and explain who they are if necessary. Elicit from Sts the 
question What’s (your mother) doing at the moment? and 
answer, e.g. I think she’s (probably) having lunch. When Sts 
have asked about the other people, they do the same in 
pairs. 
4	LISTENING  working out a situation from context
a	 e 5.15  Write WHAT’S THE WOMAN DOING? on the board 
and tell Sts that they need to listen to a conversation and 
answer this question.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
She’s checking in at a hotel.
e 5.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.119)
A	 Good afternoon. How can I help you?
B	 Hello. I have a reservation for two nights.
A	 Your name?
B	 Carter.
A	 Carter. Here we are. Can you sign here, please?…Here’s your key 
card. You’re in room two hundred and twelve, on the second floor.
b	 Tell Sts they will listen again and this time they must write 
down the words which helped them guess the answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
reservation, two nights, sign here, key card, room 212, second 
floor
c	 e 5.16  Tell Sts that they need to listen to five more 
conversations and say what the people are doing.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. If necessary, 
play the audio again, pausing after each conversation to 
elicit the answer.
	 Check answers.
1	 He’s buying a coffee.
2	 He’s looking for his car keys.
3	 They’re waiting for a train.
4	 She’s taking a photo.
5	 He’s having a job interview. / She’s interviewing a man for a 
job.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 74@@
74
5C
	5C	 A city for all seasons
1	 21 (degrees), ten (degrees)
2	 It’s probably summer – it could be any month from May to 
September.
3	 It’s typical weather during this period. British weather is very 
changeable.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The weather and 
dates on p.159 and get them to do Part 1. 	
 
Vocabulary notes
Sts may find the question What’s the weather like? 
confusing. Emphasize that the question means How is 
the weather?. In this question like is a preposition, not a 
verb. The weather in English is usually expressed by It’s 
+ adjective, e.g. It’s windy. However with rain and snow, 
although the adjectives rainy and snowy exist, we use the 
verbs in the present continuous e.g. It’s raining.
	 Focus on 1 The weather and the chart in a.	
	 Get Sts to complete the chart individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 5.17
The weather and the dates, 1 The weather
1	 It’s sunny.
2	 It’s hot.
3	 It’s cloudy.
4	 It’s raining.
5	 It’s windy.
6	 It’s foggy.
7	 It’s cold.
8	 It’s snowing.
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now focus on the Other adjectives for weather and 
Nouns and adjectives box and go through it with the 
class. 
	 Now focus on c and get Sts, in pairs, to practise asking 
about the weather, using the pictures in the chart.
	 e 5.18   Focus on the pictures and words for the seasons 
in d and get Sts to match them. 
	 Play the audio to check answers and drill pronunciation. 
e 5.18
1 The weather
3	 spring
1	 summer 
4	 autumn
2	 winter
	 Finally, focus on Activation and elicit answers from the 
class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5C. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
 G 	 present simple or present continuous?
 V 	 the weather and seasons
 P 	 places in London
Lesson plan
The main context of this lesson is London – first its weather, 
and then some unusual tourist attractions. Many Sts who 
have not visited the UK have the idea that in London it 
rains a lot, and some even think that it’s still a foggy city. 
Here they learn the real facts about its climate. Sts begin by 
learning basic vocabulary to talk about the weather, and 
listen to a travel guide describing typical London weather. 
The Grammar (present simple or present continuous) is 
then presented through some messages between friends 
in different places around the world. Sts then read an online 
guide which recommends what to do in London in different 
seasons. Pronunciation helps Sts pronounce and understand 
famous place names in London, and the lesson finishes with 
writing, which deals with how to write posts about your 
holiday on a social networking site.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present simple or present continuous? p.182 
Vocabulary  The weather p.268 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  It’s Friday evening p.228  
(instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  5C
Online Practice  5C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write LONDON on the board and teach / elicit the correct 
pronunciation (/ˈlʌndən/). 
Tell Sts, in pairs, to write down three things they associate 
with London, e.g. red buses, Trafalgar Square, the River Thames, 
Big Ben, Oxford Street, Camden Market, etc.
Write their suggestions on the board. 
Ask Sts Have any of you visited London? Which of these did you 
see? and get feedback. 
1	VOCABULARY & LISTENING  the weather 
and seasons
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and elicit / explain 
the meaning of weather forecast. Model and drill 
pronunciation. Check the meaning of temperature and 
model and drill pronunciation.
	 Give Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Check answers and elicit opinions in answer to Do you 
think it’s typical weather for London? 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 75@@
75
5C
b	 Tell Sts to read the messages again and focus on the 
highlighted verbs. In pairs, they should answer the two 
questions. 
	 Check answers.
We use the present simple to talk about things that are normally 
true.
We use the present continuous to talk about things that are 
happening now / at the moment.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Draw two columns on the board, one for 
the present simple and the other the present continuous. Go 
through the messages with the class. After each highlighted 
verb, elicit whether it is the present simple or present 
continuous and write it in the correct column. Then ask Sts 
the two questions.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5C on p.132. 
Grammar notes
There is a clear difference in use between the present 
simple and present continuous: 
The present simple is used for habitual actions (things 
which are always true or which happen every day). 
The present continuous is used for temporary actions, 
things happening now / at this moment, or around now.
The use of these two forms can cause problems either 
because Sts don’t have the present continuous in their L1, 
or because English is ‘stricter’ about using it when talking 
about now. 
If you know your Sts’ L1, contrast it with English to 
anticipate or correct errors. 
Stative verbs, e.g. want, like, need, have (= possess), and 
know, are not normally used in the present continuous. 
	 e 5.20   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules and the information box with the class.
	 Focus on the What do you do? or What are you doing? 
box and go through it with the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 5C on p.133. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  He’s playing    ​2  Do your parents live, have    ​3  do you go, 
needs    ​4  is sleeping, doesn’t usually sleep
b
1  are…doing, ’m waiting    ​2  Do…like, don’t eat    ​3  are having, 
have    ​4  does…do, works
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 5.19   Focus on the instructions. If you didn’t do the 
Optional lead-in, ask Sts if they have been to London, 
and if so, what the weather was like.
	 Give Sts some time to read the five sentences. 
Elicit / Teach the word degrees (= a measurement of 
temperature), e.g. 22°C.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner.
 	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the travel guide again 
and this time they must correct the false sentences. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each paragraph 
for Sts to correct the false ones. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers. Ask Sts if they were surprised by any of the 
information.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 F (It isn’t usually very hot or very cold.)
2	 T
3	 F (It hardly ever snows.)
4	 T
5	 F (Today the air is clean and it’s hardly ever foggy.)
e 5.19
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
The best thing about the weather in London is that it’s never 
extreme. It isn’t usually very hot or very cold. In the summer, it’s 
sometimes sunny and sometimes cloudy, with temperatures of 
about twenty-two degrees. And of course, it sometimes rains.
In winter the temperature is usually between zero and ten degrees. 
It can be windy and cold, but it hardly ever snows. 
In spring and in autumn the weather is very changeable – you can 
have all the four seasons in one day! It can be sunny in the morning, 
cloudy at lunchtime, raining in the afternoon, and then cold and 
windy in the evening. I always tell tourists to take their sunglasses 
and their umbrellas when they go out!
But one thing you don’t often see these days in London is fog. A 
lot of tourists come to London and say, ‘Where’s the fog? London is 
always foggy in films!’ Well, it’s true that, in the past, that is, until the 
1950s, London was a very foggy city because the air was really dirty. 
But today the air is clean and it’s hardly ever foggy.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Get Sts, in pairs, to discuss the question, or do it as a 
whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, elicit some answers from the class.
2	GRAMMAR  present simple or present 
continuous?
a	 Focus on the photos and messages. Tell Sts to read the 
messages and answer the questions. 
	 Check answers.
Tim is sad because he loves snow, but he lives in Valencia and it 
never snows there.
Jane is sad because she is on holiday in Cancún, Mexico, but it’s 
raining.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 76@@
76
5C
Buckingham Palace    Wembley Stadium    the Tower of London   
Leicester Square    Piccadilly Circus    the Houses of Parliament   
Trafalgar Square    St Paul’s Cathedral    Westminster Abbey   
Covent Garden
b	 Now play the audio again and get Sts to repeat the places. 
	 Ask Sts what they know about the places, and what you 
can see and do there.
Suggestions
Buckingham Palace: It is where the monarch stays when in 
London. You can visit 19 rooms.
Wembley Stadium: The new stadium opened in 2007. You can 
see concerts and various sports events, such as football, rugby, etc. 
The Tower of London: It’s a UNESCO World Heritage Site. You 
can see the monarch’s crown jewels.
Leicester Square: It’s a public square for pedestrians. There are a 
lot of cinemas and restaurants around the square.
Piccadilly Circus: It’s particularly known for its video display and 
neon signs, as well as a statue in the centre, mistakenly, believed 
to be of Eros.
the Houses of Parliament: Big Ben is the nickname of the clock. 
You can see debates or take a tour.
Trafalgar Square: It’s a public square. Nelson’s Column is at its 
centre, and the National Gallery is on one side.
St Paul’s Cathedral: Building started in 1675 and finished 
in 1710. You can visit the cathedral and enjoy the wonderful 
architecture.
Westminster Abbey: It’s a very large church used for royal 
weddings and funerals. Many famous people are buried there.
Covent Garden: It was London’s old fruit and vegetable market. 
Now it is full of shops, restaurants, bars, and street entertainers.
c	 Focus on the instructions and point out the questions 
each person asks. Make sure Sts understand them, e.g. Is 
it far?.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to role-play a short 
conversation with a partner.
	 Make sure they swap roles.
	 Get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
5	WRITING  posting on social media
a	 Focus on the questions and elicit the meaning of social 
media (= communication with people who share your 
interests, using a website or other service on the internet).
	 Then elicit answers from the class (or get Sts to answer the 
question in pairs and then get feedback from the class). 
Elicit the names of websites which are popular in your Sts’ 
country. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Posting on social media on 
p.115.
	 Focus on the instructions in a. Give Sts a few minutes to 
read posts 1–5 and match them to photos A–E. 
	 Check answers. 
1  E    ​2  B    ​3  C    ​4  D    ​5  A
	 Now focus on b and tell Sts to imagine that they are either 
in their country or in a different country. Point out that 
they must write four posts of about 30 words each.
	 Sts could do c in class or for homework. Remind them of 
the word count.
	 Focus on d and remind Sts to read through their writing 
and check it for mistakes before they give it in.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What do you do? What are you doing 
now?, A on p.105, B on p.111. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A asks B his / her 
questions and B answers. Stress that B needs to listen 
carefully as to which form A uses in the question, and to 
use this form in his / her answer.
	 When A has asked all his / her questions, they swap roles.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5C.
3	READING & SPEAKING  finding specific 	
	 information
a	 Focus on the online guide and the photos, and if some of 
your Sts have been to London, ask them if they recognize 
any of the places.
	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
	 Now go through the Where can you…? questions.  
Elicit / Teach any lexis you think Sts might not know.
	 Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes, for Sts to read the guide 
to find the answers. 
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the guide the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  TW    ​2  OAT    ​3  TW    ​4  V&A    ​5  LM    ​6  OAT    ​7  LM    ​
8  V&A
b	 Tell Sts to read the guide again and complete the nouns 
or noun phrases used with adjectives 1–7. Point out that 
the first one has been done for them (see text 1 about the 
London Marathon).
	 Check answers.
2  places (text 1)    ​3  weather (text 1)    ​4  place, café (text 2,  
text 4)    ​5  buildings (text 3)    ​6  museums (text 4)    ​
7  collections (text 4)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c	 In pairs, Sts discuss the questions. If you are from a 
different town than your Sts, you might want to tell them 
about your town first.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
4	PRONUNCIATION  places in London
a	 e 5.21   Focus on the instructions and the place names. 
Tell Sts that it can be very useful to be able to pronounce 
them correctly, for example if they want to ask for 
directions, get a taxi, or buy a bus or underground ticket.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen. 
e 5.21
See place names in Student’s Book on p.43
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each place to 
give Sts time to underline the stress. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to say the words out loud. 
Highlight the pronunciation of Leicester /ˈlestə/ and 
Parliament /ˈpɑːləmənt/.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 77@@
77
PE3
c	 Tell Sts to cover the words, look at the photos, and test 
each other in pairs. 
2	r MEETING IN THE STREET
a	 e 5.23   Focus on the photos and elicit what is 
happening.
	 Focus on the question and then play the video / audio 
once the whole way through for Sts to see if their guesses 
were correct and to see what problem Rob has.
	 Check the answer.
Rob spills the coffee down his shirt.
e 5.23
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 Hey, Jenny!
J	 Oh, hi, Rob. Is that coffee for me?
R	 Yes. A double espresso.
J	 Oh wow, thanks. That’s really nice of you. 
R	 No problem. Do you have a meeting with Daniel?
J	 Yes, another meeting. And you?
R	 I’m going to the office, too. I have an interview in twenty minutes. 
J	 Oh really? With who?
R	 A theatre director. 
J	 Sounds interesting.
R	 What time is your meeting with Daniel?
J	 At half past nine. 
R	 Ugh! 
J	 Oh no. Are you OK? I’m so sorry!
R	 I’m fine!
J	 I’m really sorry. You can’t do an interview in that shirt.
R	 Don’t worry, there’s a clothes shop over there. I can buy a new 
one.
J	 OK. I can help you choose one. Oh, that’s my phone. Sorry, I need 
to answer this. See you in there. 
R	 OK.
b	 Focus on sentences 1–7 and give Sts time to read them 
and think about what the missing words might be. 
	 Then play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary for 
Sts to complete the gaps. 
	 Get them to compare with a partner. Play the video / 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  double espresso    ​2  Daniel    ​3  20    ​4  half    ​5  shirt    ​6  shop ​
7  phone
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
Function  buying clothes
Vocabulary  clothes
Lesson plan
In this third Practical English lesson, Sts learn some basic 
clothes vocabulary and some key phrases for buying clothes 
in English. The story develops: Jenny spills Rob’s coffee over 
his shirt, so he has to buy a new one. While he is looking 
for a new shirt, Jenny gets a call from somebody called 
Eddie. Rob comes out of the shop and hears the end of 
her conversation, and wonders who Eddie is. When Jenny 
sees the shirt he has chosen, she insists he goes back to 
change it.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 3 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 3 
                     Can you remember? 1–5
Online Practice  Practical English 3 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 3, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 2. Ask them Who’s Rob? Where does he work / 
live? Who’s Jenny? Where is she from?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 2.
1	r VOCABULARY  clothes
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and get Sts to match the 
words and photos.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 5.22   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 5.22
7	 a jacket
1	 jeans
5	 a shirt
2	 a T-shirt
6	 a skirt
3	 shoes
4	 a sweater
8	 trousers
	 Focus Sts’ attention on the phonetics next to each word. 
Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to repeat.
	 Ask Sts why they think it’s a jacket, a shirt, a T-shirt, a skirt, a 
sweater (with article) but jeans, shoes, trousers (no article), 
and elicit that it’s because the latter are plural.
	 3	
Practical English  In a clothes shop
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 78@@
78
PE3
c	 e 5.26   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. 
e 5.26
Same as script 5.25 with repeat pauses
d	 Focus on the information box and make sure Sts 
understand it. The meaning of this / these (for things 
within reach) and that / those (for things out of our reach, 
or far away) is easier to demonstrate than it is to explain. 
They can be determiners (this book) or pronouns  
(What’s this?).
	 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is the shop assistant. Get 
Sts to read the conversation aloud, and then swap roles.
e	 Focus on the photos of clothes at the bottom of the page. 
Elicit what they are and how much they are.
	 Tell Sts they are now going to do a role-play. A is the 
shop assistant and B the customer. A keeps his / her book 
open and B should quickly choose what he / she wants 
to buy (i.e. a T-shirt, a jacket, or jeans) before closing his / 
her book.
	 Ask some individual Bs What do you want to buy? and elicit 
their first sentences, e.g. What size is this T-shirt / jacket? or 
What size are these jeans?.  
	 Sts now role-play the conversation. Monitor and help.
	 Then get Sts to swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
4	r JENNY’S ON THE PHONE
a	 e 5.27  Focus on the photo and ask Sts What do you think 
of Rob’s shirt?.
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and give Sts time to read them.  	
Then play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Play again 
if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Make it clear that they don’t need to correct the 
false sentences yet.
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  T    ​5  F    ​6  F 
c	 e 5.24   Focus on the Apologizing box and go through 
it with the class. Elicit that I’m so sorry / I’m really sorry are 
stronger than I’m sorry. Point out that the three responses 
are interchangeable.
	 Play the video / audio once for Sts to watch or listen to the 
phrases.
e 5.24
See script in Student’s Book on p.44
	 Now play it again, pausing after each apology and 
response for Sts to repeat.
d	 Put Sts in pairs. Get them to cover the box (or close their 
books). Tell them to pretend to knock each other’s book or 
pen off the table, and then apologize.
3	r BUYING CLOTHES
a	 e 5.25   Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where is Rob? Who is he talking to?, etc. 
	 Now focus on the Saying prices and Sizes box and go 
through it with Sts.
	 Either tell Sts to close their books and write the three 
questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the 
questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers.
1  Medium    ​2  Yes, he does.    ​3  £44.99
e 5.25 e 5.26
S = shop assistant, R = Rob
S	 Can I help you?
R	 Yes, what size is this shirt? (repeat)
S	 Let’s see. It’s a small. What size do you need?
R	 A medium. (repeat)
S	 This is a medium.
R	 Thanks. (repeat) Where can I try it on? (repeat)
S	 The changing rooms are over there.
R	 Thank you. (repeat)
S	 How is it?
R	 It’s fine. (repeat) How much is it? (repeat)
S	 It’s forty-four pounds ninety-nine.
b	 Focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who says the 
You hear phrases (the shop assistant) and who says the 
You say phrases (the customer, here Rob). These phrases 
will be useful for Sts if they want to buy clothes.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  help    ​2  size    ​3  medium    ​4  rooms    ​5  How
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. You may want to highlight the meaning of 
the phrasal verb try on.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 79@@
79
PE3
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  6    ​B  2    ​C  1    ​D  5    ​E  3    ​F  7    ​G  4
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
e 5.27
E = Eddie, J = Jenny, R = Rob
E	 So, Jenny, what do you think of London?
J	 I love it, Eddie! It’s so cool!
E	 What about the people in the office?
J	 They’re really nice. And they’re very polite!
E	 What are you doing right now? You aren’t in the office. I can hear 
traffic.
J	 Right now? I am standing outside a men’s clothing store.
E	 You’re what?
J	 I’m waiting for Rob…
E	 Who’s Rob? Do you have a new boyfriend already?
J	 Don’t be silly. He’s just a guy from the office. He’s buying a new 
shirt. 
E	 Wait a minute. So you’re waiting for a guy named Rob outside a 
men’s clothing store…?
J	 Stop it. I don’t have time to explain it all now. Oh, here he is now. I 
have to go.
E	 OK. Have fun!
J	 Bye Eddie. Love you. 
R	 So, what do you think?
J	 You cannot be serious!
R	 What’s wrong? You don’t like my new shirt?
J	 No way! You can’t wear that to an interview! Come on, let’s go 
back into the store and change it.
R	 OK.
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen and 
correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 F (She says ‘I love it!’)
5	 F (He says ‘Do you have a new boyfriend already?’)
6	 F (She says ‘You can’t wear that…’)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class. 
	 Then focus on the British and American English box 
about shop and store.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says the phrases.
d	 e 5.28   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen to 
the seven phrases and check their answers to c.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases. 
1  J    ​2  J    ​3  E    ​4  J    ​5  E    ​6  R    ​7  J
e 5.28
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.45
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase, for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 80@@
80
6A
	6A	 A North African story
 G   object pronouns: me, you, him, etc. 
 V   words in a story
 P   /aɪ/, /ɪ/, and /iː/
Lesson plan
The aim of this lesson, apart from its grammar and lexical 
objectives, is to encourage Sts to begin reading, as this is 
a great way to consolidate and expand their knowledge 
of English. Sts are advised to read ‘Graded Readers’ (easy 
to read books which have been simplified according to 
level). Sts first look at people’s different reading habits 
and in Communication they talk about their own general 
reading habits. Then object pronouns (me, you, him, etc.) 
are presented through Part 1 of a traditional North African 
story. In the second part of the lesson Sts read and listen to 
Part 2 of the story, and then listen to the last part, getting 
more practice with pronouns and possessive adjectives. This 
is followed by Vocabulary, where the focus is on learning 
words through reading. Sts then look at three sounds  
(/aɪ/, /ɪ/, and /iː/) in Pronunciation, which will enable them to 
do the speaking better. Finally, Sts retell the story, each in the 
role of one of the two main characters.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  object pronouns: me, you, him, etc. p.183 
Communicative  The pronoun game p.229  
(instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  6A
Online Practice  6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write THINGS PEOPLE READ on the board and elicit words from 
the class, e.g. books, magazines, Kindles, iPads, websites, etc. 
Get Sts to spell the words and drill the pronunciation.
1	SPEAKING
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions and make sure Sts 
understand on screen (= on a computer, laptop, tablet, etc.).
	 First, answer the questions yourself, and then elicit 
answers from the class. You could get a show of hands to 
see if the majority prefer reading on paper or on screen.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Reading in English on 
p.105. 
	 Focus on the questions and make sure all the vocabulary is 
clear to Sts, e.g. subtitles (= words at the bottom of a film or 
TV programme that tell you what people are saying), etc. 
	 Set a time limit for Sts to interview each other.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. 
 
	 Finally, focus on the Reading in English box and go 
through it with the class. Point out that many graded 
readers come with audio and some are available as 
e-books, so that they can listen and read at the same time 
to help them with understanding and pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA IDEA   If you have a school library, get Sts to take a 
book out and start reading. Put up a chart in your classroom, 
so that Sts can write down the name of the book they’re 
reading, and you can keep track of how many they read.  
If your school doesn’t have a library, you could create a class 
library by getting each student to buy one Graded Reader 
(either a Starter (A1) or Stage 1 (A2/B1)) – they are relatively 
inexpensive. They then swap books with each other.
2	READING
a	 e 6.1   Sts are going to read and listen to a traditional 
story called The Glass Bottle. 
	 Focus on questions 1–5 and highlight the pronunciation 
of the names (Hassan /hæsæn/ and Walid /wæliːd/) and 
the meaning of valuable (= worth a lot of money).
	 Now focus on Part 1 and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts to read and listen to the story. 
	 Then put Sts in pairs and give them some time to answer 
the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story the first time, check 
whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the 
words in b.
1	 Hassan and Walid are brothers. They live in a small house in 
the desert.
2	 They’re very poor, and they don’t have anything. Every day is 
the same.
3	 Hassan works, but Walid doesn’t.
4	 She has a ring. She doesn’t want to sell it because it was her 
husband’s ring.
5	 Because he wants to help his mother.
e 6.1
See Part 1 of The Glass Bottle in Student’s Book on p.46
b	 Now focus on the words in the list and get Sts to match 
them to the pictures. 
	 Check answers and model and drill pronunciation. 
1  a desert    ​2  mountains    ​3  a field    ​4  the sky
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c	 Give Sts time to read Part 1 again. 
	 Now get Sts to cover the text and either elicit from the 
class who and what they can see in the picture on this 
page, or get them to describe it in pairs and get feedback.
	 Then tell Sts that they will find out the rest of the story 
later.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 81@@
81
6A
3	GRAMMAR  object pronouns
a	 Focus on the highlighted words in Part 1 and the 
example. Explain that the highlighted words are object 
pronouns, and we use them (like subject pronouns he, she, 
etc.) because we don’t want to repeat a name or a noun. 
	 Then give Sts a few minutes in pairs to write the relevant 
name or noun. 
	 Check answers.
it = the ring
him = Hassan and Walid’s father
her = Hassan and Walid’s mother
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.134. 
Grammar notes
Sts will be familiar with some examples of object 
pronouns in phrases like I love you or Excuse me.
The main problems they may have will be with word 
order and mixing up subject and object pronouns, e.g. 
I spoke to she.
You could point out that the object pronoun me is used 
instead of the subject pronoun I to answer the question 
Who?, e.g. A Who wants a cup of coffee? B Me! (NOT I ).
	 e 6.2  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Object pronouns after prepositions box 
and go through it with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 6A on p.135. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	 1  it    ​2  him    ​3  them    ​4  us    ​5  her    ​6  them
b	 1  She, it, her, us    ​2  They, me, them, I    ​3  him, her, she, him    ​
4  He, them, them, they, me    ​5  he, them, it
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 6.3   Focus on the example and tell Sts they are going 
to hear ten sentences and each time they must repeat the 
sentence changing the object (name, person, or thing) to 
a pronoun.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 6.3
1	 I like Anna. (pause) I like her.
2	 I know your husband. (pause) I know him.
3	 Can you help Jane and me? (pause) Can you help us?
4	 I want to speak to David and Sally. (pause) I want to speak to 
them.
5	 I love this song. (pause) I love it.
6	 I live near Catherine and Richard. (pause) I live near them.
7	 Wait for my brother and me! (pause) Wait for us!
8	 I don’t like these shoes. (pause) I don’t like them.
9	 Do you work with Suzanna? (pause) Do you work with her?
 10	 I see Jack every day. (pause) I see him every day.
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When you play the audio the first time, 
stop it after each pause. Elicit the object, e.g. in 1 Anna, then 
elicit the object pronoun, e.g. her, and finally elicit the whole 
sentence, e.g. I like her. Repeat with the other sentences. 
Then play the audio again for Sts to produce the sentences 
with object pronouns more quickly. 
4	READING & LISTENING  retelling a story
a	 e 6.4   Before Sts read and listen to Part 2, elicit the main 
details of Part 1 by asking them questions, e.g. What are 
the brothers’ names? Where do they live? Are they rich?, etc. 
	 Now ask Sts what they think happens next and elicit ideas.
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–8, making sure they 
understand palace (Sts saw Buckingham Palace in 5C) and 
plan (= something you have decided to do and how you 
are going to do it).
	 Now focus on Part 2 and play the audio once the whole 
way through for Sts to read and listen to the story. 
	 Then put Sts in pairs and give them some time to answer 
the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 He walks through the mountains.
2	 The prince welcomes him and gives him food, drink, and a bed.
3	 The windows have no glass.
4	 His empty water bottle.
5	 Because he doesn’t know what glass is. 
6	 A box (with 100 gold coins).
7	 Because now they can buy food and clothes.
8	 Walid wants to give the prince his mother’s ring, and get 
1,000 gold coins.
e 6.4
See Part 2 of The Glass Bottle in Student’s Book on p.47
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Go through the story line by line with Sts, 
eliciting guesses for the meaning of any vocabulary that 
they don’t know. 
b	 Before Sts read Part 2 again, go through the Pronouns 
and possessive adjectives box with the class. 
	 Now tell Sts to re-read Part 2 and, in pairs, decide what or 
who the highlighted pronouns and possessive adjectives 
refer to. Point out that the first one has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
2  Hassan    ​3  Hassan’s    ​4  the glass bottle    ​5  the prince    ​
6  the prince    ​7  the box    ​8  Hassan and Walid’s    ​9  Hassan    ​
10  Hassan, Walid, and their mother    ​11  Walid    ​12  his / their 
mother’s
c	 e 6.5   Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit ideas.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to Part 3 to find out what 
happens. 
	 Check the answer.
Walid goes to the palace. He gives the prince the silver ring. The 
prince gives him a box, but when he gets home and opens it, 
inside is the glass bottle.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 82@@
82
6A
a	 e 6.7   Focus on the sound pictures and the words (bike, 
fish, and tree). Tell Sts that these sounds can seem quite 
similar, but one difference is that fish is a short sound and 
tree is a long sound, and bike is a diphthong (= has two 
vowel sounds). Remind / Elicit from Sts that the symbols 
which have two dots are always long sounds.
	 Tell Sts to match each group of words to one of the sound 
pictures. Remind them that it is easier if they say the 
words aloud.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Encourage Sts to 
see the sound–spelling relationship, i.e. that the fish sound 
here is always the letter i, usually between consonants; the 
tree sound here is always e, ee, or ea. 
	 Check answers.
1  fish /ɪ/    ​2  tree /iː/    ​3  bike /aɪ/
e 6.7
fish /ɪ/  him, it, his, ring, sit, kiss
tree /iː/  he, she, me, meet, read, leave
bike /aɪ/  my, I, buy, sky, nice, high
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 6.8   This exercise gives Sts practice in distinguishing 
between the sounds.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen. 
e 6.8
See list of words in Student’s Book on p.47
c	 e 6.9   Focus on the instructions. Play the audio at least 
twice. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by playing the audio again, stopping after each 
pair of words.
1  b    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  a    ​5  b    ​6  a
e 6.9
1  his    2  my    3  it    4  leave    5  keys    6  we
d	 Put Sts in pairs to practise saying sentences 1–5.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read each sentence and get Sts to listen 
and repeat. Then put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the sentences.
7	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. 
	 Tell Sts to close their books and put them in pairs, A and B. 
Sts B role is harder, as Sts have only listened to this part of 
the story, rather than reading it. For this reason it’s a good 
idea for stronger Sts to take the B role.
	 Give Sts time to prepare their stories.
	 Sts A start. Monitor and help.
	 When Sts A have finished, Sts B should start telling their 
story.
e 6.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Part 3
Walid walks for five days through the mountains. The sun shines, 
and at night it’s very cold. Then, one evening, he finds the palace. 
The prince welcomes him and gives him food and drink, and a 
comfortable bed. But Walid can’t sleep. He’s thinking about the one 
thousand gold coins.
The next morning he says to the prince, ‘I want to say thank you to 
you. Please have this silver ring. It’s my mother’s.’
The prince is very happy. ‘This is a beautiful ring,’ he says. ‘Thank you. 
Let me give you something in return.’
He gives Walid a box. ‘Don’t open this until you get home,’ he says. 
‘Be careful with it. It’s very, very valuable.’
Walid runs through the mountains, and after three days he arrives 
home.
‘Where’s my silver ring?’ shouts his mother.
‘Don’t worry about your ring!’ says Walid. ‘Look at this!’
Hassan and their mother watch as he opens the box. Inside he 
finds…the glass bottle.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could ask Sts what they think the 
moral of the story is, and elicit some ideas.
Possible morals
Don’t ask for more than you need.
Different things are important to different people.
Be happy when you have enough.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts in the main lesson and on p.120, 
so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
5	VOCABULARY  words in a story
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the four 
column headings. Point out the two examples.
	 Give Sts time to put the words in the correct columns.
b	 e 6.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.6
adjectives  comfortable, strange, surprised, valuable
verbs  arrive, decide, leave, sell
nouns  desert, mountain, palace, village
prepositions  inside, into, through, towards
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
6	PRONUNCIATION  /aɪ/, /ɪ/, and /iː/
Pronunciation notes
This pronunciation exercise focuses on a small but 
significant difference between two similar but very 
common sounds /ɪ/, /iː/ as well as /aɪ/, all of which occur  
in subject and object pronouns. Depending on their 
L1, Sts may find the difference between /ɪ/ and /iː/ 
very difficult to hear and to produce. It is important to 
encourage elementary Sts when they do these kinds 
of pronunciation exercises. Reassure them that this 
difference is small and that with time and practice they 
will be able to differentiate and make these sounds.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 83@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
83
6B
	6B	 The third Friday in June
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The weather and 
dates on p.159 and get them to do Part 2.
Vocabulary notes
Although the date can be said in two ways, e.g. the sixth 
of April or April the sixth, we have focused on the former, 
which is more common, as it is easier for Sts just to learn 
one form.
	 Focus on 2 Ordinal numbers and the date and look 
at a which introduces ordinal numbers. Focus on the first 
four, and show Sts how the last two letters of the word 
(st, nd, rd, and th) are written after the numeral to make it 
an ordinal number. 
	 Get Sts to complete the missing numbers and words, and 
then compare with a partner.
	 e 6.10   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
sixth 
seventh 
8th 
9th 
tenth 
eleventh 
12th 
thirteenth  
fourteenth 
20th 
twenty-first 
22nd 
twenty-third 
24th  
thirtieth 
31st
e 6.10
1 Ordinal numbers and the date
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, 
eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, twentieth, twenty-first, 
twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth, thirtieth, thirty-first
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the numbers, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any numbers your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce. When Sts go back to the main lesson, there 
will be further practice of the more tricky ordinal numbers.
	 In c Sts focus on the way dates are written and spoken. 
Focus on the Writing and saying the date box and go 
through the We write and We say section. Highlight that 
the words the and of are said, but not written.
	 Then go through the Prepositions with months and 
dates section and stress that we use in followed by a 
month and on followed by a day of the week or a date. 
	 Finally, go through the Saying years section. 
 G   like + (verb + -ing)
 V   the date, ordinal numbers 
 P   /ð/ and /θ/, saying the date
Lesson plan
The main vocabulary focus in this lesson is how to say the 
date, and the lesson starts with Sts revising the months, 
and then learning ordinal numbers. This is followed by a 
Listening on identifying ordinal numbers. Sts then read an 
online forum where readers answer questions about their 
favourite month, day of the week, and time of the day. Sts 
then focus on the grammar, like, love, etc. + the -ing form, 
and talk about what free-time activities they like and dislike. 
The lesson ends with Sts interviewing each other about their 
favourite or least favourite month / day / week, and then 
writing about their own favourite times.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  like + (verb + -ing) p.184 
Vocabulary  Dates p.269 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  Likes and dislikes p.230  
(instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  6B
Online Practice  6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the question WHAT’S THE DATE TODAY? on the board.  
Elicit / Teach the answer and write it on the board like this, 
e.g. 6th April 2019. Elicit / Teach that th indicates an ordinal 
number (here sixth). Sts will practise this in more detail in 
Vocabulary. You may want to explain that the date can also 
be written 6 April 2019 (without th).
Draw a face and a speech bubble on the board and write 
in the bubble: The sixth of April twenty nineteen. Explain that 
this is the way the date is said in English.
Highlight the use of the /ðə/ and of /əv/, and model and drill 
pronunciation. 
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
the date, /ð/ and /θ/
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and do it as a whole-class 
activity. If you have more than 12 Sts, go back to January 
with the 13th and start again. Give further practice of any 
months your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the first letter of each month on the 
board and elicit them from the whole class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 84@@
84
6B
f	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat each 
date. Make sure they copy the rhythm and stress the 
ordinal number and month.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to mingle and ask When’s your birthday?. 
They did this in 4C with months, but not saying the actual 
date. Get feedback by asking if anyone found someone with 
exactly or nearly the same birthday.
g	 Elicit / Teach the meaning of a public holiday (= a day 
which is holiday for everybody, e.g. 25th December). Do 
these questions as a whole-class activity if Sts are from 
the same place. If they are from different countries, do it in 
pairs and get feedback.
2	LISTENING  making connections
a	 e 6.14   Tell Sts that they are going to listen to five 
conversations and they need to circle the ordinal number 
they hear.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit all the ordinal numbers in the chart 
before Sts listen.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation to give Sts 
time to circle their answer.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  21st    ​2  30th    ​3  5th    ​4  53rd    ​5  6th
e 6.14 
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
1	 A	 Hi, Kim. Listen, do you want come to the theatre in London this 
Saturday?
	
B	 Saturday? I can’t – it’s my brother’s twenty-first birthday! We’re 
having a big party at my parents’ house.
	
A	 Oh, that sounds great! Have a wonderful time – and say ‘Happy 
Birthday’ from me!
2	 A	 Are you in the office next week?
	
B	 No, I’m on holiday.
	
A	 Where are you going?
	
B	 Australia!
	
A	 Lucky you! When do you get back?
	
B	 On the thirtieth.
	
A	 Wow! That’s a long holiday.
	
B	 Yeah, three weeks! I can’t wait.
3	 A	 You drink a lot of coffee!
	
B	 Yes, this is my fifth this morning.
	
A	 It’s not good for you, you know.
	
B	 I know, but I can’t wake up without it.
4	 A	 Where’s the restaurant?
	
B	 It’s not far. It’s on the corner of Park Avenue and fifty-third.
	
A	 Great. See you there at 7.30.
5	 A	 Good morning. I’m here to see Lynn Mody. My name’s Graham 
Davies.
	
B	 Just a moment, sir, I’ll give her a ring…Is that Lynn? There’s a Mr 
Davies here to see you…That’s fine, sir. Could you sign in here? 
Great. You can go straight up. She’s on the sixth floor. The lifts 
are just over there.
	
A	 Many thanks.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight to Sts that the years between 2000 and 2009 
have to be said two thousand and (three)… and from 2010 
onwards, it’s more common to say Twenty (nineteen).
	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to tell you what the 
date is today and tomorrow.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
Pronunciation notes
/ð/ and /θ/
Sts should be aware by now of the small difference 
between these two sounds as they occur in so many 
common words. Here they get some extra practice to 
help them to hear the difference and produce the two 
sounds.
c	 e 6.11   Focus on the two sound pictures, mother /ð/ and 
thumb /θ/.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the two sounds and 
example words. 
e 6.11 
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.48
	 Encourage Sts to try to approximate the th sound as far as 
possible and to hear the difference between the voiced 
sound /ð/ and the unvoiced sound /θ/ although they may 
find this quite difficult. Now play the audio again for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 e 6.12   Before playing the audio, focus on the Ordinal 
numbers box and go through it with the class. 
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each ordinal number for 
Sts to listen and repeat. 
e 6.12
See ordinal numbers in Student’s Book on p.48
	 Then give Sts a few minutes to practise saying the ordinal 
numbers on their own.
e	 e 6.13   Give Sts a few minutes in pairs to try saying the 
dates.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
e 6.13
the first of March    the second of November    the third of May    
the fourth of June    the fifth of January    the sixth of July    
the twelfth of September    the seventeenth of October    
the twentieth of August    the twenty-third of February    
the twenty-eighth of April    the thirty-first of December
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First, elicit the answers from the class and 
then play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 85@@
85
6B
c	 Tell Sts to look at the highlighted adjectives, and in 
pairs use the context to work out if they are positive or 
negative.
Positive  light, fun, festive, favourite
Negative  sad, cold, least favourite, tired, dirty
	 Check Sts understand depressing (= makes you feel very 
unhappy) and festive (= typical of a special event or 
celebration).
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
4	GRAMMAR  like + (verb + -ing)
a	 Focus on the faces and the five verb phrases. Give Sts a 
minute to complete the chart in pairs. 
	 Check answers by quickly drawing each emoticon on 
the board and eliciting the phrases. Explain that don’t 
mind is a ‘neutral’ answer, e.g. I don’t mind cooking = I don’t 
especially like cooking, but it isn’t a problem for me. 
b	 Tell Sts to complete sentences 1–5 from the forum 
comments.
	 Check answers.
1  celebrating    ​2  sitting    ​3  working    ​4  thinking    ​5  getting
	 Now read the question together and elicit the answer. 
The form of a verb after love, like, etc. is the -ing form, the same 
form that is used after be in the present continuous.
b	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen to each conversation 
again and this time they need to match the ordinal 
number they hear to one of the things in the list. 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each conversation.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  21st: a birthday    ​2  30th: a date    ​3  5th: a drink    ​4  53rd: a 
street    ​5  6th: a floor
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
3	READING
a	 Focus on the first part of the text – the introduction on 
the forum. Elicit / Teach the meaning of the happiest and 
the most depressing. If you are teaching in the southern 
hemisphere, highlight that the psychologist is talking 
about the UK, where the months referred to (January and 
June) fall in different seasons.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the introduction and answer 
the two questions. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. (Sts will focus on superlatives in 10A; this is just a 
preview). Then get Sts to tell you the reasons for this. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the  
adjectives in c.
The third Friday in June is the happiest day of the year. This is 
because it’s summer, it’s warm, the evenings are light, and it’s the 
day before a weekend.
The third Monday in January is the most depressing day of the 
year. The reasons are because it’s winter, the weather is grey 
and cold, the days are dark, and Monday is the first day of the 
working week.
	 Ask Sts if they think these dates / times might also be the 
most depressing / happiest in their country, and if not, 
which are (they will almost certainly not be the same 
dates for people who live in the southern hemisphere). 
b	 Now focus on the comments. Elicit / Explain that the 
happy face emojis go with comments about people’s 
favourite months, days, and times, and the sad face ones 
with people’s least favourite.
	 Focus on the months, days, and times in the list, and give 
Sts time to complete the comments with them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  June    ​2  December    ​3  October    ​4  February    ​5  Monday    ​
6  Saturday    ​7  Sunday    ​8  Friday    ​9  9.00 a.m.    ​10  7.45 p.m.    ​
11  6.30 a.m.    ​12  5.30 p.m.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start, elicit from the class the 
answer to gap 1.
I love
I like
I don’t mind
I don’t like
I hate
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 86@@
86
6B
d	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all the 
verb phrases.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other what they 
love, like, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Draw the smiley faces from 4a on the 
board and elicit the verbs, love, like, etc. Give Sts time to write 
a few sentences before putting them in pairs to tell their 
partner about themselves.
	 Find out if any pairs felt the same about some of the verb 
phrases.
5	SPEAKING & WRITING
a	 Focus on the questions and point out the example. 
	 Now give Sts time to think about their answers. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. 
Monitor and help while Sts are interviewing each other. 
Make sure they swap roles.
	 Then get Sts to discuss in their pairs if they are similar or 
different. 
	 Finally, get some feedback from various pairs. 
b	 Using their answers in a, Sts now write their own positive 
comments (beginning ‘My favourite…’)  and negative 
comments (beginning ‘My least favourite…’) for each of 
the three sections of the forum.
	 If you want Sts to add photos and drawings, you might 
like to set the task as homework.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.134. 
Grammar notes
like + (verb + -ing)
When another verb follows love, like, don’t mind, don’t like, 
and hate, the -ing form is normally used, e.g. buying, going, 
not the infinitive, e.g. NOT I love buy clothes. 
The infinitive with to is also possible after like, love, and 
hate in certain circumstances, and is common in American 
English, but it may be confusing for Sts and it’s probably 
best to avoid it at this stage. 
Sts may find it strange that in English we use the same 
verb to say I love you and I love shopping (or I hate him and 
I hate getting up early). Highlight that love and hate are 
used for strong likes and dislikes, not just for emotional 
feelings for people.
Spelling rules
Sts focused on these when they learned the present 
continuous in 5B and 5C, but it is worth reminding them, 
e.g. that verbs ending in y don’t change the y for an i as 
they do in the third person singular (e.g. study – studying 
NOT studing), and about the double consonant in, e.g. 
swimming.
	 e 6.15   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 6B on p.135. Sts do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers. When you check the -ing forms also check 
that Sts remember the meaning of the verbs. 
a
verb + -ing
verb ending in e
double consonant
cooking
eating
sleeping
studying
dancing
having
writing
getting
running
stopping
swimming
	 Sts now do b. Remind them that they have to add -ing to 
the verbs, e.g. working, to make the sentences. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
b
1	 He loves going to the cinema.
2	 He likes taking the dog for a walk.
3	 He likes listening to music.
4	 He doesn’t mind doing housework.
5	 He doesn’t mind working in an office.
6	 He doesn’t like watching football on TV.
7	 He doesn’t like reading novels.
8	 He hates having lunch with his parents.
9	 He hates wearing a tie.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 87@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
87
6C
	6C	 Making music
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the words on the board for the next 
activity.
c	 e 6.17   Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the 
musicians column. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to guess the words for musicians 
before they listen. Then play the audio for them to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers, eliciting the words onto the board. Elicit 
from Sts how the words for musicians are formed (we 
usually add -ist to a musical instrument to make the 
musician, e.g. violin > violinist; we sometimes add -er, 
e.g. drum > drummer; with a few instruments we say 
instrument + player, e.g. keyboard > keyboard player).
e 6.17
1	 accordion – accordionist
2	 bass – bass player
3	 violin – violinist
4	 guitar – guitarist 
5	 piano – pianist
6	 drums – drummer
7	 keyboard – keyboard player
8	 trumpet – trumpeter
9	 saxophone – saxophonist
EXTRA SUPPORT   Leave the words on the board for the next 
activity.
d	 Play the audio again and tell Sts to underline the stressed 
syllables in the words for musicians.
	 Check answers, by underlining the stress in the words 
on the board. Give further practice of words your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
See underlining in script 6.17
	 Now get Sts to compare the words in both columns and 
ask them when the stress is different.
piano / pianist and saxophone / saxophonist have different stress.
e	 e 6.18   Tell Sts they are going to hear nine short pieces 
of instrumental music and they must say the name of the 
instrument being played and the musician. Get them to 
cover the chart or close their books.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to elicit the 
words.
1  piano – pianist    ​2  saxophone – saxophonist    ​3  accordion 
– accordionist    ​4  drums – drummer    ​5  keyboard – keyboard 
player    ​6  bass – bass player    ​7  violin – violinist    ​8  trumpet – 
trumpeter    ​9  guitar – guitarist
 G   revision: be or do?
 V   music
 P   /j/, giving opinions
Lesson plan
This lesson, the last of the first half of the book, uses the 
topic of music to revise the uses of be and do. First, Sts focus 
on the vocabulary of musical instruments and musicians. 
Sts then interview each other with a music questionnaire to 
find out about their partner’s musical tastes and habits. After 
revising the grammar, there is a pronunciation focus on the 
/j/ sound, including the ‘hidden’ /j/, e.g. in music, and Sts also 
look at the stress on words when giving opinions. Sts then 
listen to a programme about busking in London. The lesson 
finishes with a visit to the Writing section to learn how to 
write an informal email.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  be or do? p.185 
Communicative  Tell me about you p.231  
(instructions p.208)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  A London busker
For students
Workbook  6C
Online Practice  6C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board the names of some musicians who 
are popular in your Sts’ country. Then elicit the musical 
instrument they play and write it next to each name.
1	VOCABULARY  music
a	 Books open. Focus on the list of musical instruments. Tell 
Sts to first match the word to the photo and then write 
the word next to the correct number in the instruments 
column. Point out that the first one (accordion) has been 
done for them.
!  Don’t ask Sts if they play a musical instrument yet as they 
will be doing this later in the lesson.
b	 e 6.16   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Give further practice of words your Sts 
find difficult to pronounce.
e 6.16 
1  accordion    2  bass    3  violin    4  guitar    5  piano    
6  drums    7  keyboard    8  trumpet    9  saxophone
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 88@@
88
6C
c	 e 6.21   Focus on the instructions and the examples in 
the speech bubbles. Explain to Sts that they are going to 
hear a sentence and they must turn it into a question.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence, and elicit a 
response from the whole class. 
e 6.21 
1	 She’s British. (pause) Is she British?
2	 He plays the piano. (pause) Does he play the piano?
3	 You like music. (pause) Do you like music?
4	 Anna’s having a shower. (pause) Is Anna having a shower?
5	 You’re tired. (pause) Are you tired?
6	 She lives near here. (pause) Does she live near here?
7	 I’m late. (pause) Am I late?
8	 The train arrives at six o’clock. (pause) Does the train arrive at six 
o’clock?
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the My music questionnaire and go through 
it with Sts, making sure they know the different types 
of music in 1. You might want to elicit / explain the 
difference between a concert (= a public performance 
of music) and a gig (= a public performance of music by 
musicians playing popular music or jazz). Model and drill 
their pronunciation, /ˈkɒnsət/ and /ɡɪɡ/. Make sure Sts 
understand and can pronounce download 
/daʊnˈləʊd/ and lyrics /ˈlɪrɪks/. 
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary whilst Sts think about 
their answers.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. 
Encourage them to ask for and give more information 
where possible. You could demonstrate by asking 
individual Sts some of the questions.
	 Monitor and correct.
	 When time is up, focus on the question Do you have 
similar musical tastes and habits? and elicit some answers.
4	PRONUNCIATION  /j/, giving opinions
Pronunciation notes
/j/
y at the beginning of a word is always pronounced /j/, 
e.g. yes. 
Some words containing u or ew also have a ‘hidden’ /j/ 
sound, e.g. music, student, new, etc.
Sts must be careful with this phonetic symbol because it 
is not the same as the letter j.
Giving opinions
When we give our opinion, we give extra stress to the 
‘opinion’ word, e.g. He’s fantastic.
e 6.18
(sound effects of musical instruments)
1	 classical piano 
2	 jazz saxophone 
3	 an accordion 
4	 drums in a rock band 
5	 electric keyboard 
6	 electric bass guitar 
7	 classical violin 
8	 classical trumpet 
9	 acoustic not classical guitar 
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could demonstrate 
the activity by telling the class if you play an instrument 
and how well you play it.
2	GRAMMAR  revision: be or do?
a	 Get Sts to read the five sentences and circle the correct 
options. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  do you    ​2  I don’t    ​3  isn’t    ​4  Do you    ​5  is
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6C on p.134. 
Grammar notes
In this first half of the book Sts have learned to use the 
verb be, the present simple, and the present continuous. 
For many Sts the use of do and does in questions and 
negatives in the present simple takes some getting 
used to, and as a result there is sometimes a tendency 
to overuse them. Sts sometimes forget that be, both as 
a main verb and as an auxiliary, does not form questions 
and negatives in the same way, but simply by inverting 
the subject and verb or adding not. 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 6.19 and e 6.20 for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go 
through the rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 6C on p.135. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
Are you…?
Do you…?
hungry
listening to me
stressed
tired
waiting for a friend
have a car
know those people
like classical music
live in the city centre
speak Russian
b	
1  ’s, ’s    ​2  Do, don’t    ​3  Does, doesn’t    ​4  are, ’m    ​5  Does, ‘s    ​
6  Are, ’re    ​7  is, doesn’t    ​8  Are, ’m
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 89@@
89
6C
5	r VIDEO LISTENING  understanding specific 	
	 information
a	 Read the definition of busker together and model and drill 
pronunciation. 
	 Now do the questions as a whole-class activity.
b	 Now tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary 
about busking in London, and about a professional busker 
called Charlotte Campbell. 
	 Focus on the question and play the video for Sts to watch 
or listen. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if 
you need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch. You 
may want to check that Sts know what Waterloo (= a major 
London train station) and the London Eye are (= a popular 
tourist attraction on the South Bank).
Yes, Charlotte likes her job.
A London busker
This is Charlotte Campbell. She’s twenty-five and she’s a busker. 
Charlotte plays the guitar and sings on the South Bank in London. 
Today, she’s busking near the London Eye.
‘On a typical day when I’m going busking, I get the train to Waterloo 
and I walk to the London Eye. I start at about eleven o’clock and I 
play until one. Then I take a lunch break. And sometimes I stay until 
six or seven p.m. but in the winter when it gets dark I go home a 
little earlier.’
You can find buskers everywhere – in the streets, in shopping 
centres, outside bars and restaurants and in the parks of most British 
cities. In London, you can also listen to music while you’re on the 
London Underground. Buskers play or sing all kinds of different 
music – opera, jazz, pop and folk.
‘I like music that’s on the radio, Ed Sheeran and things like that, and 
some older music from the 60s, like the Beatles.’
But busking isn’t always easy. London is a busy city and there are lots 
of buskers, which means you can’t just play music wherever you like.
‘You need to get a permit to busk in London, and pass an audition, 
but when you do, there’s a really nice community and busking in 
London becomes easy.’
So buskers like Charlotte have to choose an area of London to sing 
and play in. They share this area with other buskers and sometimes 
they have to wait for the other buskers to finish.
Charlotte lives in Brixton, in South London. In her flat, she writes her 
own songs and practises.
‘I love writing songs. I love writing my own music.’
For Charlotte, there are good and bad things about life as a busker.
‘I like meeting new people and sharing my music with a new 
audience. I don’t like it when it gets cold.’
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts what musicians apart from Charlotte 
they saw busking.
Two saxophonists, a drummer, and an opera singer
a	 e 6.22   Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the two 
sounds and example words. 
e 6.22 
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.51
	 Focus on the Hidden /j/ sound box and go through with 	
	 the class.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 6.23   Focus on the task. Point out that Sts will hear 
phrases and not sentences. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase to give Sts time 
to write it down. 
	 Check answers.
e 6.23
1	 a beautiful tune
2	 a young musician
3	 music students
4	 your yoga teacher
5	 the New Year
	 In pairs, get Sts to practise saying the phrases.
c	 e 6.24  Focus on the sentences and remind Sts that the 
words in bigger font are stressed and the underlining 
shows the extra stress. Point out that the words in blue 
here are the ‘opinion’ words and that we give them extra 
stress.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen to the sentences 
and rhythm. 
e 6.24 
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.51
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 In pairs, get Sts to practise saying the sentences.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to write the 
names of two male musicians, two female, and two bands 
– one that they love and one that they hate.
	 Tell Sts they are going to ask their partner’s opinion of the 
musicians and bands they have written down. Model and 
drill the question What do you think of…? 
	 Demonstrate the activity by asking Sts their opinion of a 
male musician, a female musician, and a band that you 
either love or hate, and elicit responses. Remind Sts that 
they will need to use an object pronoun in their answer 
after the verb (e.g. I like him, her, or them.) or a subject 
pronoun after I think (e.g. I think he’s / she’s / they’re great.).
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. Encourage them to add sentences like those 
in c to give their opinions and to ask for and give more 
information where possible. Monitor, checking Sts are 
using the right pronouns and adding extra stress correctly.
	 Find out from various pairs if they have the same taste in 
music.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 90@@
90
6C
b	 Tell Sts to cover the email or close their books and elicit 
the information Carmen gives about herself in each 
paragraph.
	 Check answers.
Personal information: She’s 19. She’s from Madrid. She’s a 
receptionist at a hotel. She’s studying English for her job.
Family: She lives with her parents and her brother and sister. Her 
father is an architect and her mother works in a clothes shop. 
Her brother and sister are at school.
Free time: She doesn’t have much free time. She usually goes 
shopping on her day off. In the evening she likes seeing friends 
or listening to music.
c	 Individually or in pairs, Sts correct the six spelling mistakes.
	 Check answers, by eliciting the words onto the board.
1  studying    ​2  because    ​3  architect    ​4  usually    ​5  shopping  ​
6  friends
d	 Focus on the instructions and go through the Informal 
emails box with the class. Tell Sts that you can also begin 
an email with Dear, but Hi is more informal. Contractions 
are common in informal language. Finally, focus on the 
end of the email. Elicit / Teach the meaning of Please 
write soon and Best wishes, and tell Sts they are useful 
expressions to put at the end of an email to a friend. 
	 Sts now make notes for their own email. 
e	 Using their notes from d, Sts now write their email. Either 
give Sts at least 15 minutes to write the email in class, or 
set it for homework. 
!   Tell Sts to set their email out in paragraphs like in the 
model email. 
f	 If Sts do the writing in class, give them time to check their 
emails for mistakes. They could then swap them with a 
partner and read each other’s emails, before you collect 
them in. 
EXTRA IDEA   If you know any good websites for Sts to find 
their own penfriends, now would be an ideal moment to tell 
Sts about them.
c	 Focus on 1–6 and go through them with Sts. 
	 Now play the video again for Sts to mark the sentences T 
(true) or F (false). 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 F (She takes a lunch break at 1.00, and she sometimes plays 
until 6.00 or 7.00 p.m.)
2	 F (Buskers play all kinds of different music – opera, jazz, pop, 
and folk.)
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (She writes her own songs.)
6	 T
	 Elicit why the F sentences are false.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles / showing the script, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate 
/ Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Finally, focus on the questions and do them as a  
whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   When Charlotte sings her song Streets of London 
at the end of the video, you could get Sts to write down 
some of the lyrics as they listen:
Ba-baa, ba-baa, there’s music on the streets of London
Ba-baa, ba-baa, there’s music in my heart
Ba-baa, ba-baa, there’s music on the streets of London
That’s where we are, that’s where we are.
Ah-hoo, yeah I get lonely
Ah-hoo, yeah I get cold
Ah-hoo, I get tired, oh so tired
But I’ll never sell my soul.
Ah-hoo, from Piccadilly
Ah-hoo, to Leicester Square
Oh I gave my heart to London
And you’ll always find me there.
6	WRITING  an informal email
Here Sts consolidate the language they have learned 
so far through writing about themselves, and learn the 
conventions for writing an informal email. Sts will learn 
how to write a more formal email in 10B.
Tell Sts to go to Writing An informal email on p.115.
a	 Focus on the title and elicit / explain the meaning of 
informal (= friendly). Elicit / Teach the opposite formal and 
explain that this is more serious, e.g. a business letter / 
email.
	 Focus on the information box at the bottom of the page 
and make sure Sts understand the meaning of penfriend.
	 Then focus on the beginning of the email. Elicit / Teach 
the meaning of the headings From, To, and Subject. 
	 Give Sts time to read the email. Tell them not to worry 
about the spelling mistakes. 
	 Elicit who Sts think Stefan is. 
Stefan is Carmen’s penfriend. She is writing to him to practise her 
English.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 91@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
91
Revise and Check
	5&6	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  b
e 6.25
1	 Duncan
I = interviewer, D = Duncan
I	 Can you play a musical instrument?
D	 I can. I can play the violin.
I	 How well do you play it?
D	 Not very.
2	 Myles
I = interviewer, M = Myles
I	 Do you have noisy neighbours?
M	 Um, I’m lucky, um, I don’t. But I think I’m the noisy neighbour, so...
I	 What do you do?
M	 I play the guitar.
3	 Tiffany
I = interviewer, T= Tiffany
I	 What’s your favourite month of the year? Why?
T	 My favourite month is December because it gets colder, and I like 
snow and cold weather. And I like Christmas time.
4	 Stephen
I = interviewer, S = Stephen
I	 What kind of music do you like?
S	 A lot of kinds of music. Um, I typically listen to electronic dance, 
and um, indie rock. I listen to the new folk, they call it. But I like 
opera and a lot of jazz. The list could go on.
I	 What kind of music don’t you like?
S	 I don’t like country music.
I	 Do you have a favourite band or singer?
S	 Sure. Right now, my favourite band is Wye Oak from Brooklyn.
5	 Dasha 
I = interviewer, D = Dasha
I	 What kind of books do you like?
D	 Um, I read like all sorts of books, from history books to like, novels, 
and all sorts of books really.
I	 What are you reading at the moment?
D	 Er, at the moment I’m reading a history of modern France.
For instructions on how to use these pages see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 5&6 
Quick Test 6 
File 6 Test 
Progress Test Files 1–6
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  b    5  a    6  c    7  a    8  b    9  b    10  c    
11  a    12  b    13  c    14  a    15  c
VOCABULARY
a	
1  hear    ​2  play    ​3  forget    ​4  buy    ​5  tell    ​6  have    ​7  take    ​
8  run    ​9  call    ​10  dance
b	
1  at    ​2  on    ​3  for    ​4  to    ​5  for    ​6  in    ​7  on
c	
1	 fog (the others are weather adjectives)
2	 cold (the others are verbs)
3	 season (the others are seasons)
4	 seven (the others are ordinal numbers)
5	 twenty-second (the others are numbers)
6	 ring (the others are parts of a country)
7	 drummer (the others are musical instruments)
8	 concert (the others are musicians)
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  cook /ʊ/    ​2  sitting /ŋ/    ​3  tenth /θ/    ​4  there /ð/    ​ 
5  violin /aɪ/
d	
1  neighbour    ​2  remember    ​3  fiftieth    ​4  saxophone    ​
5  pianist
CAN YOU understand this text?
b	 1  a    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  c
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 92@@
92
7A
	7A	 Selfies
 G   past simple of be: was / were
 V   word formation: write › writer
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
This lesson uses the context of self-portraits and selfies to 
introduce and practise the past simple of the verb be  
(was / were). The Grammar is presented through an audio 
guide talking about Vincent van Gogh. Pronunciation gets 
Sts to focus on sentence stress in past simple sentences 
and questions with was and were. The Reading picks up the 
topic of self-portraits of famous people and then moves 
onto word formation, e.g. music − musician. In Speaking, 
Sts discuss whether or not they take selfies, and talk about 
selfies and photos on their phones.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple of be: was / were p.186 
Communicative  Where were you? p.232  
(instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  7A
Online Practice  7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Start to draw a picture of yourself on the board. Ask Sts who 
they think it is, and keep adding details until they realize that 
it’s you. Teach the word self-portrait and ask Sts if they think it 
looks like you.
1	GRAMMAR  past simple of be
a	 Books open. Focus on the title and elicit / teach the 
meaning of selfie (= a photo that you take of yourself). Ask 
Sts if they like taking selfies to elicit yes / no answers. Sts 
will be discussing this in more details in Speaking.
	 If you haven’t done the Optional lead-in, elicit / teach the 
meaning of portrait (= a painting of a person). Model and 
drill pronunciation /ˈpɔːtrət/. Now elicit the meaning of 
self-portrait.
	 Now focus on the portrait and the three questions. Put Sts 
in pairs to discuss them.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are right or not.
b	 e 7.1   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Tell Sts to 
just listen for the answers to questions 1 and 2 in a.
	 Check answers. Elicit opinions for question 3. You could 
tell Sts what you think of his paintings.
1  Vincent van Gogh    ​2  He is 35 years old. 
e 7.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.120) 
This painting is a self-portrait by the Dutch painter Vincent van 
Gogh.
Van Gogh was born in the Netherlands on the thirtieth of March 
eighteen fifty-three. His parents weren’t poor – his father was a 
church minister, and his mother was an artist. Van Gogh’s first job 
was in his uncle’s company, selling paintings, but later he was 
a teacher in England, and finally a painter. We only really know 
what he looked like because of his many self-portraits. Only three 
photographs of him exist, and they are all from when he was young.
This portrait is from his time in Arles in the south of France, in 
eighteen eighty-eight, when he was thirty-five. He was very poor, 
but he was happy because of the beautiful light and colours there. 
This portrait was a present for his friend, the painter Paul Gauguin. 
Gauguin and van Gogh were together in Arles for a month. Van 
Gogh was not strong mentally, and the relationship between them 
was difficult. After a big fight, van Gogh cut off his ear, and was in a 
mental hospital for some time. He died on the twenty-ninth of July 
eighteen ninety. He was only thirty-seven years old. His paintings 
weren’t popular during his lifetime and he was never rich or famous. 
But today people think that Vincent van Gogh is one of the greatest 
painters in the world, and his paintings, like Sunflowers, and The 
Starry Night, sell for millions of pounds.
EXTRA IDEA   If you have an interactive whiteboard 
connected to the internet, you could show Sts some of van 
Gogh’s paintings, especially Sunflowers and The Starry Night 
as they are mentioned in the audio.
c	 Focus on questions 1–8. Give Sts time to read all the 
questions and options and make sure they understand all 
the lexis, e.g. a present, complicated, died, unpopular. 
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  c    ​5  c    ​6  b    ​7  b    ​8  a
d	 Give Sts time to complete the chart with the highlighted 
verbs.
	 Check answers, and model and drill pronunciation, /wəz/, 
/wə/, /ˈwɒznt/, /wɜːnt/. 
was  were  wasn’t  weren’t
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.136. 
Grammar notes
was is the past of am and is, and were of are.
was and were are used to talk about both recent and 
distant completed actions in the past, e.g. I was tired this 
morning. Caesar was a Roman Emperor.
was and were are used exactly like is and are, i.e. they are 
inverted to make questions (he was › was he?) and not (n’t) 
is added to make negatives (wasn’t, weren’t). 
We use the passive construction was born to talk about 
the time and place of our birth.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 93@@
93
7A
	 e 7.2   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 7A on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	
1  She was    ​2  were you    ​3  I was    ​4  Was it    ​5  It wasn’t    ​
6  They weren’t    ​7  We were    ​8  They were    ​9  We weren’t    ​
10  I wasn’t
b	
1  were    ​2  Was    ​3  wasn’t    ​4  was    ​5  Were    ​6  were    ​7  was ​
8  was    ​9  Were    ​10  weren’t    ​11  was    ​12  was
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
was and were have two different pronunciations 
depending on whether they are stressed or not (i.e. they 
can have either a strong or weak pronunciation). 
was and were tend to have a weak pronunciation in 
positive sentences and questions: I was /wəz/ born in 1990. 
They were /wə/ famous. Was /wəz/ it expensive? The vowel 
sound in both words, as in most weak forms, is the schwa.
was / wasn’t and were / weren’t have a strong 
pronunciation in short answers and negative sentences: 
Yes, I was /wɒz/, No, I wasn’t /ˈwɒznt/, Yes, we were /wɜː/, 
No, we weren’t /wɜːnt/.
As pronunciation of strong and weak forms tends to occur 
quite naturally when there is good sentence stress and 
rhythm, it is best to concentrate your efforts on this (as 
in 2a).
a	 e 7.3  Focus on the sentences and remind Sts that the 
words in larger font are stressed and that the underlining 
shows the stress within a word. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 7.3
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.54
	 Now play it again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm. Give further 
practice as necessary.
b	 e 7.4  Tell Sts they are going to hear some sentences and 
questions in the present simple and they must say them 
in the past simple. Focus on the example, and highlight 
that the rhythm of the past simple sentence is the same 
as the present simple sentence, e.g. I’m at home, I was 
at home.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence / question, 
and elicit the past simple version from the whole class.
e 7.4
1	 I’m at home. (pause) I was at home.
2	 He’s American. (pause) He was American.
3	 They aren’t famous. (pause) They weren’t famous.
4	 It’s very cheap. (pause) It was very cheap.
5	 Where are they? (pause) Where were they?
6	 Is she an actress? (pause) Was she an actress?
7	 You’re right. (pause) You were right.
8	 What’s his name? (pause) What was his name?
9	 She isn’t happy. (pause) She wasn’t happy.
10	 Are they tired? (pause) Were they tired?
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3	READING  understanding the order of life events
a	 Focus on the self-portraits and photos on p.55 and ask Sts 
if they know any of the three people (They may know one 
or two, e.g. the singer Adele). Elicit anything they know, 
and tell them they are going to find out more about them 
when they read the texts.
	 Now ask the question to the class to elicit some opinions.
b	 Focus on the biographies and the events for each person 
and tell Sts that they need to number the events in the 
correct order. 
	 Give Sts time to read the biographies and number the 
events.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the biographies the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Kurt Vonnegut
1	 He was a soldier.
2	 Slaughterhouse-Five was a bestseller.
3	 He was a painter.
Billy Dee Williams
1	 He was an art student.
2	 He was in his first film.
3	 He was very successful as an actor.
Adele
1	 She wasn’t very interested in schoolwork.
2	 She was a student with singer Jessie J.
3	 19 was a bestseller.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c	 Give Sts time to read the biographies again.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to cover the biographies or 
close their books. Together they see how much they can 
remember about each person.
	 Elicit from the class as much information as possible about 
each person.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in small groups of three. Each 
student sees how much they can remember about one 
of the biographies whilst the other two Sts look at the 
biography and help if necessary.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell the 
class which of the self-portraits you like the most and why.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask the class if they know any other famous 
self-portraits and if they like them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 94@@
94
7A
d	 Focus on the words Alive and Dead in the circles. Elicit / 
Teach that they are opposites. Get Sts to write four names 
of famous people in each circle.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions 
about the names using either Who is / Who’s...? or Who 
was...? depending on whether the person is alive or dead.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by copying the 
circles on the board and writing the names of two people in 
each, and eliciting the questions from Sts.
5	SPEAKING
	 If you haven’t already focused on the title of the lesson, 
focus on the initial question and elicit the meaning of 
selfie. Point out the two possible answers, Yes and No. If 
you have some selfies on your phone, you could show  
the class. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask each other the 
questions. Encourage them to take their phones out and 
show their partner some of their selfies or other photos.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to think about their answers 
before putting them in pairs. Monitor and help.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. With a show of 
hands, find out how many Sts take selfies.
 
4	VOCABULARY  word formation
a	 Give Sts a few minutes to find the words in the 
biographies, or get them to guess first and then check 
with the texts.
	 Check answers, modelling the pronunciation and getting 
Sts to underline the stress.
1  writer    ​2  actor    ​3  singer    ​4  painter
	 Focus on the Word building box about professions and 
go through it with the class. Point out that to make the 
word for a person (e.g. writer) you add the letters -(e)r or 
-or to a verb and -ist or -ian to a noun. You might also 
want to point out that sometimes with nouns you have 
to make more changes, e.g. science – scientist (the ce 
disappears and a t is added).
b	 Tell Sts to first look at the group of words and decide if 
they are verbs or nouns. Then they should write the words 
for the jobs.
	 Get Sts to compare answers with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could first ask Sts to tell you whether 
group 1 is verbs or nouns (They are verbs). Then give Sts 
some time to add the correct ending. Then do the same for 
group 2.
c	 e 7.5   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check answers 
to b. Pause the audio after each word and get Sts to spell 
the endings to you. Write the answers on the board.
1	 verbs; composer, dancer, director, inventor
2	 nouns; artist, novelist, politician, scientist
e 7.5 
1	 composer, dancer, director, inventor
2	 artist, novelist, politician, scientist
	 Now play the audio again and this time Sts should 
underline the stress. 
	 Check answers by underlining the stress in the words on 
the board. 
1	 composer, dancer, director, inventor
2	 artist, novelist, politician, scientist
	 Finally, in pairs, Sts practise saying the words. If you think 
they need more practice, you could play the audio again 
for them to listen and repeat the words.
EXTRA IDEA   Test Sts’ memory by getting them to cover 
the words in a and b and then saying the noun / verb as a 
prompt, e.g.  
T  art  
Sts  artist. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit a famous name(s) for each of the 
professions in a and b (preferably a dead person). Elicit a full 
sentence for one, e.g. (X) was a famous writer. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 95@@
95
7B
	7B	 Wrong name, wrong place
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 They wanted to fly to Ibiza from Manchester.
2	 India’s stepfather
	 Finally, elicit some ideas for question 3.
b	 Now tell Sts they are going to read the second part of the 
story and they have to put it in order. Point out that the 
first paragraph (B) has been numbered for them.
	 Give Sts time to order the rest of the paragraphs.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  D    ​3  E    ​4  C    ​5  A    ​6  F
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.  
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit different 
opinions.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to order the 
sentences. Point out that the first one (C) has been done 
for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
e	 e 7.6  Tell Sts they are now going to hear the first part of 
the story, not just the sentences in d, and they must listen 
and check their answers.
	 Play the audio and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2  F    ​3  B    ​4  E    ​5  D    ​6  G    ​7  A
e 7.6 
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Kevin and his partner Jeanette live in Birmingham, England. Last 
year they decided to go on a winter holiday to Trinidad in the 
Caribbean, and they looked for flights online. They were very happy 
to find cheap flights – only eight hundred pounds return for the 
two of them. Kevin booked the flights and they started to plan their 
holiday.
On the day of their flight they arrived at Birmingham Airport and 
parked their car in the long-stay car park. Then they walked into 
the terminal building and tried to check in their bags. The check-in 
assistant looked at their boarding passes and asked where they 
wanted to go. ‘Trinidad,’ they replied. ‘We’re going there on holiday.’ 
The check-in assistant looked surprised.
f	 e 7.7  Before Sts listen to the rest of the story, ask them 
what they think might be the problem. Elicit some ideas.
	 Play the audio for Sts to hear the end of the story.
	 Check the answer.
They booked their flights from the wrong airport – Birmingham, 
Alabama, in the United States, instead of Birmingham, England.
 G   past simple: regular verbs
 V   past time expressions: three years ago, last week, etc. 
 P   -ed endings
Lesson plan
Past simple regular verbs are introduced in this lesson. The 
context is provided by two true stories of people having 
a problem with a flight. The lesson begins with a Reading 
about someone needing to change the surname on their 
ticket, and then Sts listen to a story about a couple having 
a problem when they arrive at the airport. These are used 
to present the past simple of regular verbs. Then there is 
a focus on the pronunciation of -ed endings. Vocabulary 
introduces past time expressions, and Grammar, Vocabulary 
and Pronunciation are put together in the final Speaking 
activity. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple: regular verbs p.187 
Communicative  Are we in Australia? p.233  
(instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  7B
Online Practice  7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts Do you have a passport, an ID card, or both? What 
information is in it?
Write ideas on the board, e.g.: 
FIRST NAME                        MIDDLE NAME(S) 
SURNAME                            NATIONALITY 
DATE OF BIRTH                   PLACE OF BIRTH
Explain that the first part of the lesson is about somebody 
who wanted to change something in their passport. 
1	READING & LISTENING  predicting the order 	
	 of events from existing knowledge
a	 Books open. Tell Sts that they are going to read and listen 
to two true stories. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
know what a flight is. Model and drill pronunciation.
	 Now go through questions 1–3 and check Sts know to fly, 
to book a ticket, and a booking. 
	 Give Sts time to read the beginning of the story and 
answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers for 1 and 2. Elicit / Explain that stepfather = a man 
who has married your mother, but who is not your father.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 96@@
96
7B
	 Now focus on the exercises for 7B on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
Correct any mispronunciation of the -ed ending. Get Sts to 
spell the verbs to you and write them on the board. 
a
1	 I studied English
2	 Did you listen to the news
3	 He didn’t cook
4	 Did she play sport
5	 They worked late
6	 She travelled a lot 
7	 Jack worked in New York
8	 I called my parents 
9	 We didn’t live in France 
 10	 Anna asked a lot of questions 
b	
1  didn’t call    ​2  Did…cry    ​3  played    ​4  didn’t listen    ​ 
5  Did…dance    ​6  booked
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and questionnaire, and explain 
the activity. Sts need to find a person who did each of 
the activities in the questionnaire yesterday. Elicit that Sts 
need to make the sentences into questions by adding 
Did you… and then putting the verb in the infinitive, e.g. 
Did you watch football on TV yesterday?
	 Tell Sts they are going to move around the classroom 
asking questions in the past simple to find out if people 
did the activities mentioned. If someone says yes, they 
should write that person’s name on the line on the left.
	 Focus on the speech bubbles and demonstrate the 
activity by asking the first question until someone says yes 
and then mime that you are writing down their name.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before starting the activity, you could get 
Sts to ask you all the questions first, making sure they don’t 
say, e.g. Did you watched football on TV yesterday?. Give simple 
answers that they can understand. 
With a large class, divide Sts into two separate groups.
	 Get Sts to stand up and move around the class asking 
questions. Stop the activity when someone gets a name 
for each statement or when you think Sts have had 
enough practice, and get some feedback from the class.
3	PRONUNCIATION  -ed endings
Pronunciation notes
The regular past simple ending (-ed) can be pronounced 
in three different ways:
1	 -ed is pronounced /t/ after verbs ending in these 
unvoiced sounds*: /k/, /p/, /f/, /s/, /ʃ/, /ʧ/, e.g. cooked, 
booked, laughed, missed, relaxed, stopped, washed, 
watched.
2	 After voiced endings* (all other consonant sounds 
except /d/ and /t/) -ed is pronounced /d/, e.g. arrived, 
called, changed, showed. This is the biggest group. Verbs 
which ends with consonant + y, e.g. study, carry, also 
belong to this group because the sound added is /d/.
e 7.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
C = check-in assistant, J = Jeanette, K = Kevin
C	 Where do you want to go?
J	 Trinidad. We’re going there on holiday.
C	 I’m sorry, but there are no flights from here to Trinidad.
K	 No flights? But we booked last month!
C	 Let me check your booking. Oh, I see. I’m really sorry, but your 
booking isn’t from this Birmingham. It’s from Birmingham 
Alabama, in the United States.
J	 No, it can’t be.
C	 I’m very sorry, but it is. Look, it says BHM – that’s the code for 
Birmingham Airport in the States. You can’t fly from here.
J	 I don’t believe it. Kevin, did you check the airport when you 
booked?
K	 Yeah. It was Birmingham. I didn’t check which Birmingham.
J	 You idiot!
C	 I’m very sorry, but you can’t fly today.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
g	 Make sure Sts understand the question. 
	 Do this as a whole-class activity. First, elicit some opinions 
for the first story about Adam and India, and then elicit 
some opinions about Kevin and Jeanette’s story. Ask 
Sts if they know anyone who had a problem when they 
booked flights online.
2	GRAMMAR  past simple: regular verbs
a	 Tell Sts to read 1b again and find the four past tense verbs. 
Make sure they know the meaning of reply.
	 Elicit the answers onto the board.
1  asked    ​2  decided    ​3  replied    ​4  didn’t want
b	 e 7.8   Now tell Sts to look at the question taken from the 
second story. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gap.
	 Check the answer.
did
e 7.8
J	 I don’t believe it. Kevin, did you check the airport when you 
booked?
K	 Yeah. It was Birmingham.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.136. 
Grammar notes
It is important to emphasize that the past simple is used 
for completed actions in the past, both distant and recent 
and which happened once or more than once. The 
form of regular past simple verbs is very easy. The main 
problem Sts have is the pronunciation, and remembering 
to use the infinitive, not the -ed form, after did / didn’t.
	 e 7.9   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class. You may want to point out here that 
the e is not normally pronounced in -ed endings unless 
there is a t or a d before it. This will be focused on more 
fully in Pronunciation.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 97@@
97
7B
Play the audio for them to check. 
/d/	
lived, played, travelled
/t/	
asked, cooked, finished, liked, stopped, watched, worked
/ɪd/	 ended, painted, started
c	 e 7.12  Focus on the speech bubble and explain to Sts 
that they are going to hear some verb phrases and they 
must make either a positive sentence or a negative one 
depending on what they really did yesterday.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each verb phrase. Elicit 
sentences from a few Sts before moving on to the next 
phrase.
e 7.12
1	 play tennis
2	 travel by train
3	 cook lunch
4	 wait for a bus
5	 play the guitar
6	 study English
7	 watch TV
8	 listen to music
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  past time 
expressions
a	 Write a true sentence about yourself in the past with a 
regular verb, e.g. I started teaching English in 1999. Then write 
underneath it I started teaching English (x) years ago, and 
elicit the meaning of ago. Model and drill pronunciation. 
	 Focus on the past time expressions, and explain that Sts 
must number them from the most recent (five minutes 
ago) to the most distant (in 2017). Give Sts time to do the 
activity and get them to check their order with a partner.
b	 e 7.13   Go through the Past time expressions box with 
the class and highlight that in time expressions with last 
(e.g. last week) the definite article the is not used. Also 
explain that we say last night NOT yesterday night.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 7.13
1	 five minutes ago
2	 last night
3	 yesterday morning
4	 the day before yesterday
5	 three days ago
6	 last week
7	 last month
8	 last summer
9	 a year ago
10	 in 2017
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
c	 Focus on the instructions and the sentences. Make sure 
Sts understand the question When was the last time?.
	 Give Sts time to write a time expression for each activity.
d	 Tell Sts they will now tell each other when they did each 
activity. Focus on the example.
	 Put Sts in pairs and set a time limit.
	 Monitor and help. Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 Get some feedback by getting individual Sts to tell you an 
activity they did and asking a few extra questions.
3	 After verbs ending in /d/ or /t/ the pronunciation of -ed 
is /ɪd/, e.g. wanted, chatted, needed, decided. This group 
is very small.
In practice, the difference between 1 and 2 is very small 
and can only be appreciated when a verb is said in 
isolation or is followed by a word beginning with a vowel 
(e.g. I liked it). 
However, the difference between 3 and the other two is 
significant (it is an extra syllable) and many Sts tend to 
pronounce all past simple verbs in this way, e.g. /ˈlaɪkɪd/,  
/ˈstɒpɪd/, etc.
Voiced and unvoiced consonants
•	 Voiced consonant sounds are made by vibrating 
the vocal chords, e.g. /b/, /l/, /m/, /v/, etc. Unvoiced 
consonant sounds are made without vibration in the 
throat, e.g. /p/, /k/, /t/, /s/, etc.
•	 You can demonstrate this to Sts by getting them 
to hold their hands against their throats. For voiced 
sounds they should feel a vibration in their throat, but 
not for unvoiced sounds.
a	 e 7.10  Focus on the Past simple regular verbs box and 
go through it with the class. Elicit / Explain that there are 
three different ways of pronouncing -ed. Two are similar 
(/d/ and /t/), but the third /ɪd/ is very different. 
	 Focus on the phonetics which show the three different 
pronunciations of -ed (/d/, /t/, and /ɪd/). Then look at the 
sentences for each pronunciation and play the audio 
once. Tell Sts to listen and concentrate on how the -ed is 
pronounced.
e 7.10 
See chart in Student’s Book on p.57
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat. 
	 Ask Sts the question In which group do you pronounce the 
‘e’ in -‘ed’? (group 3). 
	 Tell Sts to look at the spelling of the verbs in group 3, and 
see what letters come before the -ed (d or t). Explain / 
Demonstrate that it would be impossible to pronounce 
another /d/ or /t/ after a d or a t. For that reason an extra 
syllable is added, which is why the pronunciation here is  
/ɪd/. Emphasize that this group of verbs is very small.
	 Highlight that the most important rule to remember is not 
to pronounce the e in -ed (unless it comes after a t or d).
b	 e 7.11  Tell Sts to look at the verbs in the list and circle 
the ones which have the /ɪd/ sound in the past simple. 
Remind Sts that an exercise like this is easier if they say the 
verbs aloud.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
ended, painted, started
e 7.11
See list of verbs in Student’s Book on p.57
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to look at all the verbs again and 
then to try and put them in the appropriate columns in a. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 98@@
98
7C
	7C	 Happy New Year?
	 Give Sts time to read the stories again and complete the 
six sentences with an initial.
	 Check answers.
1  J    ​2  A    ​3  M    ​4  A    ​5  M    ​6  J
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 If your Sts come from the same country, do this as a 
whole-class activity. If your Sts come from different 
countries, put them in pairs or small groups to discuss the 
questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts come from different countries, give 
them time to make notes about New Year’s Eve celebrations 
in their country. Monitor and help with vocabulary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs / groups. If you 
don’t come from the same country as your Sts, tell them 
how people celebrate New Year’s Eve in your country.
2	GRAMMAR  past simple: irregular verbs
a	 Focus on the 15 infinitives and check Sts remember 
their meaning. Then put Sts in pairs and give them a few 
minutes to find the past simple forms in the stories. Point 
out that the first one (bought) has been done for them.
Encourage Sts to use the phonetics to help them.
b	 e 7.14  Write the infinitives on the board. Play the audio, 
pausing after each verb to check answers. Get Sts to spell 
the verbs to you and write the past simples on the board 
next to the infinitives. 
See verbs in bold in script 7.14
e 7.14
buy	
bought
can	
could
come	
came
drink	
drank
feel	
felt
find	
found
get	
got
go	
went
have	
had
know	
knew
put on	
put on
say	
said
take	
took
think	
thought
wear	
wore
	 Focus on the phonetics and tell Sts to listen to the 
pronunciation. Play the audio again, pausing after each 
infinitive and past tense for Sts to repeat them. Give more 
practice as necessary, getting Sts to repeat after you or 
after the audio. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Focus on the phonetics and elicit the 
pronunciation of the verbs before playing the audio. 
	 Get Sts to cover the past simple verb and see if they can 
remember it, uncovering them one by one to check their 
answers. 
 G   past simple: irregular verbs 
 V   go, have, get 
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is New Year’s Eve. Three blogs about 
memorable New Year’s Eves (good and bad!) provide the 
context for the introduction of past simple irregular verbs. 
The vocabulary focus is common collocations of the key 
verbs go, have, and get (e.g. go out, get home, etc.). Then Sts 
listen to a fourth person talking about a memorable New 
Year’s Eve in Brazil. Sts then work on the stress pattern in  
Wh- questions in the past simple, which prepares them for 
the final Speaking and Writing activity, where Sts ask each 
other about a memorable New Year’s Eve and then write 
about it.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple: irregular verbs p.188 
Vocabulary  go, have, get p.270 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  Born on 31st December p.234 
(instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  7C
Online Practice  7C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board 31ST DECEMBER, 1ST JANUARY. Ask Sts if they 
know what these days are called in English, and elicit New 
Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day. 
Ask Sts what they usually do on New Year’s Eve.
1	READING
a	 Books open. Focus on the photos and the questions. If you 
didn’t do the Optional lead-in, elicit when New Year’s Eve 
is (31st December). Elicit answers to the second question. 
If you don’t come from the same country as your Sts, tell 
them if New Year’s Eve is an important occasion in your 
country.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the three 
options. 
	 You may want to pre-teach the past of go (went), midnight, 
and a lift to help Sts understand the stories.
	 Give Sts time to read all three stories.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the stories the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Jenny had a great evening. Andy had an OK evening. Mina had a 
terrible evening.
c	 Focus on the task and the six sentences. You might want 
to check Sts know the meaning of alone.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 99@@
99
7C
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank go, have, get on p.160 
and get them to do a individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to tell Sts that get is one of the most 
common verbs in English partly because it has many 
different meanings. The most common are buy (as in get 
a newspaper), receive (as in get an email), arrive (as in get 
home) and take (as in get a taxi).
Remind Sts that go home = go to your house, get home = 
arrive at your house. 
	 e 7.16   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 7.16
go
8	 go by bus 
1	 go for a walk
5	 go home
 10	 go out
9	 go shopping
2	 go to a restaurant
 11	 go to bed
7	 go to church
3	 go to the beach
6	 go back
4	 go on holiday
have
 15	 have a car
 12	 have long hair
 18	 have breakfast
 14	 have a drink
 13	 have a good time
 16	 have a sandwich
 17	 have a shower
get
 20	 get a newspaper
 23	 get a taxi 
 19	 get an email
 21	 get dressed
 25	 get home
 22	 get to the airport
 24	 get up
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words or phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce
	 Focus on c. Get Sts to cover the verb phrases and use the 
photos to test themselves or each other. Encourage them 
to say the complete phrase. 
	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to take it in 
turns to say five things they did the previous day and five 
the previous week. All the sentences should include went, 
had, or got. Get some feedback.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7C. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7C on p.136. 
Grammar notes
The vast majority of verbs in the past are regular. However, 
a small number of verbs (several of which are very 
common) are irregular in the past simple. These verbs 
don’t add -ed in the past, they change their form. This 
change can be just one or two letters, e.g. wear › wore, or 
can be a completely new word, e.g. go › went. Some verbs 
don’t change their form, e.g. cost, put, etc. The verb read is 
spelled the same, but pronounced differently.
Irregular verbs are only irregular in the affirmative. In 
questions and negatives, as with regular verbs, the 
infinitive is used after did / didn’t. 
There is a list of the most common irregular verbs on p.165 
of the Student’s Book. 
	 e 7.15   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the can / could box and go through it with the 
class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 7C on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
!   Monitor while Sts are doing the exercises. If you see they 
are having problems with word order in c, remind them of 
QuASI and ASI (see p.50 of this book).
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1	 She didn’t wear a red dress. She wore a blue dress.
2	 I didn’t come home early. I came home late.
3	 We didn’t go by train. We went by bus.
4	 He didn’t say hello. He said goodbye.
5	 You didn’t have a sandwich. You had a salad.
6	 He didn’t know her surname. He knew her first name.
b
1  had    ​2  took    ​3  were    ​4  went    ​5  could    ​6  had    ​7  got    ​
8  felt    9  were
c
1  did you wear    ​2  did she buy    ​3  did you get home
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	VOCABULARY  go, have, get
a	 Focus on the three verbs in the heading and elicit the past 
simple (went, had, got). 
	 Give Sts a moment to decide which verb goes in 
each gap.
	 Check answers.
1  went    ​2  had    ​3  got    ​4  had    ​5  went    ​6  got
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 100@@
100
7C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. You could also 
tell Sts whether you would like to spend New Year’s Eve in 
Rio, and if not where.
5	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
a	 Go through the instructions and focus on the questions. 
	 Give Sts time in pairs or individually to complete the 
questions.
	 Check answers.
1  was    ​2  were    ​3  were you    ​4  did you    ​5  did you    ​6  did 
you    ​7  did you    ​8  did you    ​9  was    ​10  did you    ​11  Did you
b	 e 7.18   Play the audio once for Sts just to listen and focus 
on the rhythm. 
e 7.18
1	 When was it?
2	 Where were you?
3	 Who were you with?
4	 Where did you have dinner? 
5	 What did you wear?
6	 What did you do before midnight?
7	 What did you do at midnight?
8	 What did you do after midnight?
9	 How was the weather?
10	 What time did you go to bed?
11	 Did you have a good time?
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each question for 
Sts to listen and repeat, trying to copy the rhythm. 
6	SPEAKING & WRITING
a	 Give Sts a few minutes individually to think about their 
own answers to the questions in 5a. Help with any new 
vocabulary they might need.
EXTRA IDEA   If your Sts don’t celebrate New Year’s Eve, they 
could discuss and write about another important event, 
such as a wedding or a special night out.
b	 Put Sts in pairs. Get Sts A to give Sts B a complete 
‘interview’ and then swap roles. Monitor the interviews, 
encouraging Sts to ask their questions with good 
sentence stress and rhythm. Help with any new 
vocabulary that Sts need and correct as necessary.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to interview you about a memorable 
New Year’s Eve before they interview each other. 
	 Get feedback, asking a few pairs whose night was more 
memorable / fun / interesting, etc. 
c	 Sts now write an article similar to the ones they read in 1. 
Tell them they need to answer all the questions in 5a 
and they should look back at Mina’s, Jenny’s, and Andy’s 
memorable New Year’s Eves in 1 to help them.
	 Once Sts have finished, they should spend a few minutes 
checking their story, before handing it to another student 
to read or to you. 
4	LISTENING  understanding extra information
a	 e 7.17   Focus on the photo and the task. Elicit / Teach the 
meaning and pronunciation of memorable /ˈmemərəbl/ 
(= easy to remember because it is special). Tell Sts to close 
their books, relax and listen, and just focus on where 
Denisa was at midnight.
	 Play the audio once, and elicit the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Denisa was on the beach in Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil.
e 7.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
F = friend, D = Denisa
F	 What was your best ever New Year’s Eve? One you always 
remember?
D	 Oh, definitely twenty fourteen, when I was in Rio. 
F	 Who were you with?
D	 I was with my boyfriend Marcelo, who’s Brazilian. 
F	 Why was it so special?
D	 Well, Brazil has special traditions for New Year’s Eve, and they were 
all new for me. For example, it’s a Brazilian tradition to wear white 
clothes for New Year’s Eve because white is a symbol of peace, so I 
wore a beautiful white dress, which Marcelo’s mother bought me. 
I have a photo somewhere on my phone. Yes, here, look! 
F	 How lovely. So what did you do?
D	 Er, let me think. Well, first we had a typical New Year’s Eve dinner 
with Marcelo’s family. And then, I suppose it was about ten, we 
got a bus to Copacabana. 
F	 What was the atmosphere like there?
D	 Oh, it was amazing! The streets were already full of people. We 
went to a show at a place near the beach. It was great, and we 
danced samba. 
F	 Wow. Were you there at midnight?
D	 No, no. When we saw it was nearly midnight, we went to the 
beach, and the typical countdown started, you know – ten, nine, 
eight…Happy New Year! Everywhere we heard the sound of 
people opening champagne, and we watched the wonderful 
fireworks. 
F	 It sounds great. What did people do when the fireworks finished?
D	 Most people went to other parties, or they went home. 
F	 And what about you?
D	 We decided to go to a different beach, a beach called Praia do 
Arpoador, and we had our first swim of the new year. It was 
magical.
b	 Focus on the people and things in 1–8, and make sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Give Sts time in pairs or individually to see what they can 
remember.
c	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check. Play 
it again if necessary, pausing after she mentions each 
person or thing.
	 Check answers.
1	 Marcelo – is her Brazilian boyfriend.
2	 She wore white clothes because it’s a Brazilian tradition.
3	 Marcelo’s mother bought the dress.
4	 They had a typical dinner with Marcelo’s family.
5	 They got a bus to Copacabana.
6	 They went to a show at a place near the beach and danced 
samba.
7	 When it was nearly midnight, they went to the beach and 
watched fireworks.
8	 They had their first swim of the New Year at another beach 
called Praia do Arpoador.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 101@@
101
PE4
e 7.19
R = Rob, J = Jenny, D = Daniel
R	 So, Jenny, we have a free morning. What do you want to do?
J	 Well, you’re the expert on London life! What do you suggest?
R	 Well, we can go cycling.
J	 I don’t have a bike.
R	 We can rent bikes. It’s easy. 
J	 That’s cool.
R	 OK, great. So we can cycle through the parks, and you can see a 
bit of London. Oh, hang on. Uh oh. It’s Daniel. Daniel, hi!
D	 Hi, Rob. You need to do an interview this morning with an artist. 
He’s at the Tate Modern.
R	 Can I do the interview on Monday? 
D	 Sorry, he can only do this morning. 
R	 OK, send me the details. 
D	 Thank you very much, Rob. 
R	 I’m sorry. 
J	 That’s OK, I understand. Work is work! 
R	 But I can meet you later, outside the Tate Modern. It’s on the 
South Bank. 
J	 I can find it. I have a map, I can cycle there.
R	 Let’s meet at twelve o’clock then. 
J	 Great.
b	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and give Sts time to read them 
and think what the missing information might be.
	 Before Sts watch or listen again, focus on the Glossary. 
You could tell Sts that the official name is ‘Tate Modern’ 
but a lot of people call it ‘the Tate Modern’. You could also 
tell Sts that the Tate Modern is London’s most important 
gallery of modern art. It was created in 2000 from an old 
building, which used to be a power station. If they would 
like more information, see www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-
modern.
	 Play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
pausing if necessary for Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play again if 
necessary. 
	 Check answers.
1  cycling    ​2  rent    ​3  Daniel, Rob    ​4  artist    ​5  Monday    ​
6  twelve
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
Function  asking the way
Vocabulary  directions
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts get practice with directions. The focus is 
more on asking for and understanding directions than on 
giving them, as this is a difficult skill to perform at this level. 
Rob and Jenny have a free morning, and Rob plans to hire 
bikes and show Jenny some of London. But then Daniel calls 
and asks Rob to interview an artist at the Tate Modern. Jenny 
agrees to meet Rob at the gallery and ventures into London 
on her own and gets lost.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 4  
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 4 
                     Can you remember? 1–7
Online Practice  Practical English 4 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 4, elicit what Sts can remember about 
Episode 3, e.g. ask them What happens when Rob and Jenny 
meet in the street? What does Rob buy? Does Jenny like it? Who 
does Jenny talk to on the phone when Rob’s in the shop?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 3.
1	r A FREE MORNING
a	 e 7.19   Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit what 
Sts think is happening. Don’t tell them if they are right or 
not yet.
	 Now focus on the question and play the video / audio 
once the whole way through for Sts to check their ideas.
	 Check the answer.
Rob and Jenny want to go sightseeing, but Daniel phones Rob 
and asks him to do an interview that morning.
EPISODE
	 4	
Practical English  Getting lost
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 102@@
102
PE4
	 Now check how many people she asks.
She asks three people.
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit that 
You say is what Jenny says and the You hear phrases are 
said by three different people in the street, who she asks 
for directions. The You say phrases will be useful for Sts if 
they need to ask for directions.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Sorry    ​2  where    ​3  past    ​4  left    ​5  miss
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. Highlight that Can you tell me the way to…, 
please? is the typical question to ask for directions.
c	 e 7.22   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases.
e 7.22
Same as script 7.21 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is Jenny and B plays the parts of 
all the passers-by. Get Sts to read the conversation aloud, 
and then swap roles.
	 Focus on the Can you…? or Could you…? box and go 
through it with the class.
e	 In pairs, Sts role-play asking for and giving simple 
directions using the map on p.60. Go through the 
instructions with Sts, making sure they starts where Jenny 
is on the map. Sts A starts saying Excuse me. Where’s…?.
	 Monitor and help with any issues relating to directions. 
Make sure Sts swap roles.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by getting a 
confident student to ask you for directions to somewhere on 
the map.
EXTRA IDEA   Give Sts clear directions from the school to a 
nearby restaurant, shop or landmark, and see if they can 
work out where it is.
2	r VOCABULARY  directions
a	 Focus on the phrases and pictures and get Sts to 
match them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 7.20   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.20
3	 on the corner
1	 at the traffic lights
5	 a bridge
7	 opposite
2	 turn left
4	 turn right
9	 go straight on
6	 go past the church
8	 at the end of the street
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. Give further practice of the phrases your Sts 
find difficult to pronounce. 
	 Highlight that when opposite is used to describe the 
position of a building, it usually means ‘facing on the other 
side of the road’. Get an example by asking Sts what there 
is opposite your school.
c	 Tell Sts to cover the phrases and use the pictures to test 
themselves or a partner.
3	r ASKING THE WAY
a	 e 7.21   Focus on the instructions and the map. Make 
sure Sts can see where Jenny is.
	 Tell Sts that they are going to hear Jenny asking for 
directions and they need to listen to the directions and 
try to mark the Tate Modern on the map. Play the video / 
audio at least twice.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check that 
they have marked the right building. 
!   The map in the Student’s Book has been adapted and is 
impressionistic rather than strictly accurate.
It’s B.
e 7.21 e 7.22 
J = Jenny, P = passer-by
J	 Excuse me, please. (repeat) Where’s the Tate Modern? (repeat)
P1	Sorry, I don’t live here. 
J	 Excuse me. Is the Tate Modern near here? (repeat)
P2	The Tate Modern? It’s near here, but I don’t know exactly where. 
Sorry.
J	 Thank you. (repeat) 
J	 Excuse me. Can you tell me the way to the Tate Modern, please? 
(repeat)
P3	Yes, of course. Go straight on. Go past the church, then turn left at 
the traffic lights. And it’s at the end of the street.
J	 Sorry, could you say that again, please? (repeat)
P3	Yes, go straight on. Go past the church, and then turn left at the 
traffic lights. And it’s at the end of the street. You can’t miss it!
J	 Thank you. (repeat)
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 103@@
103
PE4
c	 e 7.24   Play the video / audio for Sts to listen to the eight 
phrases and check.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases. 
1  J    ​2  R    ​3  J    ​4  R    ​5  D    ​6  J    ​7  D    ​8  R
e 7.24
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.61
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  4    ​B  2    ​C  7    ​D  5    ​E  1    ​F  8    ​G  3    ​H  6
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language. 
4	r JENNY AND ROB GO SIGHTSEEING
a	 e 7.23   Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where are Rob and Jenny? What’s happening?, etc.
	 Tell Sts that they are on the bank of the River Thames in 
central London, outside the Tate Modern.
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and go through them with Sts. 
Tell Sts that the Millennium Bridge is a bridge over the 
Thames, which was built to celebrate the year 2000. Check 
Sts understand gift shop, the top floor, and power station.
	 Then play the video / audio for Sts to choose the correct 
option.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  The Millennium    ​2  100    ​3  Shakespeare    ​4  can’t    ​
5  restaurant    ​6  power
e 7.23
R = Rob, J = Jenny, D = Daniel
R	 Sorry about the weather.
J	 Yeah… but what a view! It’s a great bridge, too.
R	 It’s the Millennium Bridge. It’s not for cars, only for people. It was 
the first new bridge over the Thames in one hundred years.
J	 You sound like a tour guide! 
R	 Sorry… I interviewed the architect last year. So what would you 
like to visit?
J	 What is there to see?
R	 Well, we could see the Tate Modern first as we’re here, and then 
we could go to the Globe Theatre. Do you like Shakespeare?
J	 Not really. I studied too much Shakespeare in college. It’s Daniel. 
Sorry. Hi, Daniel.
D	 Hi, Jennifer. How’s your free day? Are you enjoying London?
J	 Absolutely. It’s fantastic.
D	 Listen, I have some free time today. Would you like to meet for 
lunch?
J	 That’s really nice of you, Daniel, but I’m sorry, I can’t. I’m really far 
away from the office right now.
D	 That’s OK. No problem. Maybe another time?
J	 Definitely. Bye.
R	 What did he want? Anything important?
J	 Not at all. Hey, let’s go inside the Tate Modern now.
R	 Yes, of course. There’s a great restaurant on the top floor. The view 
is fantastic. The Tate Modern was a power station until 1981. Did 
you know that?
J	 I didn’t. Do you know anything else about the Tate Modern?
R	 Thank you for asking, I know a lot about it actually...
J	 Oh, great!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
b	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 104@@
104
8A
	8A	 A murder mystery
 G   past simple: regular and irregular
 V   irregular verbs
 P   past simple verbs
Lesson plan
The aim of this lesson is to revise all forms of the past simple, 
regular and irregular, through the context of a murder story. 
The lesson begins with a description of the story, which 
introduces the characters and several new past forms of 
irregular verbs. A pronunciation focus then revises the 
pronunciation of irregular and regular past forms. Sts then 
hear more of the story, this time on audio, as part of a TV 
adaptation, when the inspector interviews the suspects. Sts 
decide who they think the murderer was before hearing 
what actually happened. This part of the lesson will work 
best if you can generate and maintain suspense, so that Sts 
want to find out who the murderer was. After the murder 
story, there is a grammar focus pulling together and revising 
the past simple. The lesson finishes with an extended 
Speaking activity where Sts role-play trying to break down 
the alibi of a robbery suspect. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple: regular and irregular verbs p.189 
Communicative  Past simple question time p.236 
(instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  8A
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write DETECTIVE NOVELS AND TV SERIES on the board and elicit 
names from Sts. 
Now ask Sts What usually happens in these books or series? 
(A murder), How do the police or detectives find out who the 
murderer is? (They question everyone and look for  
evidence.), etc. 
Then get Sts, in pairs, to ask each other which of the novels 
or TV series they like.
Finally, tell Sts that they are going to read and listen to a 
murder mystery.
1	READING
a	 Books open. Focus on the photo of the house and ask  
Sts a few questions, e.g. What is it? How old do you think it 
is? Where do you think it is? and elicit ideas / suggestions. 
Elicit / Explain what a country house is.
	 Then focus on the task, explaining the meaning and 
pronunciation of murder /ˈmɜːdə/, victim /ˈvɪktɪm/,  
and a suspect /ˈsʌspekt/. 
	 Focus on the photos of the victim and suspects, and 
give Sts a few minutes to read the information about the 
murder. 
	 Focus on the speech bubbles and get Sts to cover the 
text and practise saying, in pairs, who everybody is in 
relation to Jeremy, e.g. Who’s Claudia? (She’s Jeremy’s 
secretary). This will help Sts to remember who’s who as 
they read / listen to the story, and also revises the use of 
the possessive ’s.
EXTRA SUPPORT   In their pairs, A covers the text and B looks 
at the text to help A. They then swap roles.
	 Ask a few comprehension questions, e.g. On what day 
does the story take place? (On 23rd June), Who is the main 
character and murder victim? (Jeremy Travers), Why was 
22nd June an important day for him? (It was his birthday), 
What did he do that night? (He had dinner with his wife, his 
daughter, and two guests). 
	 Ask Sts Who do you think the murderer is? and elicit ideas / 
suggestions. 
b	 e 8.1  Now focus on the story, and tell Sts that they are 
going to read the story and listen to it at the same time. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to read and listen. Then set a time 
limit and get Sts, in pairs, to re-read the story and mark 
sentences 1–7 T (true) or F (false). They must also correct 
the false ones.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to say why the F sentences  
are false. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 F (Somebody killed Jeremy between 11.45 p.m. and 8.00 a.m.)
2	 F (The inspector questioned Amanda in the library.)
3	 T
4	 F (Amanda and Jeremy slept in different rooms.)
5	 F (Somebody opened and closed Jeremy’s door.)
6	 F (Amanda got up at about 7.15.)
7	 T
e 8.1
See story in Student’s Book on p.62
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary, e.g. moustache, 
library (contrast it with bookshop), and asleep, but leave 
the new irregular verbs as Sts are about to focus on them. 
Model and drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 105@@
105
8A
2	PRONUNCIATION  past simple verbs
a	 Focus Sts’ attention on the instructions and on the 
highlighted irregular verbs in the story. Point out that the 
first three have been done for them. 
	 In pairs, Sts write the infinitives – tell them that the 
context will help them to guess the ones they don’t know.
b	 e 8.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation. 
Pay particular attention to said /sed/, which has an 
unexpected pronunciation, and read /red/, which is 
spelled but not pronounced like the infinitive.
e 8.2
1	 be	
was
2	 be	
were
3	 come	
came
4	 say	
said
5	 speak	
spoke
6	 sit	
sat
7	 go	
went
8	 sleep	
slept
9	 see	
saw
10	 hear	
heard
11	 think	
thought
12	 read	
read
13	 get up	
got up
14	 have	
had
15	 take	
took
16	 find	
found
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
c	 e 8.3  Remind Sts how regular past simple verbs end 
(-ed) – see Pronunciation notes in 7B on pp.96–97. Get 
them to underline the nine regular past simple verbs in 
the story. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to say how they think the 
endings are pronounced.
  /d/  arrived, died, killed, followed, opened, closed
  /t/  looked, finished
  /ɪd/  hated
e 8.3
arrived	
Inspector Granger arrived.
died	
Mr Travers died.
killed	
Somebody killed him.
looked	
He looked at them.
followed	
She followed him.
finished	
We finished dinner.
opened	
The door opened.
closed	
The door closed.
hated	
I hated him.
	 Tell Sts that the phrases they hear aren’t exactly the same 
as the phrases in the story, so they must listen and repeat 
the phrases carefully. Now play the audio again for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Give Sts more practice if necessary.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to predict how the -ed is 
pronounced for each verb, /d/, /t/ or /ɪd/. Then play the 
audio for them to check. 
3	LISTENING  taking notes and comparing 	
	 information
a	 e 8.4, 8.5, 8.6  Focus on the chart and elicit / explain the 
meaning of motive. Highlight that the names at the top 
are all the suspects in the murder mystery. Elicit from Sts 
that Amanda is Jeremy’s wife, and point out to Sts that her 
answers to the inspector’s questions have been written 
in the chart. Explain that Sts are now going to hear the 
inspector interview the other three suspects, Barbara, 
Gordon, and Claudia. Sts have to complete the chart. 
	 Ask Who’s Barbara? (Jeremy’s daughter). Then play audio 
e 8.4 twice for Sts to complete the chart. Get Sts to 
compare their answers with a partner between each 
listening.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 8.4
(script in Student’s Book on pp.120–121)
N = narrator, I = inspector, B = Barbara
N	 Then the inspector questioned Barbara Travers.
I	 What did you do after dinner yesterday evening?
B	 After dinner? I played cards with Gordon, and then I went to bed.
I	 What time was that?
B	 It was about half past eleven. I remember, I looked at my watch.
I	 Did you hear anything in your father’s room?
B	 No. I didn’t hear anything.
I	 Miss Travers, did you have any problems with your father?
B	 No, I didn’t have any problems with him at all. Daddy was a 
wonderful man and…a wonderful father. I’m sorry, Inspector.
I	 Don’t worry, Miss Travers. No more questions.
	 Ask Who’s Gordon? (Jeremy’s business partner). Then play 
audio e 8.5 twice for Sts to complete the chart. Again, 
get Sts to compare their answers with a partner between 
each listening.
e 8.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
N = narrator, I = inspector, G = Gordon
N	 Next the inspector questioned Gordon Summers.
I	 What did you do after dinner, Gordon?
G	 I played cards with Barbara. Then she went to bed.
I	 Did you go to bed then?
G	 No. I stayed in the living room and I had a glass of whisky. Then I 
went to bed.
I	 What time was that?
G	 I don’t remember exactly. I didn’t look at the time.
I	 Did you hear anything during the night?
G	 No, I didn’t. I was very tired. I slept very well.
I	 You and Mr Travers were business partners, weren’t you?
G	 Yes, that’s right.
I	 And it’s a very good business, I understand.
G	 Yes, Inspector, it is.
I	 And now it’s your business.
G	 Listen, Inspector, I did not kill Jeremy. He was my partner and he 
was my friend.
	 Ask Who’s Claudia? (Jeremy’s secretary). Then play audio 
e 8.6 twice for Sts to complete the chart. Get Sts to 
compare their answers with a partner between each 
listening. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 106@@
106
8A
c	 e 8.7  Play the audio for Sts to see if they were right. 
Pause the audio after Amanda says Dinner everybody, and 
ask comprehension questions, e.g. What happened before 
dinner? What did Gordon tell Jeremy?, etc., to make sure Sts 
are following the story. 
	 Now play the last part. Repeat it from the beginning if Sts 
want to hear it again. 
	 Elicit who the murderer is and why he / she killed Mr 
Travers.
The murderer was Gordon. He killed Jeremy because he 
wanted to marry Barbara. He says he was in love with her, but 
he probably wanted to marry her because her father was rich. 
Jeremy said that he couldn’t. He said, ‘If you marry Barbara, all my 
money goes to Claudia.’
e 8.7
N = narrator, I = inspector, J = Jeremy, A = Amanda
N	 Before dinner, Gordon had a drink with Jeremy in the library.
G	 Cheers, Jeremy. Happy Birthday.
J	 Ah, thanks, Gordon.
G	 Listen, Jeremy, I want to talk to you about Barbara.
J	 Barbara? What’s the problem?
G	 It’s not exactly a problem. I’m in love with her, and I want to marry 
her.
J	 Marry Barbara? Marry my daughter! Are you crazy? Never! You 
don’t love Barbara. You only want her money!
G	 That’s not true, Jeremy. I love her.
J	 Listen to me. If you marry Barbara, when I die all my money goes 
to Claudia. 
G	 To Claudia? To your secretary?
J	 Yes.
G	 Is that your last word, Jeremy?
J	 Yes, it is.
A	 Dinner, everybody!
N	 At midnight, Gordon was in the living room. He finished his whisky 
and went upstairs. 
J	 Who is it? Gordon? What are you...
EXTRA SUPPORT   Finally, you could play the three interviews 
again and get Sts to listen and read the scripts on pp.120–
121, so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
e 8.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
N = narrator, I = inspector, C = Claudia
N	 Finally, the inspector questioned Claudia Pasquale.
I	 What did you do yesterday evening, after dinner?
C	 I went to my room and I had a bath and I went to bed.
I	 What time was that?
C	 About eleven o’clock.
I	 Did you hear anything?
C	 Yes. I heard somebody go into Jeremy’s room. It was about twelve 
o’clock.
I	 Who was it?
C	 It was Amanda, his wife.
I	 Are you sure? Did you see her?
C	 Well no, I didn’t see her. But I’m sure it was Amanda.
I	 You were Mr Travers’s secretary, Claudia.
C	 Yes, I was.
I	 Were you just his secretary?
C	 What do you mean?
I	 Were you in love with Mr Travers?
C	 No, I wasn’t.
I	 The truth, please, Claudia.
C	 Very well, Inspector. Yes, I was in love with him and he said he was 
in love with me. He said he wanted to leave his wife – Amanda – 
and marry me. I was stupid. I believed him. But he didn’t leave her. 
He used me, Inspector! I was very angry with him. 
I	 Did you kill him?
C	 No, Inspector, I loved Jeremy.
b	 Now get Sts to compare charts in pairs.
	 Check answers. You could copy these onto the board. 
Barbara
She played cards with Gordon.
11.30.
No.
No motive – she loved him.
Gordon
He played cards with Barbara. Then he stayed in the living room 
and had a glass of whisky.
He doesn’t remember.
No.
He wanted the business for himself.
Claudia
She went to her room and had a bath.
About 11.00.
She heard somebody go into Jeremy’s room at about 12.00. She 
thinks it was Amanda, but she didn’t see her.
She was in love with Jeremy, but Jeremy didn’t leave his wife, 
Amanda.
	 Tell Sts to look at their completed charts again and, in 
pairs, decide who they think the murderer is (they don’t 
have to agree). 
	 Write the names of the four suspects on the board, and 
get a show of hands for each suspect. Elicit a few reasons 
for each suspect.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 107@@
107
8A
d	 Now tell Sts to go to Irregular verbs on p.165. Tell Sts that 
this is their reference list of irregular verbs. Explain that 
there are three columns, because irregular verbs also have 
irregular past participles, but that for the moment, they 
should just concentrate on the first two columns. 
	 You could go through them one by one, eliciting / 
teaching the meaning of any new ones, and getting Sts to 
tick the ones they already know. Tell them to choose three 
new verbs to learn, and tell them they should try to learn 
at least three more new ones every week. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
5	SPEAKING
!   This activity will take at least 15–20 minutes. If you don’t 
have time this lesson, do it next lesson. 
	 Put Sts into groups of four, and then into pairs. Assign 
two the role of A (police officers) and two the role of B 
(friends / suspects). If you have odd numbers, have extra 
As (i.e. three police officers and two suspects). 
	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Police interview, A on 
p.106, B on p.111. 
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Then give at 
least five minutes for Sts A to look at the police interview 
form and prepare their questions. Tell them to think of 
more questions. At the same time, Sts B prepare their 
alibis by working out where they were the previous night.
	 When they are ready, re-divide the groups of four so that 
each A is with a different B. If possible, tell Sts A to take 
their suspects to different ends of the classroom to be 
interviewed. (It doesn’t matter if they are near other police 
officers / suspects, they should just not be near their own 
‘partner’.)
	 Allow at least five minutes for the interviews, making sure 
the police officers take notes. 
	 When the interviews are over, get the police officers (Sts 
A) to compare the two friends’ (Sts B) alibis. If they are 
identical, Sts B are innocent. If there are any differences, 
they are guilty. 
	 Find out, with a show of hands, how many ‘suspects’ were 
found guilty.
4	GRAMMAR & VOCABULARY  
past simple: regular and irregular
a	 Tell Sts to cover the story and look at the eight verbs in the 
list. They must first mark the verbs regular or irregular in 
the past simple, and then write the positive and negative 
form. Point out that the first one (arrived, didn’t arrive) has 
been done for them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the audio, elicit whether the 
verbs are regular or irregular.
regular	
arrive, close, hate, kill
irregular	
come, sit, sleep, speak
b	 e 8.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.8
arrive	
arrived	
didn’t arrive
close	
closed	
didn’t close
come	
came	
didn’t come
hate	
hated	
didn’t hate
kill	
killed	
didn’t kill
sit	
sat	
didn’t sit
sleep	
slept	
didn’t sleep
speak	
spoke	
didn’t speak
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.138. 
Grammar notes
This Grammar Bank reference section is purely revision, 
and reminds Sts how to form the past tense with regular 
and irregular verbs using the auxiliaries did / didn’t.
It also reminds Sts that was / were is the past of be and 
that questions are formed by inverting the subject and 
verb, and negatives are made by adding not, e.g. wasn’t.
	 e 8.9  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 8A on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  was    ​2  were    ​3  were…doing    ​4  watched    ​5  had    ​
6  weren’t    ​7  went    ​8  did…go    ​9  Did…hear    ​10  didn’t 
hear
b
1  slept    ​2  heard    ​3  couldn’t    ​4  read    ​5  arrived    ​6  saw    ​
7  sat    ​8  didn’t want
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 108@@
108
8B
	8B	 A house with a history
b	 Get Sts to cover the advertisement, and elicit what they 
can remember about the house.
Possible answer
It’s in the country. It’s very quiet. It has six bedrooms, four 
bathrooms, and a large garden. It’s five miles from Oxford.  
It isn’t expensive.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts a few minutes to 
brainstorm with a partner.
	 Write all the words on the board and drill pronunciation.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The house on p.161, 
and get them to do 1 Rooms, 2 Parts of a house, and  
3 Things in a room individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that: 
- a wardrobe is in a bedroom and for keeping clothes, but 
a cupboard can be anywhere e.g. in kitchen or a living 
room, and you can keep anything in it.
- we us a light to refer to a ceiling light, and lamp for all 
other types, e.g. a floor lamp, a table lamp. 
	 e 8.10  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen to all 
three sections and check. Check answers.
e 8.10
The house
1	 Rooms
4	 a bathroom
2	 a bedroom
9	 a dining room
6	 a garage
7	 a garden
8	 a hall
10	 a kitchen
3	 a living room
5	 a study
1	 a toilet
2	 Parts of a house
12	 a balcony
11	 a ceiling
15	 a floor
14	 stairs
13	 a wall
3	 Things in a room
23	 an armchair 
25	 a bath
19	 a bed
27	 a carpet
32	 a cooker
30	 a cupboard
33	 a dishwasher
22	 a fireplace
28	 a fridge
18	 a light
29	 a microwave
21	 a mirror
16	 a plant
26	 a shelf
24	 a shower
20	 a sofa 
17	 a wardrobe
31	 a washing machine
 G   there is / there are, some / any + plural nouns
 V   the house: living room, sofa, etc.
 P   /eə/ and /ɪə/
Lesson plan
This lesson links back to the murder story in 8A. Many years 
later, an American couple who are looking for a house to 
rent are shown around Jeremy Travers’s house by Barbara, 
his daughter, who is now quite elderly. It is only after they 
have decided to rent it that they discover the house has 
a dark secret: someone was murdered there. The lesson 
begins with a vocabulary focus on house and furniture lexis. 
Sts then listen to a conversation between Barbara and the 
young American couple as she shows them around the 
Travers family’s old house, now for rent. Sts then hear how 
Kim is reluctant to rent the house, but she is talked into it by 
her husband, and finally how when they go to celebrate at 
the local pub, they hear the true story of the house. Sts then 
focus on the grammar in the conversations, and the use of 
there is and there are. The pronunciation focus is on /eə/ and 
/ɪə/, which prepares Sts for a Speaking activity in which 
Sts describe where they live. Finally, they go to the Writing 
section and write a description of their house or flat.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  there is / there are, some / any + plural 
nouns p.190 
Vocabulary  Race around the house p.271  
(instructions p.255) 
Communicative  A place to rent p.237  
(instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  8A
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
IMAGINE THAT YOU WANT TO RENT A FLAT IN (Sts’ city). 
WHAT THINGS ARE IMPORTANT TO YOU? (e.g. location, rent, etc.) 
HOW WOULD YOU LOOK FOR THE FLAT?
Put Sts in pairs to discuss the questions.
1	VOCABULARY  the house
a	 Books open. Focus on the advertisement and elicit the 
meaning of advertisement, to rent, and low price. Model 
and drill the pronunciation of advertisement  
/ədˈvɜːtɪsmənt/.
!   You could elicit / tell Sts that the house is the same house 
as in 8A (but more than 50 years later). Alternatively, you 
could say nothing, and wait for Sts to realize as the lesson 
develops.
	 Then focus on the questions and elicit responses. 
	 Get ideas / feedback from a few Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 109@@
109
8B
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
2  living room    ​3  fireplace    ​4  kitchen    ​5  bathroom    ​
6  downstairs    ​7  neighbours    ​8  upstairs
	 Go through the conversation, making sure Sts understand 
it. They should be able to understand the examples of 
there is / are from the context. Tell Sts that this structure 
will be focused on in Grammar. Elicit / Teach the meaning 
and pronunciation of furniture /ˈfɜːnɪtʃə/, and point out 
that it is singular, but has a plural meaning.
c	 e 8.12  Tell Sts that Barbara and the Americans now go 
upstairs. Focus on the questions. Then play the audio 
twice.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
She says the bedroom is cold. 
It was Barbara’s father’s bedroom (Jeremy Travers).
Yes, they do.
e 8.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
B	 Let’s go upstairs. Follow me…Be careful. The ceiling is very low 
here.
L	 It’s a very old house.
B	 Yes, the house is three hundred years old. My family lived here for 
nearly  
eighty years. There are six bedrooms. This was my father’s 
bedroom.
K	 Is there central heating in the house?
B	 Yes, there is. Why do you ask? Are you cold?
K	 Yes, it’s very cold in here.
L	 That’s because we’re from California. 
B	 Let’s go and see the other bedrooms.
L	 Yes, of course.
***
L	 Well, what do you think, Kim? I love it! Don’t you?
K	 I’m not sure. There’s something about the house I don’t like.
L	 Kim, it’s perfect for the kids. Think of the garden. And it’s a real, 
authentic English country house. What do you say?
K	 I suppose so. If you’re sure.
L	 I am sure! Miss…er, Barbara. We want it. We want to rent the 
house.
B	 Excellent.
L	 When can we move in?
B	 As soon as you like.
	 Ask a few more comprehension questions, e.g. How old 
is the house? (300 years old), What kind of heating is there? 
(central heating), etc.
	 Finally, ask Sts if Kim and Leo decide to rent the house.
Yes, they do
d	 e 8.13  Focus on the photo and ask Where are Kim 
and Leo? (In a pub, near the house they just rented). 
Go through the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand this is not a conversation, but extracts from a 
conversation. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Play the audio again if necessary. You could tell 
Sts that cheers is a word people say to each other as they 
lift up their glasses to drink.
1  house    ​2  wrong    ​3  thought    ​4  tell    ​5  what    ​6  horrible
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now focus on the Central heating and air conditioning 
box and go through it with the class.
	 In Activation, get Sts to cover the words and use the 
pictures to test themselves or a partner. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	LISTENING  using evidence to predict outcome
a	 e 8.11  Focus on the photo and instructions. Elicit that 
the older woman is showing the young couple the house 
because they are thinking of renting it.
	 Now tell Sts to close their books or to cover the 
conversation and listen for the answer to Which three 
rooms in the house do they go into?. Stress that Sts should 
listen to find out which rooms they actually go into, not 
which ones they mention. 
	 Play the audio once, and check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
They go into the living room, the library, and the kitchen.
e 8.11
K = Kim, L = Leo, B = Barbara
K	 The garden’s wonderful. I love it.
L	 Is there a garage?
B	 Oh yes, there’s a big garage over there. 
K	 You lived in this house, is that right, Mrs…?
B	 Miss Travers. But call me Barbara, dear. Yes, I lived here. A long 
time ago. Now I live in the village. Let’s go inside the house...  
This is the living room. It’s a lovely room – very light. And this is 
the library…
L	 Wow! There’s a library, Kim!
K	 I love the furniture, the old sofa, the armchairs, the fireplace…
B	 And this is the kitchen. It’s very big, as you can see.
K	 Is there a dishwasher?
B	 No, there isn’t. It’s an old house, you see.
L	 Never mind. I think it’s lovely. Is there a bathroom downstairs?
B	 Yes, there’s one downstairs and there are three upstairs.
K	 Are there any neighbours with children?
B	 No, there aren’t any neighbours near here. But there are some 
families with children in the village.
K	 That’s great. We have two children. 
B	 Very nice, dear. Now let’s go upstairs…
	 Highlight that Leo pronounces garage in the American 
way /gəˈrɑːʒ/, whereas Barbara uses British pronunciation 
/ˈgærɑːʒ/.
b	 Tell Sts to open their books or uncover the conversation, 
and focus on the gapped conversation. Point out that the 
first one (garage) has been done for them. Play the audio 
again for Sts to complete the gaps. Play again if necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could give Sts time to read through the 
conversation and think about what the missing words could 
be before you play the audio.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 110@@
110
8B
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to the three parts of the audio with the scripts in the 
main lesson and on p.121, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases. 
3	GRAMMAR  there is / there are, some / any + plural 
nouns
a	 Put Sts into groups of three and get them to practise the 
conversation in 2b. 
	 When they have finished, tell them to focus on the chart 
and complete it. 
	 Check answers.
singular
plural
+  There’s a library.
There are some families…
−  There isn’t a dishwasher.
There aren’t any neighbours.
?  Is there a garage?
Are there any neighbours?
b	 Give Sts a moment to look at the question and discuss it 
in pairs. 
	 Check answers.
Three is a specific number. Some means ‘more than one’, but isn’t 
a specific number.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.138. 	
Grammar notes
there is / there are
Some Sts tend to always use there is for both singular and 
plural nouns because in their language there is only one 
form. They may also confuse There is / are and It is / They are. 
some and any
Some and any are indefinite articles used here with plural 
countable nouns. For simplicity’s sake, some is taught here 
as only being used in positive sentences, however (as will 
later be pointed out in Grammar Bank 9A), it can also be 
used in questions, and especially in requests, e.g. Do you 
want some biscuits? Can we have some more chairs?
Some and any with uncountable nouns is presented in 9A. 
	 e 8.15  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the There is / There are or It is / They are? box 
and go through it with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 8B on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
e 8.13
1	 Kim	
Cheers. To our new house.
2	 Leo	
Is something wrong?
3	 Barman	 Some people thought that she was the one that did it. 
4	 Barman	 Didn’t she tell you? 
5	 Kim	
Tell us what? 
6	 Kim	
Oh, how horrible!
	 Focus on the question What do you think they find out? and 
elicit ideas from Sts, but don’t tell them if they’re right yet.
e	 e 8.14  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
the question.
	 Play the audio at least twice for Sts to listen and answer 
the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Play the audio again if necessary.
They decide not to rent the house. They don’t want to live in a 
house where somebody was murdered.
e 8.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
L = Leo, K = Kim, B = barman
L	 Hello.
B	 Good evening, sir, madam. What would you like to drink?
L	 Do you have champagne?
B	 Yes, sir.
L	 Two glasses of champagne, please.
B	 Here you are!
L	 Cheers, Kim.
K	 Cheers. To our new house.
B	 You’re Americans, aren’t you?
L	 Yes, that’s right. We’re from California.
K	 But this afternoon we rented the big house near here. 
B	 Which house? The Travers family’s house?
L	 Yes.
B	 Oh.
L	 Is something wrong?
B	 Who showed you the house?
K	 Barbara. The old lady who lived there before.
B	 Ah, Barbara. Old Mr Travers’s daughter. Some people thought that 
she was the one that did it. 
K	 The one that did what? What happened? 
B	 Didn’t she tell you?
L	 Tell us what?
B	 About the murder.
L & K	 Murder?
B	 Yes, Mr Travers was murdered in that house in 1965…in his bed.
K	 Oh, how horrible!
B	 The man who killed Mr Travers was Barbara’s lover. The family 
never lived there again. They tried to sell the house, but nobody 
wanted to buy it. Not after a murder. That’s why that house is 
always rented. Barbara never married, of course.
L	 Kim?
K	 Yes?
L	 Are you thinking what I’m thinking?
K	 Yes – I don’t want to live in a house where somebody was 
murdered. Come on. Let’s go.
B	 Hey, hey, your champagne! You didn’t drink your champagne…
Ah, well…
	 Ask a few more comprehension questions, e.g. Where are 
Kim and Leo from? (California), Why do the Travers family 
always rent out the house? (Because nobody wants to buy 
it), Does Kim finish her champagne? (No). 
	 Finally, ask Sts if they would rent a house where 
somebody was murdered.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 111@@
111
8B
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
	 Ask Sts which three pairs of words are pronounced exactly 
the same.
there  they’re
here  hear
wear  where
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 e 8.18  Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences or 
questions and they need to write them. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each one to give Sts time to 
write it down.
	 Check answers.
e 8.18
1	 Here you are.
2	 I can’t hear you. 
3	 Where’s the kitchen?
4	 She always wears trousers.
5	 Is there a washing machine?
6	 They’re from America.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Tell Sts that they are going to do a role-play between 
someone who wants to rent a house or flat and the 
person who owns it. 
	 Put Sts into pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A they want to rent a 
place and must ask Sts B the questions in the book. Tell Sts 
B to imagine they want to rent out the house or flat that 
they live in to Sts A, and must answer A’s questions. 
	 Now get Sts to interview each other. Monitor and help.
	 Make sure they swap roles.
b	 Focus on the instructions. To demonstrate, quickly 
sketch a basic plan of your living room on the board, 
and describe it to the class (you don’t need to draw 
everything, just the main pieces of furniture).
	 Sts do the same in pairs. Monitor and help Sts with any 
other vocabulary they need.
a
1  Are there    ​2  Is there    ​3  There are    ​4  There’s    ​5  There are  ​
6  Is there    ​7  There are    ​8  Is there    ​9  There’s    ​10  Are there
b
1  There’s a table in the kitchen.
2  Is there a fireplace in the living room?
3  There aren’t any plants in my flat.
4  Are there any people in the garden?
5  There are some pictures in my bedroom.
6  There isn’t a TV in the kitchen.  
7  There’s a computer in the study. 
8  There aren’t any cupboards in the dining room. 
9  Is there a bath in the bathroom? 
10  There isn’t a light in the garage.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Is there…? Are there…?, A on p.106,  
B on p.111. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully, and focus 
on the two questions (Is there a…? and Are there any…?). 
Tell Sts they have to ask these questions for items 1–6. 
Point out the four possible answers, and tell Sts to give as 
much information as they can when answering.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A asks his / her 
questions to B. Then they swap roles.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
4	PRONUNCIATION  /eə/ and /ɪə/
a	 e 8.16  Focus on the two sound pictures chair /eə/ and 
ear /ɪə/. 
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen to the two sounds and 
example words. 
e 8.16
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.65
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
b	 Get Sts to look at the words in the list and to decide which 
sound they go with in the chart in a. Remind Sts to say the 
words aloud to themselves and then write them in the 
correct row.
c	 e 8.17  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 8.17
chair /eə/  there, careful, wear, they’re, stairs, where
ear /ɪə/      here, beer, dear, near, we’re, hear
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 112@@
112
8B
6	WRITING  describing your home
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing your home on p.116.
a	 Focus on the task. Give Sts a few minutes to read the 
website.
	 Ask the class Would you like to stay in the flat in Budapest? 
Why (not)? and elicit some answers.
b	 Now tell Sts to read the description of the flat again and 
number the information in the correct order.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand all the lexis.
1	 Where it is
2	 What floor the flat is on
3	 What rooms there are
4	 Details about some of the rooms
5	 What you can see from the flat
6	 What places or services there are nearby
7	 How far it is from the city centre
c	 Now tell Sts to look for the adjectives the writer used to 
describe 1–4.
	 Check answers.
1  quiet    ​2  light, pretty, small    ​3  great    ​4  beautiful
d	 Focus on the information box about so and go through it 
with the class.
	 Tell Sts they are now going to advertise their house or flat 
on the website. First, they should make notes about their 
house / flat using the seven topics in b.
e	 When Sts have finished their notes, get them to write the 
full description.
f	 Sts read their descriptions, looking for mistakes, and then 
show it to another student.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. Did they find 
anything that was the same in their descriptions?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 113@@
113
8C
1	READING & LISTENING  identifying paragraph 	
	 topics
a	 Books open. Focus on the task, making sure Sts know 
the meaning of ghost (= the form of a dead person that 
a living person thinks he / she sees) and haunted (= if a 
place is haunted, people think there are ghosts there). 
	 Elicit answers. You could start the activity by telling Sts 
whether or not you believe in ghosts.
b	 Focus on the photos and tell Sts that this is a real hotel in 
London. 
	 Now focus on the instructions, and give Sts time to read 
the article.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss 
what each of the three paragraphs is about. Elicit answers.
Paragraph 1 is about the history of the hotel and famous people 
who stayed there.
Paragraph 2 is about the hotel’s ghosts, and a journalist who saw 
them.
Paragraph 3 is about the experiences of the English cricket team 
when they stayed at the hotel.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer questions 1–5.
	 Check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 The Duke of Windsor, Napoleon III, Oscar Wilde, Arthur Conan 
Doyle
2	 GoldenEye
3	 The ghost of a Victorian doctor who murdered his wife
4	 A ghost moves the bed.
5	 He was in the hotel and couldn’t sleep because the bathroom 
taps turned on and off.
c	 e 8.19  Focus on the question and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of guest. Model and drill pronunciation.
	 Before you play the audio, you might want to tell Sts that 
the hotel stories that they are going to hear are based on 
real TripAdvisor reports. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
No, but they both heard strange noises.
 G   there was / there were
 V   prepositions: place and movement
 P   silent letters
Lesson plan
This lesson is based on real information about a hotel in 
London that is said to be haunted. A BBC journalist stayed 
there and reported on what happened during the night, 
as did members of the England cricket team. An article 
about the hotel provides a context for Sts to practise there 
was / there were and prepositions of place and movement. 
The lesson begins with Sts reading the article and listening 
to two guests describing their experiences of staying 
in room 333, where the ghosts are said to appear – this 
provides the context for the grammar presentation of 
there was / there were. It then leads into a vocabulary focus 
on more prepositions of place and movement (Sts have 
already focused on simple ones, e.g. in, on, under, and to). 
Pronunciation focuses on silent letters in words like ghost 
and guest. Then Sts do a Speaking activity in which the 
Grammar and Vocabulary are practised. The lesson finishes 
with a video listening about Portchester Castle.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  there was / there were p.191 
Vocabulary  Prepositions of place p.272  
(instructions p.256) 
Communicative  What’s different? p.239  
(instructions p.210)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  A haunted castle
For students
Workbook  8C
Online Practice  8C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Play the Long sentence game to revise there is and furniture.  
You begin the game. Say In my living room there’s a sofa. Then 
choose a student to continue. He / She must repeat your 
sentence, and add one more piece of furniture, e.g. In my 
living room there’s a sofa and two armchairs.  
Now point to another student, who must continue, 
repeating the sentence and adding to it, e.g. In my living 
room there’s a sofa, two armchairs, and a table.  
After all the Sts have added their words, see if the whole 
class can repeat the list from memory. 
	8C	 Room 333
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 114@@
114
8C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.121, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases. 
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell the class 
whether you would like to stay there.
2	GRAMMAR  there was / there were
a	 e 8.20  Focus on the four sentences and get Sts to 
complete them. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
1	 was
2	 weren’t
3	 were
4	 wasn’t
e 8.20
1	 There was a strange noise outside our door.
2	 There weren’t any more strange noises.
3	 We knew that people said there were ghosts.
4	 There wasn’t anybody in that room last night.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8C on p.138. 
Grammar notes
There is / are can be used in any tense simply by changing 
the form of be, thus the past is there was / were. 
Although it works in exactly the same way as there is / are, 
Sts have a tendency to forget the plural form there were. 
	 e 8.21  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 8C on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a 
1  There were    ​2  There was    ​3  there were    ​4  Was there    ​
5  there wasn’t    ​6  there was    ​7  Was there    ​8  there was    ​
9  there weren’t    ​10  were there
b 
1  there was a    ​2  there wasn’t a    ​3  there were some    ​ 
4  there weren’t any    ​5  there weren’t any    ​6  there was a    ​ 
7  there wasn’t a
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e 8.19
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
1	 We stayed at The Langham for two nights. It’s a wonderful place 
– a very elegant, very English hotel. The service, atmosphere, 
and room were excellent, and we really enjoyed our stay. But we 
had a very strange experience. On the first night we woke up at 
about five thirty. There was a strange noise coming from outside 
our door. It was like somebody was scratching the door with 
their fingers. To tell you the truth, we were a little bit frightened. 
Then we thought that probably it was other guests coming back 
late from a party, maybe they were drunk or something, and we 
went back to sleep. But the second night exactly the same thing 
happened. So we just thought, strange, maybe it’s because it’s an 
old hotel. But when we got home, we told the story to a friend, 
and he told us that The Langham is haunted. We looked on the 
internet, and we read that people say that room 333 has a ghost! 
And our room was 332, the next room! We sent an email to The 
Langham and told them about it and they sent us some really 
interesting information about the ghost stories. We’d really like to 
stay in this fantastic hotel again, but maybe not in room 333!
2	 I stayed at The Langham in November last year with my husband. 
It’s a beautiful hotel, with a wonderful location. It’s between 
Hyde Park and Regent’s Park. We were in a room on the second 
floor. We knew that people said there were ghosts, and we knew 
about room 333, but we weren’t worried at all. We had a nice 
meal in the hotel restaurant and then we went to bed. But in the 
middle of the night – about three in the morning – we suddenly 
woke up and we could hear loud noises from the room above 
us. They were really loud noises – like people were moving the 
bed or moving a heavy chair. Anyway, after two or three minutes, 
the noises stopped and we went back to sleep. There weren’t 
any more strange noises, and we slept for the rest of the night. 
The next morning, we went to Reception and said, ‘We slept 
really badly last night – the people in the room above us made a 
terrible noise.’ The man at reception asked for our room number 
and said, ‘Let me check.’ He looked on the computer and he said, 
‘The room above you is empty, madam.’ So I said, ‘Are you sure?’ 
And he said, ‘Yes, madam. The room above yours is room 333. 
There wasn’t anybody in that room last night.’ We checked out of 
the hotel the same morning. Never again!
d	 Focus on the task. Give Sts time to read 1–8, and make 
sure they understand all the vocabulary. 
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers (M = The man, W = The woman).
1  W    ​2  M / W    ​3  M / W    ​4  M    ​5  W    ​6  M    ​7  W    ​8  W
e	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete the verb 
phrases. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts complete the gaps, elicit the 
infinitive of the five verbs, e.g. got – get. Now tell Sts, in pairs, 
to read the article again and complete the gaps. When they 
find one of the verb phrases, they should discuss its meaning. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the gaps without 
looking at the article. Then put Sts in pairs and get them to 
compare answers and discuss what each verb phrase means.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to explain each verb phrase.
1	 got up	
got out of bed
2	 turned on / off	
opened / connected
3	 woke up	
opened your eyes after sleeping
4	 went back	
returned, do sth again
5	 checked out	
paid your bill and left
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 115@@
115
4	PRONUNCIATION  silent letters
Pronunciation notes
Encourage and help Sts to cross out silent letters when 
they learn new words, like this: listen. 
Emphasize that if Sts can recognize the phonetic 
transcriptions next to words in the dictionary, this will help 
them to identify silent letters.
a	 e 8.24  Go through the Silent letters box, and elicit 
the pronunciation of ghost, so Sts can hear the h isn’t 
pronounced. Point out the phonetics also make this clear. 
	 Get Sts to say the words aloud to themselves to help them 
decide which they think is the silent letter in each word, 
and then cross it out. Meanwhile write the words on the 
board to help check answers.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers by eliciting which letter is silent and 
crossing it out (the silent letters are in red below). 
e 8.24
could    cupboard    friend    guest    half    hour    island    know  
listen    talk    what    write
	 Highlight that in words that begin with kn- (e.g. knee) or 
wr- (e.g. wrong), the k and the w are always silent. 
EXTRA IDEA   If Sts have dictionaries, you could get them to 
check their answers with the phonetics in their dictionary. 
This will help build their confidence in dictionary use. 
b	 Get Sts to practise saying the words.
5	SPEAKING
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Room 333, A on p.106, B on p.111.
	 Give Sts one minute to look at the photo. Then focus on 
the questions, and elicit that they start with Was there…? 
for singular nouns and Were there…? for plural nouns.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to write the questions.
	 Get Sts to sit face-to-face if possible. A (book open) asks 
his / her questions to B (book closed), who has to answer. 
	 Then they swap roles.
	 Get feedback. Who had the most correct answers, A or B?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8C. 
3	VOCABULARY  prepositions: place and 
movement
a	 Get Sts to complete the two sentences with prepositions. 
	 Check answers.
1  in    ​2  through
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the meaning of the 
prepositions using, e.g. a chair in the classroom.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Prepositions on p.162. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight the difference between in (= inside an enclosed 
space, e.g. in a drawer) and on (= touching an external 
surface, e.g. on the wall), and between opposite (= face-to-
face) and in front of demonstrating with objects / people 
in the classroom. 
	 Focus on 1 Place and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.22  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 8.22
Prepositions, 1  Place
2  in    5  in front of    9  on    3  under    1  behind    7  between    
8  opposite    6  next to    4  over
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
prepositions, or model and drill them yourself. 
EXTRA IDEA   Give more practice with the prepositions by 
asking questions about things / people in the classroom. 
	 Now focus on the example in Activation. Sts cover the 
prepositions and test each other in pairs by pointing to 
pictures and asking Where’s the ghost?.
	 Go through the above and below box with the class.
	 Focus on 2 Movement and get Sts to do a individually.
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that with into and out of if we use them without 
a place, we just use in and out, e.g. Come in. Come into the 
garden. Go out. Go out of the room.
	 e 8.23  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 8.23
2  Movement
11  from…to    10  into    14  out of    15  through   
12  up    13  down 
 	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
prepositions, or model and drill them yourself. 
	 Now focus on the example in Activation. Sts cover the 
prepositions and test each other in pairs by pointing to 
pictures and asking Where’s the ghost going?.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8C. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
8C
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 116@@
116
b	 Focus on the task. Go through 1–8 with Sts, making sure 
they understand all the lexis, e.g. charity, etc. 
	 Now play the video again. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  1,700    ​2  English    ​3  ghosts    ​4  soldier    ​5  look    ​ 
6  baby / child    ​7  away    ​8  horses
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles / showing the script, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Finally, focus on the question and ask the whole class.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary about 
Portchester Castle and its ghosts. Portchester Castle is on 
the south coast of England, near Portsmouth. 
	 Focus on the question and play the video for Sts to watch. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch.
Two of the four ghosts are frightening.
A haunted castle
Hi, I’m Ned. Welcome to Portchester Castle. Portchester Castle is over 
one thousand seven hundred years old. It’s near Portsmouth, a city on 
the south coast of England. The castle is part of English Heritage. English 
Heritage is a charity, which manages over four hundred old buildings 
and monuments in England.
With so many old buildings, there are also lots of reports of ghosts. 
And ghosts are sometimes a problem for staff and visitors at English 
Heritage. In fact, some staff decided to leave their jobs because of the 
ghosts. I’ve come here to Portchester to find out more about reports 
of not one, but four ghosts! And many of the ghosts come from 
different times in Portchester’s long history. Portchester Castle dates 
back to Roman Britain; the Romans built the original castle here in the 
year two hundred and ninety. The first ghost report also comes from 
Roman times. Visitors report that they see the ghost of a Roman soldier 
guarding the walls, but they say they don’t feel frightened.
In the Middle Ages, Portchester became a favourite castle for the kings 
and queens of England. During this time, a small monastery was built. 
There’s a church here now in place of the monastery. People say that 
they see a man dressed in black here and they think he is the ghost of 
a monk from the monastery. Surprisingly, people don’t feel frightened 
when they see him. They say that he disappears when they look at him.
Our first two ghosts are not frightening, but the next ghost really 
frightens people – the White Lady. Some people believe that this is the 
ghost of Charlotte White. She was a woman who visited the castle in 
the nineteenth century. Charlotte’s baby fell into the water and poor 
Charlotte also died when she tried to save her child. 
The most frightening ghost of all is a man on a black horse. Both castle 
visitors and staff say that they see him. One of the staff who saw the 
ghost said, ‘It got bigger and bigger. It started to come towards me and 
I screamed and ran away’. People also say they hear the sound of horses; 
one visitor even heard the sound of horses on a video he filmed. One of 
the strange things about the man on the horse is that we don’t know 
who he is or which part of Portchester’s long history he is from.
I was quite sure I didn’t believe in ghosts before I came here, but, after a 
day at Portchester, I’m not so sure.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they noticed anything strange on the 
video (there is interference before the presenter goes into 
the castle, and a hooded figure, perhaps the ghost of the 
monk, appears four times).
8C
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 117@@
117
Revise and Check
	7&8	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    ​2  a    ​3  b    ​4  a    ​5  b
e 8.25
1	 Rebecca
I = interviewer, R = Rebecca
I	 Where were you born?
R	 I was born in Italy.
I	 Do you have family there?
R	 Yes, all my family lives there.
I	 Where do you live now?
R	 I live in the UK.
I	 Where in the UK?
R	 I live in Newcastle.
2	 James
I = interviewer, J = James
I	 Did you go out last weekend?
J	 Er, yes, I did. 
I	 What did you do?
J	 Er, I went with some friends to a pub, um, in Banbury, a town near 
here, and we watched a band. It was really good. 
3	 Maura
I = interviewer, M = Maura
I	 What’s your favourite room in your house?
M	 Probably my bedroom. I love sleeping.
I	 Can you describe it?
M	 Er, yes, it’s got a bed, and two bedside tables, a wardrobe, and a 
chest of drawers.
4	 Asya
I = interviewer, A = Asya
I	 What did you do yesterday evening?
A	 Last night I had dinner with my brother in Brooklyn.
I	 What time did you go to bed?
A	 I went to bed around 1.00 a.m.
5	 David
I = interviewer, D= David
I 	 What did you do on New Year’s Eve last year? 
D 	 So, last, last New Year’s Eve, my wife and I, we met some friends 
in downtown New York, in Manhattan. We went to a very nice 
steakhouse, and then went for some cocktails, and er, sang in the 
New Year in, er, in New York.
I 	 Did you have a good time?
D 	 We had a very, very good time.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  b    ​4  a    ​5  c    ​6  a    ​7  c    ​8  c    ​9  b    ​10  a    ​
11  b    ​12  b    ​13  a    ​14  b    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a	
1  actor    ​2  artist    ​3  painter    ​4  musician    ​5  scientist
b	
1  have    ​2  get    ​3  go    ​4  get    ​5  have
c	
1  out    ​2  by    ​3  to    ​4  in    ​5  back
d	
1  an armchair    ​2  a carpet    ​3  a bed    ​4  a cooker    ​5  a sofa
e	
1  behind    ​2  next to    ​3  up    ​4  down    ​5  on
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  hall /ɔː/    ​2  here /ɪə/    ​3  lived /d/    ​4  looked /t/    ​ 
5  there /eə/
d	
1  scientist    ​2  ago    ​3  yesterday    ​4  between    ​5  fireplace
CAN YOU understand this text?
b	
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  F    ​4  T    ​5  T    ​6  F
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 118@@
118
9A
 G   countable / uncountable nouns, a / an, some / any
 V   food and drink
 P   the letters ea
Lesson plan
Food and drink provide the context for looking at the 
grammar of countable and uncountable nouns and the 
related use of a, an, some, and any. The lesson begins with 
a quiz on food and drink words that have come up so far 
in Elementary, and Sts then go to the Vocabulary Bank 
to learn more words. Sts then read part of a blog where 
a man describes why he eats the same thing every day. 
The Reading leads into the grammar focus, and Sts go 
on to practise the new grammar. Sts then listen to four 
people describing their dinner the previous night. The 
pronunciation focus looks at the vowel combination ea, 
which can be pronounced in several different ways, and 
which occurs in many common food words, e.g. bread, meat, 
and steak. Finally, in Speaking Sts tell each other what they 
ate and drank yesterday, and discuss their eating habits to 
find out if they are similar or not.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  countable / uncountable nouns; a / an,  
some / any p.192 
Vocabulary  Food p.273 (instructions p.256) 
Communicative  Shopping list p.241 (instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  9A
Online Practice  9A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Play Hangman (see p.24) 
with the word RESTAURANT. 
Then ask Sts When did you last eat in a restaurant? Who were 
you with? Did you enjoy it?
1	VOCABULARY  food and drink
a	 Books open. Focus Sts’ attention on the instructions and 
point out that the first answer (pizza) has been done for 
them. Go through the clues, eliciting / explaining any 
words Sts don’t know.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them two minutes to try to write 
down all words in the quiz. 
	 Check answers by getting Sts to spell the words, and write 
them on the board. Model and drill the pronunciation.
1  pasta    ​2  milk, sugar    ​3  meat    ​4  mineral water    ​5  ice 
cream    ​6  potato    ​7  eggs    ​8  chocolate    ​9  sandwich    ​
10  breakfast, lunch, dinner
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Food and drink on 
p.163 and get them to do a individually or in pairs. There 
are more words than usual, but Sts will probably already 
know some of them. 
Vocabulary notes
This is a limited list of food and drink words in order to not 
overload Sts. If there are any food or drink items which are 
very common in your Sts country, you may want to get 
Sts to add them to the lists.
	 e 9.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 9.1
Food and drink
Breakfast
9	 bread
12	 butter
8	 cereal
1	 cheese
4	 coffee
11	 eggs
2	 jam
6	 juice
7	 milk
10	 sugar
3	 tea
5	 toast
Lunch or dinner
18	 fish, for example salmon, tuna
17	 herbs
15	 meat, for example chicken, sausages, steak, ham
14	 oil
21	 pasta
27	 rice
26	 salad
23	 seafood
28	 spices
Vegetables
30	 carrots
16	 chips
13	 a lettuce
29	 mushrooms
20	 onions
24	 peas
19	 peppers
22	 potatoes
25	 tomatoes
Fruit
41	 apples
39	 bananas
35	 oranges
32	 a pineapple
36	 strawberries
Desserts
42	 cake
38	 fruit salad
33	 ice cream
Snacks
37	 biscuits
43	 chocolate
34	 crisps
40	 nuts 
31	 a sandwich
44	 sweets 
	
	9A	 #mydinnerlastnight
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 119@@
119
9A
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words and use 
the photos to test themselves or their partner. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the questions and give Sts time to think about 
their answers. Elicit / Teach words for any food which 
is very common in your Sts’ country, but is not in the 
Vocabulary Bank.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss the questions. 
You could demonstrate by telling Sts what your favourite 
breakfast is and if there is any food or drink you don’t like.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups.
2	GRAMMAR  countable / uncountable nouns,  
a / an, some / any
a	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts know what 
a blogger is (= a person who has a website where they 
write regularly about topics that interest them).
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, and teach Sts 
any food words they don’t know. 
smoked salmon, avocado, bread, cream cheese, lime
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Tell Sts to read his blog and find the answer.
	 Check the answer.
Because he doesn’t want to spend a lot of time deciding what 
to eat.
c	 Tell Sts to read the blog again, and then, in pairs, to 
answer questions 1–6.
	 When Sts have finished, check answers to questions 1–3, 
and elicit opinions for questions 4–6.
1	 They all wear / wore the same clothes every day.
2	 He spends less time and money buying food, and never 
needs to worry if his diet is healthy or not.
3	 No, because he changes his meals a bit.
d	 Give Sts time to complete the gaps in sentences 1–3.
	 Check answers.
1  a    ​2  some, an    ​3  some, some
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.140. 
Grammar notes
Countable / uncountable nouns
The concept of countable and uncountable nouns 
shouldn’t cause too many problems (unless they do 
not exist in the Sts’ own language), but what may cause 
confusion is that some words are countable in English, 
but uncountable in other languages or vice versa. 
You may need to give more examples of when a noun can 
be countable or uncountable. This occurs when we can 
think of e.g. a chicken (a whole chicken) and chicken (e.g. 
chicken pieces).
Other examples: a beer (= a can or glass of beer),  
beer (= the liquid in general); a coffee (= a cup of coffee), 
coffee (= the drink in general).
a / an, some / any
Sts have already learned the rules for a / an, some, and 
any plus singular and plural countable nouns in 8B. 
Here they learn that some can also be used with singular 
uncountable nouns to mean ‘a quantity of’ , ‘not an exact 
amount’, e.g. some butter, some milk. 
Sts may find it strange using some and any with ‘singular’ 
words, e.g. butter, since they previously used some and 
any with plural nouns, and may have translated them in 
their heads as plural words. 
Make sure you point out the exception of using some 
for requests and offers. Sts usually assimilate this rule 
instinctively through learning set phrases like Would you 
like some coffee?.
	 e 9.2  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through 
the rules with the class. You could point out that a 
good dictionary will tell Sts if a noun is countable or 
uncountable.
	 Focus on the some in ? box and go through it with the 
class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 9A on p.141. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences in b. 
a	
1  some milk    ​2  a sandwich    ​3  some chips    ​4  a lettuce    ​
5  an egg    ​6  some carrots    ​7  some chocolate    ​8  a cake
b	
1  any    ​2  some    ​3  any    ​4  some    ​5  any    ​6  any    ​7  some    ​
8  an    ​9  some    ​10  a
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 120@@
120
9A
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  B    ​2  C    ​3  D    ​4  A
e 9.4
(script in Student’s Book on pp.121–122)
1
This is for my foodie friends. In case you thought lettuce was only for 
salads, here I’m cooking it in some butter with an onion. Then I add 
some mushrooms, chicken, fresh tomatoes, and some other things 
– not sure yet. Lettuce is also great in soups, or you can grill it and 
serve it with blue cheese.
2
We didn’t feel like cooking last night, and anyway we didn’t have 
any food in the house, so we decided to order some takeaway salads 
from our wonderful local pizzeria. They were all very good, but 
my favourite was a chicken salad with carrots, tomatoes, peppers, 
lettuce, and some pieces of fried bread.
3
Dinner last night at a restaurant in Piccadilly, called NOPI. We had 
lots of different sharing plates. I loved everything, especially this 
dish called shakshuka, which is North African, and it’s basically eggs 
in a tomato sauce, but the mixture of herbs and spices makes it just 
fantastic. And the bread we had to dip in the sauce was wonderful, 
too. Go there. Soon.
4
OK guys, this is it! Our Thanksgiving dinner – which we had at six 
thirty last night. All the usual things: turkey with cranberry sauce, 
roast potatoes, mashed potatoes, lots of vegetables, and more…
and more… Mom said, ‘Why not go to a restaurant this year – maybe 
have seafood?’, but I said, ‘No, I want it home-made and traditional’ – 
so she did it. Thanks, Mom. I now need to spend a few hours on the 
sofa before I even think of going to bed. So how was yours?
	 You might want to point out that the fourth speaker is 
American, so he uses the word Mom instead of the British 
English Mum.
c	 Focus on the task. Tell Sts they are going to listen to the 
audio again, and this time they need to decide which 
speaker talks about what. Make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis, e.g. ingredients. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers.
Speaker 2  a good restaurant near their house
Speaker 1  ways of preparing something
Speaker 3  a dish with two main ingredients
Speaker 4  a meal for a special occasion
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.121–122, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases. 
d	 Focus on the questions and elicit / explain the difference 
between a meal (= breakfast, lunch, dinner) and a dish  
(= food prepared in a particular way, e.g. a pizza, spaghetti 
carbonara, etc.). 
	 Put Sts in small groups or pairs to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback. You could tell Sts your answers, too.
f	 e 9.3  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Point out the example.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and write the shopping list. 
If necessary, play the audio again.
	 Check answers. If Sts just answer with the food word, elicit 
whether it should be a or some.
some coffee, some milk, some orange juice, some apple juice,  
a pineapple, some (four or five) oranges, some bananas, some 
onions, some (two or three big) potatoes, a bottle of wine, a 
lettuce
e 9.3
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
W = woman, M = man
W	 We need food for the weekend – can you do the shopping on 
your way home this evening?
M	 OK, I suppose so. What do we need?
W	 Let’s see. We need some coffee, we don’t have any.
M	 OK…coffee…
W	 And some milk. And some juice.
M	 Orange juice?
W	 Fine. And maybe apple juice, too.
M	 OK. What else?
W	 Get a pineapple if they have them.
M	 One pineapple…
W	 And some oranges – four or five oranges – and some bananas. 
And I want to make a vegetable curry, so get some onions, some 
potatoes, some tomatoes…
M	 Hold on, wait a minute…! Potatoes…
W	 Yes, two or three big ones. Oh, and forget the tomatoes – we’ve 
got some in the fridge. And a bottle of wine.
M	 White? Red?
W	 Don’t mind. Oh, and a lettuce, I want to make a salad.
M	 A lettuce…Do we need any tomatoes?
W	 No, I said no tomatoes!
M	 Sorry, yes, you did. Is that everything?
W	 Yes, I think so. And don’t forget anything!
3	LISTENING  hypothesizing about photos to 	
	 prepare for listening
a	 Focus on the photos and the instructions and explain 
what a hashtag is (= a word or phrase with the symbol # 
in front of it, included in some messages sent using the 
Twitter social networking service, so that you can search 
for all messages with the same subject). You might want 
to pre-teach takeaway (= food that you buy at a restaurant 
that sells hot food you can take and eat somewhere else) 
and foodie (= a person who is very interested in cooking 
and eating different kinds of food), and tell Sts that foodies 
often post photos on Instagram. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to match the photos to 1–4.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts what different foods they can see 
in the photos (A = turkey, Brussels sprouts, potatoes, carrots, 
pie, mashed potatoes; B = lettuce, onion, tomatoes, chicken, 
mushrooms; C = chicken, carrots, tomatoes, lettuce, and 
some pieces of fried bread; D = eggs in tomato sauce, onion, 
coriander). 
b	 e 9.4  Point out the Glossary. Now play the audio for Sts 
to listen and check.
	 Check answers, and get Sts to say what they can see in the 
photos.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 121@@
121
9A
5	SPEAKING
a	 Tell Sts to make a food diary for yesterday, i.e. write 
down what they had to eat and drink. They can use the 
Vocabulary Bank Food and drink on p.163 to help them. 
Monitor and help with any new words they need, but try 
not to overdo new vocabulary. Encourage Sts to use more 
general food words, e.g. meat, fish, vegetables, rather than 
specific words (e.g. lamb, hake, aubergines, etc.), which they 
probably won’t know. Tell them to write a / an or some 
with each word, and to group them under meals. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
b	 You could demonstrate the activity by telling Sts what you 
had yesterday, where you had it, and who made it. In pairs, 
Sts tell each other their answers. Monitor and help with 
pronunciation, and correct mistakes with a / an or some. 
	 Get some feedback. Did anyone have a very similar meal 
to their partner?
c	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand all 
the lexis.
	 Put Sts in pairs to ask and answer the questions.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Get feedback from some pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts they are now going to write their own 
blogs, so they need to write a short text like the ones they 
heard in the Listening about what they ate yesterday.
4	PRONUNCIATION  the letters ea
Pronunciation notes
The combination of vowels e + a has different possible 
pronunciations, several of which seem quite irregular to 
Sts, e.g. great /greɪt/. In this exercise, we focus on common 
examples of this spelling occurring in food words. 
a	 Focus on the words in the list and elicit that they all have 
the vowels ea, but that the pronunciation is not the same. 
	 Now focus on the sound pictures and elicit the three 
words and sounds (tree /iː/, egg /e/, train /eɪ/).
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to put the words in the correct columns. 
Encourage them to say the words aloud to help them.
b	 e 9.5  Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.5
tree /iː/	
eat, ice cream, meat, peas, tea
egg /e/	
bread, breakfast, healthy
train /eɪ/	
steak
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word (or group of words) for Sts to repeat.
	 Sts now practise saying the words.
	 Elicit that the most common pronunciation is /iː/, but they 
will need to learn unusual ones, e.g. steak, by heart.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   On the board, write some more words 
with ea that Sts know, and that have one of these three 
pronunciations for Sts to put in the columns, e.g. repeat, easy, 
headphones, read (/e/ and /iː/), great, mean, please, speak.  
You may want to point out that the letters ear have a 
different pronunciation from ea + other consonants, and is 
either /ɪə/, e.g. hear, or /eə/, e.g. wear. Sts saw this in 8B.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 122@@
122
9B
	9B	 White gold
b	 e 9.7  Tell Sts they are going to hear five conversations in 
shops and they must listen and write what people want 
to buy, using the words in a, e.g. a jar of honey.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers. Highlight that the container words and of 
are always linked, and the pronunciation of of is /əv/.
1  a bottle of olive oil    2  a packet of (basmati) rice    
3  a tin of tomatoes    4  a box of chocolates    5  a carton of 
orange juice
e 9.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.122) 
1
A	 Hi. I’d like a bottle of oil.
B	 Olive oil?
A	 Yes, please.
2
A	 Can I help you?
B	 Yes, I’m looking for a packet of rice.
A	 Ordinary rice, basmati, brown rice?
B	 Er, basmati, please.
3
A	 Excuse me. I need a tin of tomatoes, but I can’t see them 
anywhere.
B	 They’re over there, next to the eggs.
A	 Thanks.
4
A	 Hi. I want a box of chocolates – a nice one. It’s for my girlfriend’s 
birthday.
B	 How much do you want to spend?
A	 Oh, not very much. I mean, nothing very expensive…
5
A	 A carton of juice, please. 
B	 Apple juice? Orange juice?
A	 Er, orange juice.
B	 That’s one pound fifty, please.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases. 
c	 Sts now have to make their own phrases using a container 
from a and a word from the list. Point out the example. 
Tell Sts to think about how they buy these things in their 
country.
	 Get Sts to compare their ideas with a partner, and then 
check answers.
Possible answers
a box of biscuits 
a carton of cereal / a packet of cereal / a box of cereal
a bottle of Coke / a can of Coke
a packet of crisps
a jar of jam
a bottle of milk / a carton of milk
a packet of salt / a box of salt
a packet of sugar
a tin of tuna
 G   quantifiers: how much / how many, a lot of, etc. 
 V   food containers 
 P   linking, /ʃ/ and /s/
Lesson plan
This lesson continues the theme of food and focuses on 
sugar and salt, which were both known at different times in 
history as ‘white gold’. The lesson begins with a vocabulary 
focus on containers, e.g. packet and tin. The context for 
the grammar presentation is the amount of sugar and salt 
that there is in some common food items. Sts learn about 
quantifiers, e.g. much and a lot of, and asking about quantity, 
e.g. How much sugar is there in dark chocolate?. Pronunciation 
looks at two sounds, /ʃ/ and /s/. The reading text Fascinating 
facts about sugar and salt is based on several recent articles 
and studies. The lesson ends with Sts interviewing each 
other, using a questionnaire to find out how much salt and 
sugar they eat every day.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  quantifiers: how much / how many, a lot of, 
etc. p.193 
Communicative  How much / many board game p.242 
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  9B
Online Practice  9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise food and countability by playing the Long sentence 
game (see Optional lead-in for 8C on p.113). You begin 
by saying In my fridge there’s (e.g. some milk). Sts continue, 
remembering what the previous people have said, then 
adding an item of their own. Make sure they use a, an, or 
some before the food word.
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
food containers; linking
a	 e 9.6  Books open. Focus on the photos and explain that 
they are all containers which are often used for food. Then 
tell Sts to match the words and photos.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 9.6
3	 a bottle 
5	 a box
6	 a can
2	 a carton
7	 a jar
1	 a packet
4	 a tin
	 Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 123@@
123
9B
much / many
Much and many are used mainly in negative sentences 
and questions. Many is also sometimes used in positive 
sentences in formal English, e.g. Many people live in houses 
in the UK. However, much is not normally used in positive 
sentences, e.g. NOT British people drink much tea. 
Tell Sts to think of much as singular and many as plural to 
help them to remember which one to use. 
	 e 9.8  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the a lot and lots of box and go through it with 
the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 9B on p.141. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.  
In a sentence 4, elicit / explain the difference between 
some chocolate (a bar, some pieces, etc.) and chocolates 
(individual sweets covered in chocolate).
a	
1  How much    ​2  How many    ​3  How much    ​4  How many    ​
5  How much    ​6  How much    ​7  How many    ​8  How many    ​
9  How much    ​10  How many
b	
1  a lot of    ​2  A little.    ​3  much    ​4  Quite a lot.    ​5  a lot of    ​
6  not much    7  many    ​8  None.    ​9  a little    ​10  much, any
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Focus on the instructions. Elicit / Explain the meaning of 
the question How about you? and check Sts can remember 
the meaning of fast food.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Demonstrate the activity by 
saying how much you eat of one of the things in the list. 
Then turn to a student and ask How about you?.
	 A should start by saying how much fish he / she eats, give 
extra information, and ask B. They then swap roles.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. Find out if pairs 
have a similar diet, or if they found out something 
surprising about their partner’s eating habits.
3	PRONUNCIATION  /ʃ/ and /s/
Pronunciation notes
/ʃ/
sh and -tion are always pronounced /ʃ/, e.g. shop, station.
c before iou and ia is usually /ʃ/, e.g. delicious, special.
/s/
c before e and i is pronounced /s/, e.g. city, centre (c before 
other vowels is usually /k/).
s at the beginning of a word is always /s/. The only two 
exceptions are sure /ʃʊə/ and sugar /ʃʊgə/.
s in the middle of a word or at the end is sometimes /s/ 
and sometimes /z/.
See Sound Bank p.167.
2	GRAMMAR  quantifiers
a	 Focus on the photos of food items, and give Sts time to 
think about how much sugar and salt is in each item and 
number them 0 (no sugar / salt) to 3 (a lot of sugar / salt).
b	 Focus on the pictures of the spoons and make sure Sts 
understand the expressions for quantities from none 
to a lot. Highlight that quite a lot = a medium quantity, 
between a lot and a little.
	 Now focus on the speech bubbles and remind Sts that 
the question is How much…?, not How many…?, because 
sugar and salt are uncountable. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask each other how much 
sugar / salt is in each item.
	 Get some feedback from the class about what they think 
for each item, but don’t correct their guesses at this stage.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Sugar and salt on 
p.106. Go through the facts with the class, establishing 
whether there is a lot / quite a lot / a little sugar or salt, or 
none in each food item. 
Sugar  
a can of Coke: a lot    an apple: quite a lot    a small bar of dark 
chocolate: a little    an egg: none   
Salt 
a large packet of crisps: a lot    a slice of white bread: quite a lot   
a bottle of mineral water: a little    a bottle of olive oil: none   
	 Get feedback from some Sts. Were their answers in a 
correct? Did they find any facts surprising?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
d	 Focus on the sentences. Sts should, from memory, try to 
complete the sentences with a food item or drink from 
2a. Highlight that you have to say There isn’t any salt NOT 
There’s none salt.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  olive oil    2  dark chocolate    3  white bread    
4  (a can of) Coke
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.140. 
Grammar notes 
a lot of
In positive sentences native speakers normally use a lot 
of for big quantities. It is also possible to use a lot of in 
negatives and questions, although it is more common to 
use much / many. 
We use a lot (NOT a lot of) in short answers or when we 
don’t give the noun, e.g. I eat a lot of chocolate, but I eat a lot. 
In colloquial English, people often use lots of as an 
alternative to a lot of. It’s useful for Sts to recognize both 
forms, but at this level, we only include a lot of in the 
Grammar Bank exercises.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 124@@
124
9B
Salt is used to make glass, washing powder, and paper.
Sugar really helps the medicine go down! It’s an important 
ingredient of many modern medicines.
Christopher Columbus introduced sugar to the New World in 1493, 
on his second voyage.
If you put sugar into a vase of flowers, the flowers last longer.
If you want to check if an egg is fresh, put it in a cup with water and 
salt. If the egg floats, it isn’t very fresh.
In the UK, there’s a club for people who collect the little packets of 
sugar you get when you order tea or coffee in a café or restaurant.
If your dog or cat has fleas, and they are now living in your carpets, 
put some salt on the carpets and leave it for twelve hours. This kills 
all the fleas.
Only six per cent of the salt used in the USA is used in food; another 
seventeen per cent is used for de-icing roads in the winter months.
Sure and sugar are the only two words in the English language that 
begin with ‘s-u’ and are pronounced ‘sh’.
Scientists use sugar to make different kinds of plastic, e.g. for food 
packaging.
Salt removes red wine stains (though probably not from your new 
white carpet).
If you eat too much salt (about one gram per kilogram of weight), 
you can die. This was a method of ritual suicide in ancient China.
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and find the verbs. In 
pairs, they should to try to guess the meaning and 
pronunciation of the verbs.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English or translating 
into Sts’ L1. Model and drill the pronunciation, and get Sts 
to underline the stressed syllable in each verb.
introduce  /ˌɪntrəˈdjuːs/ = to bring in something new
float  /fləʊt/ = to stay on top of water
collect  /kəˈlekt/ = to bring together things that are the same in 
some way, to study or enjoy them
order  /ˈɔːdə/ = to ask for food or drink in a restaurant, bar, etc.
de-ice  /ˌdiː ˈaɪs/ = to take the ice away from something
remove  /rɪˈmuːv/ = to take something away
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the questionnaire about sugar and salt. Give Sts 
a few minutes to complete the gaps with How much or 
How many. 
	 Check answers by going through the questions, making 
sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. spoon and add.
1  How many    ​2  How many    ​3  How much    ​4  How many    ​
6  How much    ​7  How much    ​8  How many
b	 You could demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to 
interview you first. Answer the questions, giving a bit of 
extra information where you can, as a model for Sts, e.g.  
I don’t have sugar in my coffee; I hate fizzy drinks. 
	 Sts interview each other in pairs. When they have finished, 
they should tell each other if they need to eat less sugar 
or salt. If you didn’t teach it earlier, you may want to teach 
Sts the phrase too much.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts about their partner.
a	 e 9.9  Focus on the two sound pictures and play the 
audio for Sts just to listen. Make sure Sts can hear the 
difference between them. 
e 9.9
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.72
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 9.10  Sts should say each word aloud and then put it in 
the correct row in a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, then play the audio for 
them to check.
	 Check answers, and elicit when c is pronounced /s/ 
(before e and i although ci can sometimes be /ʃ/).
e 9.10
shower /ʃ/    sugar, fish, delicious, fresh, information, reception, 
shopping, special, sure
snake /s/        salt, sweets, centre, cereal, cinema, crisps, rice, salad, 
science
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each word for Sts to 
repeat.
c	 e 9.11  Focus on the conversation. Play the audio once 
and get Sts to listen and read. 
e 9.11
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.72
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now get Sts to practise it in pairs. Monitor, helping and 
correcting. 
	 Finally, you could get one pair to ‘perform’ for the rest  
of the class.
4	READING  categorizing information
a	 Tell Sts they are going to read an article entitled 
Fascinating facts about sugar and salt. Elicit / Explain the 
meaning of fascinating (= very interesting). Model and drill 
pronunciation. Point out the Glossary.
	 In pairs, Sts read the article and complete the gaps with 
sugar or salt. Highlight the meaning of too much (= more 
than what is good for you) before gap 12.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the verbs in c.
b	 e 9.12  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Don’t ask Sts about the facts at this stage, 
as they will be discussing them later.
1  Salt    ​2  Sugar    ​3  sugar    ​4  sugar    ​5  salt    ​6  sugar    ​7  salt  ​
8  salt    ​9  sugar    ​10  sugar    ​11  Salt    ​12  salt
e 9.12
Fascinating facts about sugar and salt
At different times in history, both sugar and salt were called ‘white 
gold’ because they were so expensive and difficult to get. But there 
are many more interesting facts about sugar and salt…
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 125@@
125
9C
e 9.13
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
P = presenter, C = contestant
P	 Question one. What is the population of the UK? Is it 
approximately a forty-seven million, b fifty-seven million, or c 
sixty-seven million?
C	 I think it’s c, sixty-seven million.
P	 C is the right answer! Question two. How far is it from New 
York City in the east to Los Angeles in the west? Is it a about 
two thousand five hundred kilometres, b about four thousand 
kilometres, or c about five thousand kilometres?
C	 About four thousand kilometres.
P	 Are you sure?
C	 Yes. I’m sure. 
P	 B is the right answer! Question three. How many politicians are 
there in the British Parliament? Is it a four hundred and fifty, b six 
hundred and fifty, or c seven hundred and fifty?
C	 I think it’s c, seven hundred and fifty.
P	 Final answer?
C	 Final answer, seven hundred and fifty.
P	 I’m sorry, the right answer is b. There are six hundred and fifty 
politicians in the British Parliament.
	 Play the audio again and tell Sts this time to pay attention 
to how the numbers are said. Pause the audio after each 
answer and elicit the number from Sts, and write it on the 
board. 
1  sixty-seven million    ​2  (about) four thousand    ​3  six hundred 
and fifty
Vocabulary notes
Highlight:
•	 there is no s on million or thousand.
•	 the use of and between hundreds and tens, e.g. six 
hundred and fifty.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases. 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Days and numbers 
on p.148 and get them to do Part 4. 
	 Focus on 4 High numbers and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs. 
	 e 9.14  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers.
three hundred and fifty
eight hundred and seventy-five
1,500
two thousand and twelve
five thousand four hundred and twenty
25,000
a hundred thousand
two million three hundred thousand
 G   comparative adjectives: bigger, more dangerous, etc.
 V   high numbers
 P   /ə/, sentence stress
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is general knowledge quizzes, 
through which comparative adjectives are presented and 
practised, and high numbers introduced. The lesson starts 
with a vocabulary focus on numbers greater than 100. In 
Listening, Sts decide if they think some statements are 
true or false, and then listen to a contestant answering the 
questions on a quiz show. The quiz questions lead into the 
grammar focus on comparative adjectives. This is followed 
by a pronunciation focus on stress in comparative sentences, 
and the sound /ə/ in than and in -er endings. In Speaking, 
Sts put the grammar and high numbers into practice and 
role-play taking part in a quiz show. The lesson finishes with 
a reading text about pub quizzes in the UK.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  comparative adjectives p.194 
Vocabulary  Guess the number p.274  
(instructions p.256) 
Communicative  Guess the comparative p.243 
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  9C
Online Practice  9C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise numbers up to 100 by writing some sums on the 
board and eliciting answers from the class.
1	VOCABULARY  high numbers
a	 Books open. Focus on the lesson title and elicit / explain 
the meaning.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to answer the 
three radio quiz questions. If they don’t know the answers, 
tell them to guess. Tell Sts at this point just to answer a, b, 
or c rather than trying to say the long numbers.
b	 e 9.13  Tell Sts they are going to hear a contestant on the 
radio quiz show answering the three questions. Play the 
audio for Sts to listen and check their answers to a.
	 Check answers.
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  b
	9C	 Facts and figures
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 126@@
126
9C
	 Finally, either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the numbers, or model and drill them yourself.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write out the numbers in 
words as well, and then elicit both versions of the numbers 
onto the board. 
e	 In pairs, Sts answer the four questions. If Sts don’t know 
the answers and they have access to the internet in class, 
you could set a time limit for them to find the answers 
online.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Sts write their own four questions with 
high numbers as answers. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
ask each other their questions.
2	LISTENING
a	 e 9.16  Focus on the task. Tell Sts that they are going to 
listen to another quiz show called Quiz Night, and give 
them a few minutes to read questions 1–4. Make sure all 
the questions are clear – check, for example, that Sts know 
How long (= How much time), contestant, to win, and 
to lose.
	 Play the audio twice.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Ten seconds
2	 a  £100  b  £200  c  £400  d  £12,800
3	 All the money
4	 Phone a friend
e 9.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
P = presenter, E = Eddie
P	 Good evening. Welcome to Quiz Night. Tonight’s show comes 
from Manchester. And our first contestant is Eddie from Chorley. 
Hi, Eddie. Are you nervous?
E	 No, not really. I think I’m, er, well-prepared.
P	 Well, let’s hope so. The rules are the same as always. I’m going to 
read you some sentences, and you have ten seconds to say if the 
sentence is true or false. If you get the first answer right, you win 
one hundred pounds. Then for each correct answer, you double 
your money, so if you get the second answer right, you win two 
hundred pounds, and for the third correct answer, you win four 
hundred pounds. For eight correct answers, you win twelve 
thousand eight hundred pounds. But if you get an answer wrong, 
you lose all the money. Remember, you can also phone a friend, 
so if you’re not sure about one of the answers, you can phone 
your friend to help you. Is that OK, Eddie?
E	 Yeah, OK.
b	 Focus on the picture and elicit whale and lion. Write 
the new words on the board, and model and drill 
pronunciation.
	 Focus on sentences 1–8 in Quiz Night. Elicit / Teach that 
the sentences are comparing two things, e.g. the first one 
is comparing a whale and a lion, using the adjective loud. 
Highlight that the -er ending means more.
	 Get Sts to read the sentences in pairs and decide whether 
they are true or false. Don’t check answers yet.
e 9.14
4 High numbers
a hundred and five
two hundred
three hundred and fifty
eight hundred and seventy-five
a thousand
one thousand five hundred
two thousand and twelve
five thousand four hundred and twenty
twenty-five thousand
a hundred thousand
a million
two million three hundred thousand
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the numbers, or model and drill them yourself.  Give 
further practice of any numbers your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words on the 
right and say the numbers. They could test themselves or 
their partner.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the numbers and words below on 
the board, and tell Sts to correct the mistakes:  
175	
	
A HUNDRED SEVENTY-FIVE 
2,150	
	
TWO THOUSAND AND ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY 
3,009	
	
THREE THOUSAND NINE 
20,000	
	
TWENTY THOUSANDS 
3,000,000		
THREE MILLIONS
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 e 9.15  Tell Sts they are going to hear ten numbers and 
they must write down the number (using figures, not 
words). Focus on the example. Tell Sts that they are going 
to hear the audio twice.
!   This is a difficult exercise. Pause the audio after each 
number, to give Sts time to think and write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, getting Sts to write the figures on the board.
2	 450
3	 920
4	 1,300
5	 3,437
6	 7,700 
7	 50,000 
8	 120,000 
9	 40,000,000 
10	 2,600,000
e 9.15
1	 a hundred and ninety-nine
2	 four hundred and fifty
3	 nine hundred and twenty
4	 one thousand three hundred
5	 three thousand four hundred and thirty-seven
6	 seven thousand seven hundred
7	 fifty thousand
8	 a hundred and twenty thousand
9	 forty million 
10	 two million six hundred thousand
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 127@@
127
9C
P	 I’m phoning from Quiz Night. Eddie needs some help. You have 
thirty seconds, Eddie. Here she is.
E	 Hi. Sandra?
S	 Yes.
E	 Listen. It’s the last question. It’s better to do exercise in the 
morning than in the afternoon. True or false? I think it’s false.
S	 Er, I think it’s true. I always see people running in the park in the 
morning…
E	 Google it. Quickly. On your phone.
S	 What do I put in?
E	 Just that sentence and see what comes up! ‘It’s better to do 
exercise in the morning than in the afternoon.’ Come on!
S	 Yes, I’m writing it. Oh sorry, I just got a message.
E	 Hurry up, Sandra!
P	 Time’s up, I’m afraid. OK, Eddie. So, true or false?
E	 Er. True.
P	 Final answer?
E	 Final answer. True.
P	 I’m sorry, Eddie, it’s false. It’s better to do exercise in the afternoon, 
between four and five. Eddie, you had six thousand four hundred 
pounds, but now you go home with…nothing.
E	 Why did I phone Sandra? Why didn’t I phone my friend Dave?
	 Find out if any pairs got all the answers right. Now ask 
how much money Eddie wins.
He doesn’t win anything.
d	 Tell Sts to listen again and write down why the answers 
are true or false. They must also write the important 
numbers they hear in the answers. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each answer to give Sts time 
to write. Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 T – Blue whales can make a sound of up to 188 decibels, 
whereas a lion’s roar is never more than 114 decibels.
2	 T – The First World War lasted four years, from 1914 to 1918, 
but the Second World War lasted six years, from 1939 to 
1945.
3	 F – …the Indian film industry produces about 1,000 films 
every year, which is double what Hollywood produces.
4	 T – The average temperature in July in Edinburgh is 15 
degrees, and in Sydney it’s 13 degrees.
5	 F – Gold weighs about 19 grams per cm3 and silver weighs 
only 10.5 grams.
6	 T – Thirty per cent of the people who try to climb K2 die, 
usually on the way down, whereas only five per cent of the 
people who try to climb Everest die.
7	 F – …out of every 100,000 people, six people died because 
of car accidents in Italy, compared to seven in Belgium.
8	 F – It’s better to do exercise in the afternoon, between 4.00 
and 5.00.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.  
c	 e 9.17  Tell Sts they are now going to hear Eddie doing 
the quiz. They should listen and check their answers to b.
	 Play the audio and get Sts to check their answers in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  T    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  T    ​5  F    ​6  T    ​7  F    ​8  F
e 9.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
P = presenter, E = Eddie, S = Sandra
P	 OK, Eddie, first question for one hundred pounds. A whale can 
make a louder noise than a lion. True or false?
E	 A whale can make a louder noise than a lion. Er, true.
P	 Correct. Blue whales can make a sound of up to one hundred and 
eighty-eight decibels whereas a lion’s roar is never more than one 
hundred and fourteen decibels. Ro-a-rrrr. Now, for two hundred 
pounds, the First World War was shorter than the Second World 
War. True or false?
E	 Er, I think it’s true.
P	 Correct. It’s true. The First World War lasted four years, from 
nineteen fourteen to nineteen eighteen, but the Second World 
War lasted six years, from nighteen thirty-nine to ninetten forty-
five. Next, for four hundred pounds, the American film industry is 
bigger than the Indian film industry.
E	 I think it’s false. You know, Bollywood and all that is huge. I think 
it’s false.
P	 Correct. The Indian film industry is much bigger than the 
American one. It produces about one thousand films every year, 
which is double what Hollywood produces. In fact, America isn’t 
even the second country that makes the most films, which is 
Nigeria. Next, for eight hundred pounds, in July, Edinburgh is 
hotter than Sydney. True or false?
E	 In July, Edinburgh is hotter than Sydney. Er, true.
P	 Correct. The average temperature in July in Edinburgh is fifteen 
degrees, and in Sydney it’s thirteen degrees. Of course, Australia’s 
in the southern hemisphere, so it’s winter there. Next, for one 
thousand six hundred pounds, silver is heavier than gold. True or 
false?
E	 Er, true. No, er, false. 
P	 Do you want to phone a friend?
E	 No, I think it’s false. I remember from science lessons at school. 
Gold is heavier than silver.
P	 Correct. Gold weighs about nineteen grams per cubic 
centimetres, and silver weighs only ten point five grams. That 
means that gold is almost twice as heavy as silver. OK, for three 
thousand two hundred pounds, the mountain K2 is more difficult 
to climb than Mount Everest.
E	 Er, true.
P	 Correct. Thirty per cent of the people who try to climb K2 
die, usually on the way down, whereas only five per cent of 
the people who try to climb Everest die. OK, Eddie, now for 
six thousand four hundred pounds, driving in Italy is more 
dangerous than driving in Belgium. True or false?
E	 Er, I think that’s a trick question. We all think the Italians drive 
really fast, but maybe they’re good drivers. I think it’s false.
P	 Well done, Eddie! It may be hard to believe, but in fact, out of 
every one hundred thousand people, six people died because of 
car accidents in Italy, compared to seven in Belgium. And finally, 
the last question. Be very careful, Eddie. If you get it right, you win 
twelve thousand eight hundred pounds, but if you get it wrong, 
you get nothing. Are you ready?
E	 Yes, ready.
P	 OK, for twelve thousand eight hundred pounds, it’s better to do 
exercise in the morning than in the afternoon.
E	 Er…er…
P	 Quickly, Eddie, your time is nearly up.
E	 I think it’s false, but I’m not sure. I want to phone a friend.
P	 Right, Eddie. So, who do you want to call?
E	 Sandra.
P	 Is she your girlfriend?
E	 Yes, she is.
P	 OK then. Hello, is that Sandra?
S	 Yes, it is.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 128@@
128
9C
e 9.20
1	 Carrots are sweeter than tomatoes.
2	 Air travel is safer than train travel.
3	 London is wetter than Milan.
4	 A horse is heavier than a car.
5	 Oranges are healthier than strawberries.
6	 Istanbul is further north than New York.
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to repeat. Highlight that is / are and than are not stressed. 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence, and 
elicit whether the sentence is true or not.
1  T    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  F    ​5  F    ​6  T
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Quiz Night, A on p.107, B on p.112. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. They are 
going to play a slightly simplified version of the game. 
	 Then give Sts time to complete their sentences with 
comparative adjectives. Before they start, you could 
quickly check they have the correct comparative forms.
Student A	
	
Student B
1	 smaller	
1	 older
2	 colder	
2	 smaller
3	 older	
3	 higher
4	 shorter	
4	 bigger
5	 more expensive	
5	 more popular
6	 drier	
6	 larger
7	 further	
7	 warmer 
8	 hotter	
8	 busier
	 Write the amounts of money that they win on the board, 
e.g. 1 = 100 (pounds or a currency that your Sts are familiar 
with), 2 = 200, 3 = 400, etc. (up to 12,800), and check Sts 
can say the numbers correctly. Explain that if you get, for 
example question 4 wrong, you continue playing, but you 
lose the money you had and the prize starts again from 
100 pounds. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A reads his / her 
sentences to B. Monitor and help Sts to get the rhythm 
right when they read their quiz sentences. 
	 B then reads A his / her sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do the above activity in groups 
of four instead of pairs. Divide the class into groups of four 
and have two As and two Bs in each group. They prepare 
their quiz sentences together, and take turns to read them to 
the other pair. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage A to ‘play the role’ of the 
presenter. Give Sts a few minutes to look at the script and 
make a note of any useful language (e.g. Good evening, I ask 
the questions).
	 When both Sts have played the game, get feedback to see 
who won the most money. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9C.
3	GRAMMAR  comparative adjectives
a	 Focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to answer the 
questions in pairs. 
	 Check answers.
1  -er    ​2  Because you double the final g.    ​3  Change y to i and 
add -er.    ​4  more    ​5  better    ​6  than
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9C on p.140. 
Grammar notes
There are clear rules governing the formation of 
comparative adjectives.
In one-syllable adjectives, a final -w after a vowel doesn’t 
count as a consonant, and is not doubled, e.g. new, newer.
Depending on your Sts’ L1, they may try to use that 
instead of than after comparative adjectives.
	 e 9.18  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 9C on p.141. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers. Get Sts to spell the -er adjectives in a and 
write them on the board. In b, get them to read the full 
sentences. 
a	
1  higher    ​2  dirtier    ​3  more important    ​4  later    ​5  lower    ​
6  more bored    ​7  wetter    ​8  more modern    ​9  more 
comfortable    ​10  happier
b	
1  cheaper than    ​2  easier…than    ​3  more tired…than    ​
4  busier than    ​5  better than    ​6  more interesting than    ​
7  further…than    ​8  shorter than    ​9  worse than    ​10  more 
difficult than
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  /ə/,  
sentence stress
a	 e 9.19  Focus on the sentence from the quiz. Play 
the audio once for Sts to hear how -er and than are 
pronounced, and then check answers. Tell Sts that the 
final -er is never stressed, e.g. safer NOT safer.
The final -er is always pronounced /ə/.
than is pronounced /ðən/.
e 9.19
See sentence in Student’s Book on p.75
b	 e 9.20  Tell Sts they are going to hear six comparative 
sentences and they must write them down.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 129@@
129
9C
5	READING  identifying section topics
a	 Tell Sts they are now going to read an article about 
pub quizzes in the UK. Make sure they understand the 
question and that they only read the first part. Before they 
start, you might want to elicit / explain the meaning of 
general knowledge. 
	 When Sts have finished, elicit some responses to the 
question.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the words  
in c.
b	 Focus on the instructions and elicit the meaning of tips. 
Now focus on A–G and make sure Sts understand them.
	 Tell Sts to read the tips and complete the gaps with A–G. 
Point out that the first one (D) has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
2  A    ​3  C    ​4  F    ​5  G    ​6  E    ​7  B
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and find the words. 
In pairs, they should try to guess the meaning and 
pronunciation.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English or translating 
into Sts’ L1. Model and drill the pronunciation, and get Sts 
to underline the stressed syllable in each item.
a team  /tiːm/ = a group of people who play a game together 
against another group
a quizmaster  /ˈkwɪzmɑːstə/ = a person who asks questions in a 
game, especially on TV
an expert  /ˈekspɜːt/ = a person who knows a lot about 
something
to cheat  /tʃiːt/ = to do something dishonest in order to gain an 
advantage, especially in a game, a competition, an exam, etc.
to memorize  /ˈmeməraɪz/ = to learn something so that you can 
remember it exactly
to be a bad loser  /bi ə bæd ˈluːzə/ = to behave badly when you 
lose a game
to win  /wɪn/ = to be the best or first in a game 
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the five questions. 
You could demonstrate the activity by answering a few 
questions yourself.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 130@@
	 1	
Practical English
EPISODE
130
PE5
e 9.21
R = Rob, J = Jenny, E = Eddie, D = Daniel
J	 Thanks for showing me around London yesterday. I had a great 
time.
R	 Me too. So, what did you do last night? 
J	 Nothing, really. I had a lot of work to do. Emails, phone calls…
What did you do?
R	 I wrote my article about the artist that I interviewed yesterday 
morning.
J	 Can I see it?
R	 Sure, it’s on my laptop. Hang on a second. There.
J	 Oh, sorry. Hi, Eddie.
E	 Happy Birthday to you!  Happy Birthday to you! 
J	 Thanks! But listen, I can’t talk right now. I’m in the office.
E	 OK. 
J	 Yeah, later.
E	 Have fun! 
J	 OK. Sorry, but…it’s my birthday today.
R	 Really? Happy Birthday! Maybe we could have dinner tonight? 
D	 Jennifer.
J	 Oh, hi, Daniel.
D	 I’d like to take you out for dinner this evening.
J	 This evening? 
D	 Yes, for a working dinner. We have a lot to talk about before you 
go back to New York. I know a very good restaurant.
J	 Yes, of course. 
D	 Great. See you later.
J	 Yes, sure. Sorry, Rob.
b	 Play the video / audio again so Sts can watch or listen and 
correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
3  It’s Jenny’s birthday.    ​5  Jenny says yes to Daniel.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
c	 e 9.22  Focus on the Responding to what somebody 
says box and go through it with the class. Elicit / Explain 
that congratulations and well done are similar, but 
congratulations is used for something important, like 
getting engaged, getting a new job, passing an important 
exam, etc., whereas well done is used for smaller things, 
like getting an exercise right.
	 Now play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and 
repeat B’s phrases. Encourage them to copy the rhythm 
and intonation.
e 9.22
See script in Student’s Book on p.76
d	 e 9.23  Tell Sts they are going to hear some phrases and 
they must respond using a phrase from the Responding 
to what somebody says box. Now focus on the example.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to respond. 
Function  ordering a meal
Vocabulary  understanding a menu
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn some common vocabulary related 
to menus and practise ordering a meal in a restaurant. In 
the storyline, Jenny and Rob are chatting in the office when 
Jenny gets a call from Eddie. Eddie sings ‘Happy Birthday’ 
to Jenny, which Rob overhears, and he takes the chance to 
invite Jenny out for dinner. But before she can reply, Daniel 
comes out of his office and invites Jenny to go out for a 
working dinner that evening.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 5 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 5 
                     Can you remember? 1–9
Online Practice  Practical English 5 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Elicit from the class what 
happened in the previous episode. Ask some questions, e.g. 
What did Rob and Jenny want to do on their free morning? Why 
couldn’t they do this? What happened to Jenny when she tried 
to find the gallery? Why did Daniel call Jenny?.  Alternatively, 
you could play the last scene of Episode 4.
1	r AN INVITATION TO DINNER
a	 e 9.21  Books open. Focus on the photo and elicit what 
Sts think is happening. Don’t tell them if they are right or 
not yet.
	 Focus on sentences 1–5 and give Sts time to read them. 
	 Then play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for them to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Make 
it clear that they don’t need to correct the false sentences 
yet. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  T    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  T    ​5  F
	 5	
Practical English  At a restaurant
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 131@@
131
PE5
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the video / 
audio again if necessary. 
	 Check answers. Ask What’s Jenny having for a starter?, etc.
Jenny: soup; mushroom ravioli
Daniel: mozzarella salad; chicken
e 9.25 e 9.26
W = waiter, D = Daniel, J = Jenny
W	 Good evening. Do you have a reservation?
D	 Yes, a table for two. (repeat) My name’s Daniel O’Connor. (repeat)
W	 Come this way, please.
***
W	 Are you ready to order?
J	 Yes. The soup and the mushroom ravioli, please. (repeat)
D	 I’d like the mozzarella salad and then the chicken, please. (repeat)
W	 What would you like to drink?
J	 Just water for me. (repeat)
D	 A bottle of mineral water, please. (repeat)
W	 Still or sparkling?
D	 Is sparkling OK? (repeat)
J	 Yes, sparkling. (repeat)
W	 Thank you, sir.
D	 Thank you. (repeat)
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit that 
the You hear phrases are said by the waiter, and You say 
is what the customer says, here Daniel and Jenny. These 
phrases will be useful for Sts if they go to a restaurant.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  reservation    ​2  way    ​3  order    ​4  like    ​5  Still
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. 
	 Also make sure Sts understand the two kinds of mineral 
water, still (= no gas) and sparkling (= with gas).
c	 e 9.26  Now focus on the You say phrases. Tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Highlight the different ways of ordering, e.g. The soup 
and the mushroom ravioli, please or I’d like (I would like) the 
mozzarella salad and then the chicken, please, or (Just) water 
for me.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. Encourage them to copy the rhythm 
and intonation, but not to try to copy Jenny’s American 
accent. When Jenny pronounces water as /ˈwɔːdər/, Sts 
should use the British English pronunciation of water  
/ˈwɔːtə/.
e 9.26
Same as script 9.25 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in groups of three A, B, and C. A is the waiter, 
and B and C are Daniel and Jenny. Get them to read the 
conversation aloud and then swap roles.
e 9.23
1
A	 I got two goals this afternoon.
B	 Well done!
2
A	 I passed my exams. I’m a doctor!
B	 Congratulations!
3
A	 I’m thirty today.
B	 Happy Birthday!
4
A	 I didn’t pass my driving test.
B	 Oh dear! Never mind.
5
A	 I have my English exam tomorrow.
B	 Good luck!
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
2	r VOCABULARY  understanding a menu
a	 Focus on the menu and get Sts to complete the 
three gaps. Check answers, and model and drill the 
pronunciation of the words. Focus especially on the stress 
in desserts /dɪˈzɜːts/ (you could point out that if they 
stress it on the first syllable, it will sound like deserts).
1  Starters    ​2  Main courses    ​3  Desserts
b	 e 9.24  Tell Sts to look at the highlighted words on the 
menu and, in pairs, to try and guess their meaning. 
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
courses /ˈkɔːsɪz/ = separate parts of a meal
soup /suːp/ = liquid food that you make by cooking things like 
vegetables or meat in water
grilled /ɡrɪld/ = cooked on metal bars under or over heat
home-made /ˌhəʊm ˈmeɪd/ = made in your house, not bought in a 
shop or made in a factory
sauce /sɔːs/ = a thick liquid that you eat on or with other food
fresh /freʃ/ = made or picked not long ago
e 9.24
See highlighted words in Student’s Book on p.76
	 Now play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen and 
repeat the words.
c	 Get Sts to cover the menu or close their books. Write on 
the board STARTERS, MAIN COURSES, DESSERTS. In pairs, see if 
Sts can remember the two starters, three main courses 
and desserts. 
	 Get feedback, asking the class to say what was on 
the menu.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could simply elicit the dishes from the 
whole class.
3	r ORDERING A MEAL
a	 e 9.25  Focus on the photo and ask Where are Jenny and 
Daniel? (At the restaurant), What are they doing? (Looking 
at the menu and ordering).
	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to look at the menu 
on p.76 as they listen. They should tick the dishes they 
hear. 
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 132@@
132
PE5
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
b	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says them.
c	 e 9.28  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen to 
the eight phrases and check. 
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases. 
1  J    ​2  D    ​3  J    ​4  J    ​5  D    ​6  B    ​7  D    ​8  D
e 9.28
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.77
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase, for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  7    ​B  2, 3    ​C  8    ​D  1    ​E  4    ​F  5    ​G  6
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
e	 Sts now role-play the conversation. A (book open) is the 
waiter. B and C (books closed) are customers. Tell the 
waiter to give B and C one of their books, open on p.76, to 
use as a menu. 
	 If there’s time, get Sts to swap roles at least once. Monitor 
and help. 
	 When Sts have finished, get feedback to find out what Sts 
ordered.
EXTRA IDEA   Print a menu for Sts to use in the role-play.
4	r THE END OF THE MEAL
a	 e 9.27  Give Sts time to read the six questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. Play it 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. When you check the answer to 3, write what 
Daniel says (YOU’VE GOT BEAUTIFUL EYES) on the board. Point 
out to Sts that you’ve got is a contraction of you have got, 
which is a colloquial form of you have. You may also want 
to get Sts to speculate what the good news is when you 
check the answer to 5.
1	 She goes out for dinner with friends or sees a film.
2	 Coffee
3	 He says ‘You’ve got beautiful eyes.’
4	 She thanks him and says they are from her mother.
5	 Good news
6	 She wants to go back to the hotel.
e 9.27
D = Daniel, J = Jenny, W = waiter, B = Barbara
D	 So, Jenny, I hear it’s your birthday today. 
J	 Yes, that’s right.
D	 Well, Happy Birthday! How do you normally celebrate?
J	 Oh, nothing special. Maybe I go out for dinner with friends or see 
a movie.
D	 Well, we could go out somewhere, after dinner.
W	 Would you like a dessert?
J	 Not for me, thanks.
D	 OK, no.
W	 Coffee?
J	 A decaf espresso.
D	 The same for me, please.
W	 Two decaffeinated espressos. Certainly, sir.
D	 You know, Jenny, you’ve got beautiful eyes.
J	 I get them from my mother. Anyway, what are your plans for the 
July edition of the magazine?
D	 The, er, July edition? I, um…
J	 I have to take this. Sorry.
D	 No problem.
J	 Hi, Barbara.
B	 Jenny, just a quick call. We really like your idea about Rob Walker. 
He’s a great writer.
J	 So can I ask him?
B	 Yes. Go ahead. 
J	 That’s great.
B	 Good luck. I hope he says yes.
J	 Me too. 
D	 Good news?
J	 Yeah. That was Barbara, my boss from the New York office. She 
just gave me a little birthday present.
D	 So, would you like to go somewhere else?
J	 I’m sorry, Daniel. I’m a little tired. 
D	 Yes. Of course. Waiter, could I have the bill, please?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 133@@
133
10A
	10A	The most dangerous place…
 G   superlative adjectives: the biggest, the best, etc. 
 V   places and buildings
 P   consonant groups
Lesson plan
A reading text about the most dangerous place in the 
world to cross the road and other geographical superlatives 
provides the context to present and practise superlative 
adjectives and the lexis of places and buildings. The lesson 
starts with Vocabulary, where Sts learn the words for 
buildings and landmarks in a town or city. In Grammar, 
Sts make the logical progression from comparatives to 
superlatives, and look at some ‘extreme’ places in the world, 
e.g. the biggest station, the oldest bridge, etc. Pronunciation 
focuses on consonant groups, which occur in superlatives, 
e.g. the most expensive, and then Sts do a role-play about 
their town, using superlatives. Then an article from the British 
press gives Sts information about the most dangerous place 
in the world to cross the road. Writing focuses more directly 
on the Sts’ own environment, and they write about their own 
town / city.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  superlative adjectives p.195 
Vocabulary  Places and buildings puzzle p.275 
(instructions p.256) 
Communicative  What do you know about the UK? p.244 
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  10A
Online Practice  10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board RUSSIA and CHINA. Ask Sts if they are big or 
small countries, and elicit that they are big. Then ask which is 
bigger, and elicit that Russia is bigger. (For reference, Russia is 
about 17 million km2, and China is about 9.6 million km2).
Now rub CHINA off the board. Ask Sts if they know any 
country which is bigger than Russia (there isn’t one).  
Elicit / Teach Russia is the biggest country in the world. Write 
the sentence on the board. 
1	VOCABULARY  places and buildings
a	 Books open. Tell Sts to look at sentences 1–6, which are all 
about famous tourist sights in the UK and the USA. In each 
one a word is missing. Sts should complete each gap with 
a word from the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 10.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
answers to a or you could elicit the answers first, and then 
play the audio.
	 Check answers. Point out the silent t in castle.
1  Bridge    ​2  Street    ​3  Castle    ​4  Park    ​5  Gallery    ​6  Square
e 10.1
1	 The Brooklyn Bridge connects Manhattan and Brooklyn.
2	 Downing Street is where the British Prime Minister lives.
3	 Windsor Castle is the Royal Family’s weekend home, and the 
largest inhabited castle in the world.
4	 Central Park is a green space in the middle of New York.
5	 The National Gallery is London’s most famous art museum.
6	 Times Square is the centre of New York’s theatre district.
	 Finally, ask Sts if any of them have seen any of these places.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Places and buildings 
on p.164 and get them to do a individually or in pairs. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to highlight the difference between a road  
(= connects different towns or cities) and a street (= in a 
town or city).
	 e 10.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers.
e 10.2
Places and buildings
3	 a chemist’s
9	 a church
4	 a department store
6	 a hospital
5	 a market
2	 a park
11	 a police station
8	 a post office
10	 a shopping centre
7	 a supermarket
1	 a town hall
15	 an art gallery
16	 a castle
14	 a museum
12	 a theatre
13	 a zoo
20	 a bridge
19	 a river
18	 a road
21	 a square
17	 a street
23	 a bus station
24	 a car park
22	 a railway station
	 Then either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Remind Sts that 
in compound nouns (e.g. post office, art gallery), the main 
stress is on the first word. Don’t forget to remind Sts of the 
silent t in castle, and that ch is pronounced /k/ in chemist’s. 
Give further practice of any other words your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the Other places of worship box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now focus on c. Get Sts to cover the words and use the 
photos to test themselves or their partner. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 134@@
134
10A
	 Finally, focus on Activation and model and drill the 
question. Put Sts in pairs to ask and answer the question.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point. 
2	GRAMMAR  superlative adjectives
a	 Tell Sts to look at photos 1–6 and ask if they know or can 
guess which countries they are in. Don’t tell them if they 
are right.
b	 Focus on the instructions. In pairs, Sts complete sentences 
1–6 using phrases from the list. Establish that the phrases 
are all superlative adjectives.
c	 e 10.3  Before you play the audio, tell Sts they are going 
to hear a little more information about each place. Play 
the audio for Sts to listen and check their answers to a 
and b.
 	 Check answers. If you have a map of the world in class, 
you could show Sts where each country is.
a	
1  the UK    ​2  the USA    ​3  Italy    ​4  Egypt    ​5  Vietnam    ​
6  Germany
b	
1	 The busiest
2	 The biggest
3	 The oldest
4	 The longest
5	 The most dangerous
6	 The tallest
e 10.3
1	 The busiest shopping street in Europe is Oxford Street. Five 
hundred thousand shoppers a day visit the street in the centre of 
London, capital of the UK.
2	 The biggest railway station in the world is Grand Central Terminal 
in New York. It has forty-four platforms, and covers nearly two 
hundred thousand square metres.
3	 The oldest bridge in Europe is the Ponte Fabricio. It’s in Rome, 
Italy, and it was built more than two thousand years ago.
4	 The longest river in the world is the Nile. It’s six thousand eight 
hundred and fifty-three kilometres long, and goes through eleven 
different African countries.
5	 The most dangerous place in the world to cross the road is Ho Chi 
Minh City, in Vietnam. There are five million scooters in this city, as 
well as cars, trucks, and buses.
6	 The tallest cathedral in the world is Ulm Münster, in Germany. It is 
one hundred and sixty-one metres tall. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to listen again and write down 
any extra information they hear about each place.
d	 Focus on the chart and the three column headings. Get 
Sts to complete the chart with the adjectives from b.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation. 
tall    longer    the biggest    busy    the most dangerous
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
For one-syllable adjectives, we add -est (and not -er) to the end 
of the adjective. For longer adjectives with two or more syllables, 
we put the most instead of more before the adjective. 
 f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.142. 
Grammar notes
Make sure Sts are clear about the difference between 
comparatives (to compare two things or people, etc.) and 
superlatives (to say which is, e.g. the smallest / largest in a 
group of three or more). In your Sts’ L1, they may just use 
the comparative form + the. (Typical error: the better place 
in the world…) 
Formation of superlatives is very easy once Sts know 
comparatives. -er changes to -est with most short 
adjectives, and more changes to the most before long 
adjectives. 
Spelling rules
These are exactly the same as for comparatives, e.g. 
hotter / the hottest; prettier / the prettiest.
Highlight that we use in the world, in the class, etc. after 
superlatives, NOT of.
	 e 10.4  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 10A on p.143. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers. Get Sts to spell the -est adjectives in a 
where there’s a spelling change and write them on the 
board. In b, get them to read the full sentences, helping 
them with the rhythm. 
a	 1  the hottest    ​2  the cheapest    ​3  the worst    ​4  the easiest  ​
5  the wettest    ​6  the tallest / longest    ​7  the furthest    ​8  the 
dirtiest
b	 1  the biggest    ​2  the best    ​3  the smallest    ​4  the most 
comfortable    ​5  the noisiest    ​6  the most stressed    ​7  the 
youngest    ​8  The most beautiful
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g	 e 10.5  Tell Sts they are going to hear six questions with 
superlatives and they must write them down.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question to give Sts 
time to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting the questions onto the board.
e 10.5
1	 What’s the noisiest city in the world?
2	 What’s the foggiest city in Europe?
3	 Which US city has the biggest population?
4	 What’s the highest capital city in the world?
5	 Which city has the busiest airport in the world?
6	 Which city has the worst traffic in the world?
h	 Focus on the possible answers and make sure Sts know 
where they all are.
	 Put Sts in small groups and get them to ask the questions 
from g and choose an answer from h.
	 Elicit answers from the class.
1  Tokyo    ​2  Milan    ​3  New York    ​4  La Paz    ​5  Atlanta    ​
6  Brussels
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 135@@
135
10A
	 Get Sts to role-play the conversation. First, Sts A are the 
tourist. Monitor and help, especially with superlatives.
	 Then tell Sts to swap roles, so now Sts B are the tourist.
	 Get some feedback. Where Sts are from the same town / 
city, see if they agree.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
4	READING  identifying paragraph endings
a	 Focus on the photo and the title of the article, and ask Sts 
where it is (Ho Chi Minh City). Elicit / Explain the meaning 
of the title.
	 Tell Sts to read the article and decide which suggestion in 
the article is the most useful. 
	 When Sts have finished, elicit responses.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
b	 Now set a time limit for Sts to read the article again and 
complete the gaps with A–E.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
Keep walking D
Cross with a local person E
Cross in a group B
Find a policeman A
Take a taxi C
c	 Tell Sts to cover the article, and elicit / explain the 
meaning of vehicles (= a thing that takes people from one 
place to another). Model and drill pronunciation.
	 In pairs or as a whole-class activity, Sts try to remember all 
seven words.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers. You could draw 
a mind map on the board with vehicles in the middle. 
Elicit / Explain that a scooter is a light motorbike with a 
small engine.
cars, lorries, bikes, buses, motorbikes, scooters, taxi
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the six questions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis.
	 Put Sts in small groups and get them to discuss the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. You could also 
tell Sts if you have had problems crossing a road.
5	WRITING
	 Focus on the instructions and read the example about 
Kielce. Tell Sts to write an advert for their town / city, and 
to include some superlatives. If your Sts are all from the 
same town / city, you could give them the option to write 
about another place they know well. You could set this as 
homework and ask Sts to add some photos to their advert.
	 Put the adverts around the class for Sts to read.
	 Ask Sts if they found out anything new / interesting about 
the places.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
consonant groups
a	 e 10.6  Focus on the Consonant groups box and go 
through it with the class. 
	 Tell Sts to look at the speech bubble and play the audio 
once for them just to listen.
e 10.6
See word and phrases in Student’s Book on p.79
	 Now play the audio again and get Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 10.7  Now tell Sts they are going to do the same with 
the adjectives in 1–4. Tell them the word in brackets is the 
noun they must use with the adjective. If Sts are confused, 
write BEAUTIFUL (SQUARE) on the board and show them the 
speech bubble in a.
	 Then play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. 
e 10.7
1	 old – the oldest – the oldest building – What’s the oldest building?
2	 interesting – the most interesting – the most interesting museum – 
What’s the most interesting museum?
3	 good – the best – the best shopping street – What’s the best 
shopping street?
4	 nice – the nicest – the nicest place – What’s the nicest place? 
	 You may want to repeat it, pausing after each word / phrase, 
and get individual Sts to say the phrase and question.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to say the word, phrases, 
and question first. Then play the audio for them to listen 
and check.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication I’m a tourist. Help!, A on p.107,  
B on p.112.
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Highlight 
that the tourist only speaks English, so the local person 
must explain everything in English. Highlight, too (if 
your Sts are from the same town), that the tourist should 
pretend not to know anything and to ask for as much 
information as possible, and the local person should try to 
answer all his / her questions in as much detail as possible.
	 Now focus on questions 1–6 and the examples, and 
explain that Sts have to complete the questions with the 
superlative of the adjective in brackets. You might want to 
elicit / explain the meaning of typical and popular.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to write in the superlatives, and 
check them before they start.
Student A	
	
Student B
1	 the most beautiful	
1	 the oldest
2	 the easiest	
2	 the nicest
3	 the most interesting	
3	 the best
4	 the best	
4	 the most typical
5	 the nicest	
5	 the most popular
6	 the most famous	
6	 the most beautiful
	 If you are not from the same city / country as your Sts, get 
them to interview you first with their first two questions to 
find out about your town / city.
!   Don’t be afraid to say I don’t know, but I think it’s… This will 
provide a good model for Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 136@@
136
10B
	10B	Five continents in a day
	 Before playing the audio, you might want to tell Sts that 
Gunnar is from Norway and has a slight accent. Play the 
audio for Sts to listen and draw the route. Play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers. Ask Sts which continent they are not 
planning to visit (Australia).
Istanbul  >  Casablanca  >  Paris  >  Punta Cana  >  Caracas 
e 10.8
I = interviewer, G = Gunnar, A = Adrian
I	 Gunnar, Adrian, tell us your plan. How can you visit five continents 
in one day?
G	 We’re going to start in Istanbul. Part of Istanbul is in Asia, which is 
our first continent. At ten past one in the morning we’re going to 
fly to Casablanca, which is in Morocco, in North Africa. Continent 
number two.
I	 Are you going to get another flight immediately?
A	 No, first we’re going to visit the famous mosque – it’s the largest 
mosque in Morocco. Then our next flight is to Paris, at seven 
thirty-five in the morning.
I	 So Europe is your third continent. How long are you going to be 
in Paris?
G	 Five minutes, maybe? We’re just going to go out of the airport – 
that’s one of the rules of our challenge – and then go back in. We 
only have one hour fifty-five minutes before our next flight, to 
Punta Cana, in the Dominican Republic.
I	 So North America is your fourth continent?
G	 Yes, that’s right. And from there, the final flight is to Caracas in 
Venezuela, South America – our last continent. We’re going to 
arrive at five past ten. And then we’re going to celebrate!
c	 Tell Sts to uncover the interview and look at the verbs in 
the list. 
	 Give Sts time to quickly read the interview before playing 
the audio.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the gaps before they 
listen to the audio.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  start    ​2  fly    ​3  get    ​4  visit    ​5  be    ​6  go out    ​7  arrive    ​
8  celebrate
d	 Either put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the 
questions, or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
1  infinitive    ​2  the future
 G   be going to (plans), future time expressions
 V   city holidays: stay in a hotel, etc.
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is travel and city breaks. The lesson 
starts with Grammar, where be going to for future plans is 
presented and practised by listening to and reading about 
two people who are planning to travel to five continents in 
one day. Pronunciation focuses on sentence stress in going 
to sentences. In Listening, Sts listen to an expert from a 
website called Responsible Travel giving advice about how 
to plan a holiday. In Vocabulary and Speaking, Sts look at 
some common holiday phrases and then plan their own 
dream trip. Finally, in Writing they write a formal email, 
booking some accommodation for a holiday.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  be going to (plans) p.196 
Communicative  Future plans p.245 (instructions p.212)
For students
Workbook  10B
Online Practice  10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise continents. Play Hangman (see p.24 for instructions) 
with the word EUROPE. 
Then ask Sts what it is (a continent). 
Finally, elicit the other five continents and write them on 
the board.
1	GRAMMAR  be going to (plans)
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and do this as a 
whole-class activity. Point out the example.
Punta Cana is in the Dominican Republic, North America.
Casablanca is in Morocco, Africa.
Paris is in France, Europe.
Istanbul is in Turkey, Europe / Asia.
b	 e 10.8  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what Gunnar and Adrian are planning to do. You could tell 
Sts that in order to break the record, Gunnar and Adrian 
have to leave the airport in each place, even for just a 
short time. Make sure Sts cover the interview and look at 
the map.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 137@@
137
10B
e 10.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.122) 
I = interviewer, G = Gunnar
I	 Gunnar, can you give us a quick summary of your journey?
G	 OK, so we left Istanbul twenty minutes late, at one thirty in the 
morning – not a good start. But we arrived in Casablanca more or 
less on time. We visited the mosque at four thirty in the morning. 
We couldn’t go inside though – we just saw it from the outside! 
Then we went back to the airport and flew to Paris. When we 
arrived, we rushed outside and took some photos, and then went 
back in to a different terminal. It was really stressful, the most 
stressful part of the trip – but we just got to the gate in time for 
our flight to Punta Cana. When we got there, we went to a beach 
that was just twenty kilometres from the airport, and we relaxed 
there for a bit, and then went back to the airport and got our 
flight to Caracas. And we arrived here at ten at night, and we 
officially entered the country at ten fifteen. So – five continents in 
one day! We did it! 
EXTRA IDEA   Before playing the audio, you could ask Sts 
what they think success or failure depended on, e.g. the 
airlines, the weather, etc.
g	 Focus on the question and the three options, eliciting / 
explaining any lexis Sts don’t know, especially the 
word trip. 
	 Do this as a whole-class activity, by getting a show of 
hands for each option. Elicit some reasons. You could also 
tell the class what you think. 
2	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
When native speakers speak quickly, they tend to 
pronounce going to as gonna /ˈgənə/. It is a good idea 
to point out this pronunciation to Sts as they will hear 
it if they have contact with native speakers or listen to 
songs, and they will see it written down in song lyrics. 
This pronunciation is widespread in British and American 
English, particularly in conversation, although it might not 
be appropriate in some formal situations.
At this level, we recommend that it is better to teach the 
more ‘correct’ pronunciation, i.e. pronouncing both going 
and to (using the weak form of to). Sts can use the more 
colloquial form later when their speed of speech increases.
a	 e 10.11  Tell Sts they are going to listen to the two 
conversations. Before playing the audio, focus on the first 
question and ask Sts which words are stressed (What, do, 
and summer).
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 10.11
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.81
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage Sts to get the right rhythm.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to read the conversations aloud in pairs.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.142. 
Grammar notes
going to + infinitive is the most common way to express 
future plans and the main future form taught in this level. 
It is often used with time expressions like tonight, next 
week, and next summer. Sts don’t usually find the concept 
of going to a problem, but the form needs plenty of 
practice. A typical error is the omission of the auxiliary be, 
e.g. I going to have dinner, or using the present simple of 
go, e.g. I go to have dinner. 
In song lyrics, going to is sometimes spelled gonna 
because of the way it is pronounced (see Pronunciation 
notes in 2). Discourage Sts from using this in written 
English. 
Some Sts may know the future form will and may ask 
about this. Explain that both going to and will are used to 
talk about the future. In the English File series, be going to is 
presented first to talk about plans and predictions. Going 
to for predictions is practised in the next lesson. Sts will 
learn the grammar of will in English File Pre-intermediate, 
but will see some examples in Practical English. 
	 e 10.9  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 10B on p.143. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	
1  ’re going to book    ​2  ’m going to stay    ​3  ’s going to study    ​
4  are going to get    ​5  ’s going to work    ​6  isn’t going to go    ​
7  aren’t going to visit
b	
1  ’m going to call    ​2  are…going to have    ​3  isn’t going to 
come    ​4  are…going to get    ​5  aren’t going to buy    ​ 
6  Are…going to watch
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 e 10.10  Remind Sts of Gunnar and Adrian’s plan. Focus 
on the question.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and find out if Gunnar and 
Adrian succeeded.
	 Check the answer.
Yes, they did.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 138@@
138
10B
the same things. But if what you really want to do is to meet new 
people, perhaps it would be better to travel alone. 
And finally, step three. Think about good holidays you had in the 
past. Why were they good? Perhaps it was the people you were with. 
Perhaps it was something you learned, or an experience you had. 
What can you repeat from those holidays? 
Of course, there are always other things you need to consider, like 
how much money you can spend, and how much time you can be 
away. But first follow these three steps, and then you’re ready to start 
thinking about where you want to go!
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts what else Justin said is important to 
think about.
How much money you can spend and how much time you can 
be away
c	 Now tell Sts they are going to hear the audio again and 
they must answer questions 1–5. 
	 Go through the questions before Sts listen, making sure 
they understand all the lexis, e.g. skill, to make sure, etc. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after Justin has 
answered each question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 •  Reading, doing yoga
	 •  Visit an exciting new city, or see some countryside and 
animals that are different from where you live
	 •  Climb Everest or live with an African tribe
	 •  Learn Spanish or learn to cook
2	 Make sure everyone wants the same things.
3	 To travel alone
4	 The people you were with, something you learned, or an 
experience you had
5	 Where you want to go
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.122–123, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Either put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the 
questions, or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get feedback.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  city holidays
a	 Tell Sts to look at the nine phrases related to holidays and 
to complete each one with a verb from the list. 
	 Check answers. You might want to point out that 
accommodation is uncountable.
1  book    ​2  go    ​3  rent    ​4  stay    ​5  eat    ​6  visit    ​7  buy    ​
8  have    ​9  meet
	 Now get Sts to cover phrases 1–9 (but not the verbs in the 
list) and see if they can remember the holiday phrases.
b	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs.
	 Monitor and help while Sts try to find things they both like 
doing on holiday.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What are you going to do?, A on 
p.107, B on p.112. 
	 Tell Sts they need to complete their questions with going 
to. Point out the example.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. A asks his / her 
questions to B. Monitor and help Sts to get the rhythm 
right when they read their questions. 
	 B then asks A his / her questions.
	 When both Sts have answered the questions, get 
feedback from the class. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
3	LISTENING  using prior knowledge to predict 	
	 stages
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand plan.
	 Give Sts time to read the four questions and make sure 
they understand previous.
	 Now get Sts to number the questions.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare answers.
	 Get some feedback.
b	 e 10.12  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
who Justin Francis is.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers. Find out, with a show of hands, if anyone 
had the same order as Justin. Don’t ask Sts if they agree 
with Justin, as they will be doing this later in the lesson.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 What am I going to do?
2	 Who am I going to go with?
3	 What previous holidays did I really enjoy? 
4	 Where am I going to go?
e 10.12
(script in Student’s Book on pp.122–123)
If you’re thinking of having a holiday or travelling somewhere nice, 
the planning can be complicated. The internet is full of reviews of 
hotels, restaurants, and attractions. There are so many different ways 
of travelling, and thousands of places to go. Where do you start? 
Why not follow these three simple steps to find the right holiday 
for you?
Step one. Think about what you want to do on your holiday. The first 
thing people usually try to decide is where they want to go, but it’s 
probably better to start by thinking about what you want to do. 
Do you want to relax? Then think about how you relax. For 
example, do you like reading or doing yoga, or do you like doing 
something more active? Do you want to go somewhere completely 
different? Do you want to visit an exciting new city, or see some 
countryside and animals that are different from where you live? 
Seeing something completely new is a great way to forget about 
your normal life. Do you want to have an adventure? Perhaps you’re 
dreaming about climbing Everest or living with an African tribe. You 
could use your holiday to make one of those dreams come true.
Do you want to learn something new? Not everybody wants to sit 
in a classroom learning Spanish, or be in a kitchen learning to cook 
when they’re on holiday, but some people love it. And nowadays 
you can do courses in many countries and experience a different 
culture at the same time. 
So now step two. Think about the people you’re going to go with. 
Are they family or friends? Do they have children? What do they 
want to do? People have different needs and interests, and if you’re 
all going to enjoy the holiday, you need to make sure you all want 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 139@@
139
10B
c	 Focus on the Formal emails box and go through it with 
the class. Elicit / Remind Sts of the difference between Mrs 
and Ms (some married women use Mrs. Most women use 
Ms as this gives no indication of marital status). Highlight 
that we don’t usually use contractions in formal writing.
	 Now tell Sts to write their email to the Bed and Breakfast. 
They must include answers to the questions in b, i.e. who 
they are travelling with, which rooms they want, how 
many nights they want to stay, etc. 
	 As this writing task is fairly short, you may like to get Sts to 
do it in class. 
EXTRA IDEA   If your Sts also need to write formal letters, not 
just emails, tell them that they can use exactly the same 
language to begin and end as in an email, but they should 
put:
•   their address in the top right-hand corner
•   the name and address of the person / company they’re 
writing to on the left-hand side, slightly lower down
•   the date under the name and address
•   Yours faithfully (if the letter is addressed Dear Sir / Madam) 
or Yours sincerely (if it is addressed to a name, e.g. Dear Mrs 
Richards) 
You could also teach as a set phrase I look forward to hearing 
from you.
 
c	 Focus on the task and the five questions. Tell Sts that they 
are going to plan a dream trip in their pairs. Their plan 
must be a visit to three cities in the same continent, and 
the holiday can be a maximum of ten days.
	 Before Sts start, go through the Making suggestions box 
with the class, and encourage them to use these phrases 
when planning their trip with their partner. You could 
write them on the board to serve as an extra reminder.
	 Give Sts about five minutes to make their plans for each of 
the five questions. Monitor and help, encouraging them 
to use Why don’t we…?, etc. for making suggestions. 
	 Monitor and help.
d	 Now tell Sts to change partners and to tell their new 
partner the agreed plan from c. Focus on the example in 
the speech bubble before they start.
e	 Finally, ask Sts if they are still happy with their original 
plan, or if they prefer their new partner’s plan. Get some 
Sts to tell the class their plans. 
EXTRA IDEA   Get one pair to come out to the front of the 
class. Act as a TV presenter and interview them, using the 
questions from c, e.g. What cities are you going to visit?.
5	WRITING  a formal email
	 Remind Sts of / Elicit the difference between informal and 
formal writing: informal = e.g. to a friend, and formal = e.g. 
to a person we don’t know, or to a company or institution. 
We need to use a different style of writing depending 
on whether it is an informal or formal situation. Before 
going to the Writing section, quickly elicit what Sts can 
remember about writing an informal email, e.g. how you 
begin (Hi / Dear…) and end (Best wishes / Write soon, etc.). 
	 Now tell Sts to go to Writing A formal email on p.117.
a	 Focus on the advertisement and the email. Make sure Sts 
know what a Bed and Breakfast is. Tell Sts to complete the 
gaps in Pascale’s email with the words in the list.
	 Check answers.
1  Dear    ​2  double    ​3  from    ​4  are    ​5  about    ​6  would    ​
7  hope    ​8  confirm    ​9  Regards
	 Ask Sts some comprehension questions to make sure 
they understand the email, e.g. Who are Mr and Mrs 
Buckingham? (the owners of the Bed and Breakfast), Why is 
Pascale writing to Mr and Mrs Buckingham? (to confirm her 
reservation, ask about parking, and arrange to have dinner 
there), How many nights does Pascale want to stay? (three 
nights), etc. 
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to think of their 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 140@@
140
10C
	10C	The fortune teller
b	 Sts match the cards and verb phrases. Point out that the 
first one (be lucky) has been done for them.
	 Check answers, and model and drill pronunciation.
B	 have a surprise
C	 fall in love
D	 get married
E	 become famous
F	 travel
G	 meet somebody new
H	 move house
I	 get a new job
J	 get a lot of money
	 Get Sts to test each other’s memory by covering the 
phrases and pointing at the cards.
2	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
a	 Focus on the Word stress in two-syllable words box and 
go through it with the class. 
	 Now focus on the words in the list and tell Sts that all 
these words are in a story they are going to hear. They 
must look at the words and decide which four are stressed 
on the second syllable. Remind Sts that exercises like this 
are easier if they say the words aloud.
	 Get Sts to compare answers with a partner.
b	 e 10.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
believe    idea    surprise    today
e 10.13
See words in the list in Student’s Book on p.82
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to listen and repeat. Then put them in pairs and 
get them to practise saying the words.
3	READING & LISTENING  following the events 	
	 of a story
a	 Focus on the title of the story and help Sts to explain / 
translate it. Elicit some ideas about the story.
b	 e 10.14  Focus on questions 1–3. Now play the audio 
and get Sts to read and listen to Part 1 of the story.
	 Get Sts to answer the questions in pairs and then check 
answers. Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words you think 
Sts may not have understood, e.g. a voice.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
!   Although the story is in the past, it is more natural to ask 
and answer questions about it in the present.
 G   be going to (predictions) 
 V   verb phrases: become famous, etc.
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
This lesson looks at another use of the future be going to 
to express predictions (what we think or are sure is going 
to happen in the future). The context is a short story about 
a fortune teller, which has also been dramatized on video. 
The lesson starts with Sts discussing fortune telling and 
looking at related verb phrases. In Pronunciation, Sts look 
at stress in two-syllable words. Then Sts read and listen to a 
short story about a fortune teller, which has a ‘twist’ at the 
end. As they read / listen to the story, Sts have to make a 
series of predictions about the outcome. After reading and 
listening to the first four parts of the story, Sts then have 
the possibility of watching them on video, and then finally 
discovering what happens in the end. However, if you are 
unable to use video in class, you can simply use the audio 
for the end of the story, and tell Sts to watch the video at 
home. After the story, Sts look at the grammar of using going 
to for predictions, and the lesson ends with Sts telling each 
other’s fortunes. If you would like to give Sts the actual cards 
to use for this stage, go to p.248 to photocopy them and cut 
them up. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  be going to (predictions) p.197 
Communicative  Predictions p.246 (instructions p.212)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  It’s written in the cards
For students
Workbook  10C
Online Practice  10C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise going to for plans. Write the following prompts on the 
board: 
TONIGHT    TOMORROW NIGHT    NEXT WEEKEND    NEXT SUMMER
Get Sts to ask you What are you going to do…? with the 
prompts. 
Sts ask each other in pairs. 
1	VOCABULARY  verb phrases
a	 Books open. Focus on the cards and ask Sts what they 
think they are for. Elicit / Tell them they are for fortune 
telling, i.e. predicting somebody’s future. 
	 Now focus on the questions and elicit answers from the 
class. Tell Sts if you believe in fortune telling, and if you 
have had any experience of it. Find out if any of the Sts 
have, too.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 141@@
141
10C
N	 Jane looked at her watch.
J	 Oh no, look at the time. I’m going to be late for work.
N	 She stood up, left a fifty-pound note on the table, and ran out of the 
room.
4	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 e 10.18  Tell Sts they are going to watch or listen to 
Parts 1–4 again. Get them to close their books and try to 
follow the story. Play the video / audio once the whole 
way through.
	 Ask Sts what they think is going to happen.
e 10.18
See scripts 10.14–10.17
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to listen again to the four 
parts of the audio with the scripts in the main lesson and on 
p.123, so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. If you are using the video, you could get Sts to 
watch again with subtitles / showing the script.
b	 e 10.19  Focus on the three questions. Then play the 
video / audio and tell Sts to watch or listen to Part 5.
	 Give Sts time to answer the questions in pairs.
	 Check answers and elicit some ideas for question 3. 
1	 Jim, the actor that Jane met at the party
2	 Because she helped him.
3	 A plane 
Accept any reasonable predictions: her plane is going to 
crash. If he travels with her, he is going to die, too.
e 10.19
N = narrator, Y = Yolanda, J = Jim
Part 5
N	 The fortune teller stood up. He turned on the light. At that moment, a 
woman came in. 
Y	 So, what happened? 
N	 ...she asked.
J	 It was perfect! She believed everything.
N	 ...said Jim. 
J	 I told you I’m a very good actor. She was sure I was a fortune 
teller!
N	 He gave the woman one hundred pounds. 
J	 That’s Jane’s fifty pounds and another fifty pounds from me. 
Thanks very much, Madame Yolanda. Bye.
N	 Madame Yolanda took the money. The fifth card was still on the 
table, face down. She turned it over. It was the plane. She looked at it 
for a minute and then she shouted.
Y	 Wait, young man! Don’t travel with that girl – her plane is going to…
N	 But the room was empty.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
1	 Madame Yolanda, the fortune teller
2	 A man because Madame Yolanda isn’t there.
3	 Because the room was dark. 
e 10.14
See It’s written in the cards Part 1 in Student’s Book on p.83
c	 e 10.15  Sts now listen to Part 2. Tell Sts you are going 
to play the audio twice. Sts, in pairs, complete the gaps in 
1−4. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words 
you think Sts may not have understood, e.g. face down, 
turn over.
1  boyfriend    ​2  five    ​3  (very) lucky    ​4  stay
e 10.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
J = Jane, Ji = Jim, N = narrator
Part 2
J	 Well, I have a problem with my boyfriend. We argue all the time. 
I’m not sure that he loves me. I want to know if we’re going to stay 
together.
Ji	 Please choose five cards, but don’t look at them.
N	 The fortune teller put the cards on the table, face down. Jane took 
five cards. The fortune teller turned over the first card.
Ji	 Ah, this is a good card. This means you’re going to be very lucky.
J	 But am I going to stay with my boyfriend?
N	 Jane asked. 
Ji	 Maybe.
N	 ...said the fortune teller.
Ji	 We need to look at the other cards first.
d	 e 10.16  Focus on questions 1–5. Then play the audio 
and tell Sts to read and listen to Part 3.
	 Give Sts time to answer the questions in pairs.
	 Check answers and elicit some ideas for question 5. 
1	 A house. She is going to move to another country.
2	 Her boyfriend can’t move.
3	 A heart. She’s going to fall in love.
4	 Jim is an actor from New York. She met him at a party.
e 10.16
See It’s written in the cards Part 3 in Student’s Book on p.83
e	 e 10.17  Focus on sentences 1–4. Then play the audio 
and tell Sts to listen to Part 4.
	 Give Sts time to complete the sentences in pairs.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Teach the meaning of any words 
you think Sts may not have understood, e.g. ring, note.
1  leave, another country    ​2  get married    ​3  happy, very happy  ​
4  50
e 10.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
Part 4
N	 The fortune teller turned over a card with two rings.
Ji	 Now I can see everything clearly. You’re going to leave your 
boyfriend and go away with the other man, with Jim…to another 
country. And very soon you’re going to get married.
J	 Married? To Jim! But am I going to be happy with him?
Ji	 You’re going to be very happy together. I’m sure of it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 142@@
142
10C
6	SPEAKING
	 Go through the instructions with Sts and focus on the 
example in the speech bubbles. Then put Sts in pairs,  
A and B, and get them to sit face-to-face if possible.
	 Sts individually number the cards 1–10. Stress that it 
should be in random order. Number your cards, too.
	 Demonstrate the activity. Get a student to tell you a 
number, and ‘tell his / her fortune’, depending on the card 
he / she has chosen. 
	 Student A is the fortune teller first. B chooses five 
numbers between one and ten, and tells A, who writes 
them down. A predicts B’s future according to the ‘cards’ 
he / she has chosen. Then Sts swap roles.
!   If you have odd numbers, have a group of three, where  
A tells B’s fortune, B tells C’s, and C tells A’s. 
	 Get feedback by asking a few Sts what’s going to happen 
to them. 
EXTRA IDEA   You could photocopy the Communicative 
photocopiable activity and cut out the cards. Give each pair 
a pack of cards. Sts don’t need to think of any numbers, they 
simply choose five cards from the pack.
5	GRAMMAR  be going to (predictions) 
a	 Focus on the two sentences and make sure Sts 
understand a prediction (= something you think is going 
to happen). Do this as a whole-class activity.
1 is a prediction and 2 is a plan.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10C on p.142. 
Grammar notes
Sts learned the use of going to to express future plans in 
the previous lesson. Here, the same structure is used to 
make predictions (what we think or are sure will happen). 
Will can also be used to make predictions. This is taught in 
Pre-intermediate.
	 e 10.20  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.	
	 Focus on the exercises for 10C on p.143. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	 1  They’re going to have dinner.
	
2  It’s going to be a nice day.
	
3  She’s going to get the bus.
	
4  He’s going to make an omelette.
	
5  She’s going to send an email.
b	 1  ’re going to have 
	
2  isn’t going to pass
	
3  are going to buy
	
4  ’m not going to finish
	
5  ’re going to win
	
6  ’re going to be
	
7  ’m not going to like
	
8  ’s going to forget
	
9  ’s going to sleep
	
10  ’re going to have
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts to write one prediction for each category − the 
weather, sport, their town / country, and the student 
himself / herself. All four sentences should start with 
I think. Point out the example.
d	 In pairs, Sts now read their predictions to each other 
and say whether or not they agree with their partner’s 
predictions.
	 Get some feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 143@@
143
Revise and Check
	9&10	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  b    ​5  c
e 10.21
1	 Graziella
I = interviewer, G = Graziella
I	 Do you think you have a healthy diet?
G	 Um, for the most part, I would say I have a healthy diet. Er, lots of 
fruits and vegetables, and a little bit of chocolate, here and there.
I	 How much sugar and salt do you eat?
G	 Um, I don’t have that much salt in my diet, but with all of the fruit 
that I have, I would say I have quite a bit of sugar, natural sugars.
2	 Kara
I = interviewer, K = Kara
I	 Do you like cooking?
K	 I love to cook.
I	 Do you think you’re a good cook?
K	 I do think I’m a good cook.
I	 What’s your speciality?
K	 Um, my husband is Cuban, so I learned to cook Cuban food for 
him, so that’s my specialty.
3	 Maura
I = interviewer, M = Maura
I	 What’s the most beautiful city you’ve ever been to? Why?
M	 Er, that’s a difficult question, but I think I’d have to say Edinburgh. 
Um, it’s very beautiful, it’s got the sea, it’s got an extinct volcano 
in the centre, and every street has, er, a different view.
4	 Kevin
I = interviewer, K = Kevin
I	 Where are you going to go for your next holiday?
K	 Er, we’ve booked that for January and we’re going to Thailand for 
two weeks.
I	 Where are you going to stay?
K	 We’re staying three nights in Bangkok, three nights in an island 
called Ko Samui and five nights in an island called Ko Tao.
I	 How are you going to get there?
K	 We are flying from Edinburgh to, er, Dubai, Dubai to Bangkok, 
and then it’s another flight from Bangkok to Ko Samui, and then a 
ferry from Ko Samui to Ko Tao.
5	 Mica
I = interviewer, M = Mica
I	 What’s the biggest difference between the US and the UK?
M	 Um, so the biggest difference between the US and the UK in New 
York City, er, food’s very different here compared to the UK. Um, 
lots of burgers and pizza, and fast food and things like that.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  c    ​5  a    ​6  b    ​7  c    ​8  b    ​9  b    ​10  a    ​
11  b    ​12  a    ​13  c    ​14  c    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a	
1	 dessert (the others are meals)
2	 strawberries (the others are vegetables)
3	 sugar (the others are drinks)
4	 tomatoes (the others are, or are made from, potatoes)
5	 chicken (the others are desserts)
b	
1  beer    ​2  tomatoes    ​3  honey    ​4  rice    ​5  fruit juice
c	
1  a hundred and twenty    ​2  million    ​3  department store    ​
4  square    ​5  station
d	 
1  stay    ​2  go    ​3  become    ​4  get    ​5  fall    ​6  book    ​7  meet  ​
8  visit    ​9  have    ​10  move
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  bread /e/    ​2  chemist /k/    ​3  oil /ɔɪ/    4  town /aʊ/    ​
5  wrote /r/
d	
1  chocolate    ​2  dessert    ​3  supermarket     ​4  interesting    ​
5  dangerous
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	
1  C    ​2  B    ​3  A
b	
1  A    ​2  B    ​3  A    ​4  C    ​5  C    ​6  A    ​7  B    ​8  C
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 144@@
144
11A
	11A	Culture shock
 G   adverbs (manner and modifiers)
 V   common adverbs: slowly, fast, etc.
 P   connected speech
Lesson plan
People’s first impressions of a new country provide the 
context for learning common adverbs of manner and 
modifiers. This lesson starts with Sts reading some posts on 
a forum written by people about what surprised them when 
they first arrived in the USA. This leads into the grammar 
focus on the formation and position of adverbs. In Listening, 
a British teacher talks about living in Costa Rica, which leads 
to Pronunciation, where the focus is on understanding 
connected speech. Sts then discuss habits and behaviour in 
their own country / city. Finally, Sts write three short posts 
about habits in their country which might surprise a visitor.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  adverbs (manner and modifiers) p.198 
Communicative  Read slowly p.247 (instructions p.212)
For students
Workbook  11A
Online Practice  11A
 OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts to imagine that they have to go and live for a year in 
a foreign city. Then tell them, in pairs, to decide which city 
they would like to go to, and why. 
Get feedback about the cities Sts chose and their reasons. 
1	READING
a	 Books open. Do this as a whole-class activity. You could 
tell the class about your own experience.
b	 Focus on the title of the forum and the question below it. 
Make sure Sts understand the topic. 
	 Give Sts a few minutes to read the posts and decide which 
topic isn’t mentioned.
	 Check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the posts the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary , but 
not the words and phrases in e.
exercise
c	 Get Sts to read the posts again and match sentences 
1–9 to the people who said them. The sentences are 
paraphrases and not the exact wording in the posts.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  J    ​2  L    ​3  N    ​4  R    ​5  L    ​6  N    ​7  T    ​8  N    ​9  T
d	 Tell Sts to read sentences 1–9 again and, with a partner, 
discuss whether each one is true in their country. You 
could do the first one with the whole class to start them 
off. If your Sts come from the same country, you could do 
this as a whole-class activity.
e	 Focus on the words in the list. Elicit the pronunciation 
from the phonetics, and drill.
	 Then Sts work alone or in pairs.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
salary – the money that you get from your job
insurance – something that you buy to protect yourself if you 
have an accident, need an operation, etc.
tip – extra money that you give to a taxi driver, a waiter, etc.
earn money – get money from your job
pay bills – pay for electricity, gas, phone, etc.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
2	GRAMMAR  adverbs
a	 Tell Sts to look at the highlighted phrases in sentences 1–9 
in 1c and choose option a or b in questions 1–3.
	 Check answers.
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  b, a
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11A on p.144. 
Grammar notes
Adverbs of manner
Sts usually find formation of these adverbs fairly 
straightforward.
The most common word order with these kinds of 
adverbs is to put the adverb after a verb or verb phrase, 
e.g. He drives very quickly, I speak English very well (typical 
error: I speak very well English).
Sts may try to use hardly instead of hard, e.g. I work hardly. 
Explain that hard is irregular and doesn’t add -ly. 
Hardly is a word which means almost not, e.g. I hardly slept 
last night, I hardly ever go to the theatre. Sts learned hardly 
ever in 4C.
Modifiers
The position of these is quite straightforward. You may 
want to point out that you can’t use very with strong 
adjectives, e.g. great, fantastic, awful, etc.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 11.1 and e 11.2 for Sts to listen and repeat.  
Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Words ending in -ly box and go through it 
with the class. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 145@@
145
11A
	 Now focus on the exercises for 11A on p.145. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
Help with rhythm, and tell them that adverbs are always 
stressed. 
a	
1  carefully    ​2  polite    ​3  beautifully    ​4  unhealthy    ​5  slowly    ​
6  really    ​7  well    ​8  perfectly    ​9  casual    ​10  incredibly
b	
1  quietly    ​2  fast    ​3  well    ​4  carefully    ​5  hard    ​6  healthily    ​
7  badly    ​8  easily
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11A.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you  
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 11.3  Tell Sts they’re going to hear six sound effects, 
and for each one, they must write a sentence using the 
present continuous and an adverb to describe what’s 
happening.
	 Play the audio and pause after number 1, so Sts can see 
how the example sentence describes what they heard.
	 Now play the other five sound effects, pausing after each 
one to give Sts time to write.
	 Elicit ideas from Sts.
2	 He’s driving fast.
3	 They’re dancing badly.
4	 They’re eating noisily.
5	 She’s singing beautifully / well.
6	 He / She’s playing the piano loudly. 
e 11.3
(sound effects for the following)
1	 two people whispering
2	 car screeching round corners, plus male voice
3	 stepping on feet, two voices
4	 two people eating together, slurping spaghetti
5	 lovely female opera voice 
6	 very loud piano playing
3	LISTENING & PRONUNCIATION  
connected speech
a	 e 11.4  Focus on the photo of Jack and the caption, and 
ask Sts if they know where Costa Rica is (Central America), 
and what they can see in the big photo (a man selling 
fruit and vegetables). Make sure Sts understand the task. 
You could tell Sts that Jack Horton is from the UK.
	 Tell Sts that the first time they listen, they don’t need to 
understand everything. They just need to decide how Jack 
feels about living in Costa Rica. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
He’s positive. 
e 11.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.123) 
The first thing that I really noticed when I arrived here was how 
incredibly friendly the people are. The ‘ticos’ – that’s what they’re 
called – are much friendlier than people in Europe. They always say 
buenos días to you even if they don’t know you. And if something’s 
good, like a beautiful day or a good meal, they say pura vida, which I 
love. It literally means ‘pure life’, but I think it really means ‘things are 
great’, or something like that. One thing that can be difficult though, 
their sense of time is completely different from ours – they call it ‘tico 
time’. If they have an appointment at, let’s say, seven in the evening, 
they probably leave home at seven o’clock, so they’re always late. 
Luckily, my school works on what they call ‘British time’, so classes 
start punctually!
Another thing that surprised me was the weather. I thought Costa 
Rica was hot and sunny all the time. That’s true in the dry season, 
and the temperature’s about twenty-five degrees all year round, 
but in the rainy season, especially in September and October, it 
rains really heavily for maybe two hours a day. Really amazing rain, 
nothing like in England.
Everyone told me that the scenery was beautiful in Costa Rica, but it 
was even more beautiful than I expected. Incredible animals, birds, 
trees – and volcanoes. Some of them are active and smoke quietly, 
and then suddenly there’s a big bang and they start erupting. I was 
quite frightened the first time it happened.
What else? Er, I thought that life here was going to be very cheap, 
but in fact, food is very expensive, especially imported food. The 
only thing that’s cheap is fruit, vegetables, and coffee – wonderful, 
wonderful coffee. And the fruit and vegetables are very different 
from what we have in Europe. One day I went to a market and I 
didn’t recognize any of the fruit.
I like San José. I don’t feel that it’s dangerous, but it probably is. A 
colleague of mine was in a taxi the other day, and the taxi driver 
took out a gun and asked him for all his money! And the roads are 
terrible, especially in the rain! But in general, I love it here.
b	 e 11.5  Tell Sts they are now going to hear eight phrases 
taken from the listening and they must write each one 
down. Each phrase has three or four words in it. Point out 
the example.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase to give Sts time 
to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
e 11.5
1	 how incredibly friendly
2	 things are great
3	 their sense of time
4	 seven in the evening
5	 hot and sunny
6	 all year round
7	 two hours a day
8	 took out a gun
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each one for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 146@@
146
11A
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Jack again, and this time 
they need to complete the gaps in 1–11. Give Sts time to 
read 1–11.
	 Play audio e 11.4 again for Sts to complete the task. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  friendlier     2  are great    3  late    4  25 degrees     5  rains, 
heavily    6  more beautiful     7  quite frightened     8  fruit, 
vegetables, coffee    9  coffee    10  dangerous    11  terrible
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity and give your opinion.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  
common adverbs
	 Focus on the task. Then look at the questions and make 
sure Sts understand all the verb phrases, e.g. treat tourists, 
behave, etc. 
	 Put Sts in small groups. Focus on the example, or 
demonstrate first if you are from a different country / city, 
by telling Sts, e.g. In Britain, I think most people drive very 
carefully. I drive…
	 Give Sts time in their groups to discuss all the points. 
Remind them to first say what they think about the 
people in their country and then about themselves.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
5	WRITING
	 Tell Sts to look back at all the topics in the posts in 1 and 
to choose three they want to write about, e.g. transport, 
food, money. They need to write one post about their own 
country for each topic.
	 When Sts have finished, ask them to compare their posts. 
If your Sts are all from the same country, ask them if they 
wrote about the same things, and if they agree. If they’re 
from different countries, ask if anything surprises them, 
and if they’d like to visit the other country.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 147@@
147
11B
	11B	Experiences or things?
 G   verb + to + infinitive
 V   verbs that take the infinitive: want to, need to, etc.
 P   weak to, sentence stress
Lesson plan
This lesson is based on a blog written by a German girl who 
is passionate about travel and new experiences. In the first 
half of the lesson, Sts read and talk about people’s dreams 
or ‘bucket lists’. In Grammar, they focus on the structure 
verb + to + infinitive, which is common when talking about 
dreams, e.g. I want to climb a mountain, and they learn 
some common verbs that are followed by the infinitive. 
In the second half of the lesson, Sts work on the weak 
pronunciation of to in verb phrases and sentence stress, and 
talk about their dreams and plans for the future. The Writing 
task, which links back to the reading, gets Sts to write their 
own bucket lists and then compare them. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  verbs + to + infinitive p.199 
Communicative  Dreams and plans p.248  
(instructions p.212)
For students
Workbook  11B
Online Practice  11B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts to imagine that they have won, for example €1,000 
in the lottery. Ask who would buy something with it (what?), 
and who would spend it on an experience, e.g. a trip (where 
to?).
1	READING & SPEAKING  scanning for 	
	 information
a	 Books open. Read the definition and elicit answers from 
the class. Don’t ask Sts if they have a bucket list as they 
will be doing this later in the lesson. The term bucket list 
comes from the expression to kick the bucket, meaning to 
die. You might want to point out that the definition here 
says ‘before you die’, but the term bucket list also often 
means any list of special things that you want to do – in 
this lesson, Stef makes a new bucket list for each year.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts can remember what 
a blog is. Give Sts time to read the About me section and 
answer the questions. Point out that the first one has been 
done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Don’t ask Sts any questions about Stef’s lifestyle 
at this stage as they will be doing this later in the lesson.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the blog check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the phrases 
in d.
2	 She went to Australia in 2011. She worked in a pub. Then she 
travelled all over Australia and New Zealand.
3	 She got a job there as a project assistant.
4	 She went there on holiday when she worked for the IT 
company.
5	 Having experiences is more important than working to pay 
for a flat and buying things she doesn’t need.
6	 Three months ago, she left her job and decided to work in 
different jobs.
c	 Focus on the task and the My dreams section of the blog. 
Check Sts know all the lexis in the list, e.g. a balloon, a field, 
to dive, etc.
	 Now give Sts time to go through the list and tick the five 
things they would most like to do. You could demonstrate 
the activity by telling Sts five you would like to do, and 
explaining why.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their lists. Tell 
them to say why they have chosen each item.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
d	 Now tell Sts to cover the text and look at the phrases in 
1–8. Can they remember the verbs?
	 Check answers.
1  make    ​2  go    ​3  ride    ​4  learn    ​5  go    ​6  make    ​7  cook    ​
8  get
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 You could also tell Sts what you think. You could find out 
with a show of hands if any Sts would like to live like Stef. 
2	GRAMMAR  verb + to + infinitive
a	 Tell Sts to match the sentence beginnings on the left to 
the endings on the right, and then answer the question.
	 Check answers.
I decided to go to Australia.
I needed to save some money.
Learn to play the guitar.
The missing word is to.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11B on p.144. 
Grammar notes
There are two forms of the infinitive in English, e.g. live and 
to live.
Live is often known as the ‘base form’ and to live as the 
‘infinitive with to’ or ‘the full infinitive’. The negative is 
formed by adding not, e.g. to be or not to be.
The base form (live) is used, for example, in questions and 
negatives with do / does and did, e.g. Where do you live?, I 
don’t live here.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 148@@
148
11B
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm by 
saying the stressed words more strongly.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversation.
	 Get a few pairs to read the conversation to the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts to memorize the conversation, 
then close their books and practise saying it.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and focus on the task. First, they need to 
look at the five things their partner ticked in Stef’s bucket 
list in 1c, and then they should ask their partner five more 
questions, using Would you like to…? followed by an item 
in the list. Before they start, focus on the speech bubbles 
and tell Sts to ask and answer like this, and if possible, as 
in 3b, they should give a reason. You might want to point 
out that Sts need to change my in certain items to your, 
e.g. Would you like to go on holiday with your best friend?
	 Get some feedback from various pairs on their partner’s 
dreams.
4	VOCABULARY  verbs that take the infinitive
a	 Focus on the task and get Sts to do it in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the past tense of each verb from the 
class and write it on the board. Then ask the class to divide 
the list into regular and irregular verbs. 
	 Check answers.
Forget is irregular (forgot).
Learn can be regular or irregular (learned / learnt).
b	 Tell Sts to complete 1–10 with the verbs in a. Point out 
that the first one (wanted) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  remembered    ​3  decided    ​4  forgot    ​5  tried    ​6  learned / 
learnt    ​7  hoped    ​8  promised    ​9  planned    ​10  needed
5	SPEAKING
	 Give Sts a few minutes to look at the ten phrases and 
think about their answers. 
	 Now focus on the instructions and example. 
	 Put Sts in pairs. Monitor and help, especially correcting 
any errors with infinitives.
	 Get some feedback. Find out if any Sts had the same 
answers, or if any answers were surprising.
6	WRITING
a	 Tell Sts to write a bucket list like Stef’s, with five things 
they want to do this year. 
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare lists. They should 
see if any of the items are the same or if their partner 
wrote something they also want to include in their list.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
The full infinitive (to live) is used very widely in English. One 
of its main uses is after a lot of common verbs, like want, 
need, decide, hope, etc., e.g. I want to live in the city centre.
Some verbs – a smaller group – are followed by the 
gerund (-ing), e.g. like, love, hate (I like cooking), which Sts 
learned in 6B.
However, some native speakers, particularly Americans, 
use the infinitive after like, e.g. I like to cook.
	 e 11.6  Focus on the example sentences and play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Highlight the 
pronunciation of would /wʊd/, reminding Sts that the l is 
silent. Then go through the rules with the class. 
	 Focus on the would like and like box and go through it 
with the class. 
	 Now focus on the exercises for 11B on p.145. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	
1  to drive    ​2  to buy    ​3  to be    ​4  to call    ​5  to stay    ​6  to see ​
7  to get married    ​8  to have    ​9  to go    ​10  to leave
b	
1  to have    ​2  to speak    ​3  to travel    ​4  relaxing    ​5  to play    ​
6  to get    ​7  going    ​8  reading    ​9  to wear    ​10  cooking
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  weak to, sentence stress
a	 e 11.7  Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences 
with verb + to + infinitive in them, and they must write 
them down.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and write down the sentence.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
e 11.7
1	 I’m planning to buy a new car.
2	 He decided to walk home.
3	 I hope to hear from you soon.
4	 Do you want to stop now?
5	 I need to go to the shops.
6	 They’d like to have dinner with us.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Ask the class how to is pronounced. If necessary, play the 
audio again.
It is pronounced /tə/.
b	 e 11.8  Remind Sts that all the stressed words are in 
bigger font. Play the audio once the whole way through 
for Sts just to listen. 
e 11.8
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.89
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 149@@
149
11C
	11C	How smart is your phone?
	 Now ask the class which ones can be used without 
internet connection.
Calendar, Camera, Kindle, Photos, Messages, Phone
c	 e 11.9  Tell Sts they are going to hear 1–13 in b, and they 
must listen and repeat. 
	 Play the audio, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat.
e 11.9
See activities 1–13 in b in Student’s Book on p.90
	 Play the audio again if necessary.
d	 e 11.10  Tell Sts to match the words related to the 
internet to the pictures.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand what each 
item is. Model and drill pronunciation.
1  wi-fi    ​2  attachment    ​3  log in    ​4  search    ​5  broadband
e 11.10
2  attachment    5  broadband    3  log in    4  search    1  wi-fi 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, and get Sts to listen 
and repeat.
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING  using visual clues to 	
	 support understanding
a	 e 11.11  Focus on the instructions and tell Sts they are 
going to hear three different conversations. They must 
listen for the first activity the three people do with their 
phones.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker A    the internet
Speaker B    receiving phone calls from other people
Speaker C    email
 G   definite article: the or no the
 V   phones and the internet
 P   the
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is phones and the internet. The 
lesson starts with the introduction of some useful phone 
and internet related language. Sts then listen to three people 
saying what they use their phones for, and Sts do the same. 
Reading focuses on life before the internet – something that 
you and your Sts may not have experienced. This is followed 
by the grammar focus, which looks at the uses of the definite 
article, with a special focus on the non-use of articles when 
generalizing, e.g. talking about things or people in general. 
The lesson finishes with a Speaking activity that revises the 
different uses of articles.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  definite article: the or no the p.200 
Communicative  Speak for 30 seconds p.249  
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  11C
Online Practice    11C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board DIGITAL NATIVE and DIGITAL IMMIGRANT and 
ask Sts what they think the terms mean. 
Elicit / Explain that a digital native is somebody who was 
born after the internet was already an important part of life, 
and a digital immigrant is somebody who was born before 
then and has had to learn how to use it. 
Ask Sts if they know any digital immigrants.
1	VOCABULARY  phones and the internet
a	 Books open. Focus Sts’ attention on the phone screen. 
Give them time to look at all the apps and functions, and 
count how many they have on their phone. 
	 Elicit some answers.
b	 Get Sts to match the icons in a to the activities.
	 Check answers.
1  Facebook (or Twitter)    ​2  App Store    ​3  Skype    ​4  Messages  ​
5  YouTube (or Facebook)    ​6  WhatsApp    ​7  Twitter    ​8  Mail    ​
9  Camera    ​10  Google Maps    ​11  Kindle    ​12  MyFitnessPal    ​
13  Spotify (or YouTube)
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 150@@
150
11C
b	 Tell Sts they are going to hear the three speakers again, 
and this time they must listen and label 1–9 according to 
which speaker says it.
	 Give Sts time to read 1–9.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  speaker A    2  speaker C    3  speaker B    4  speaker B   
5  speaker A    6  speaker C    7  speaker B    8  speaker C   
9  speaker A
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer 
questions 1–5.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could also tell 
Sts how you use your phone.
3	READING
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Don’t tell Sts if they are 
right or not at this stage.
b	 Focus on the article. You might want to model and drill 
the pronunciation of encyclopaedia /ɪnˌsaɪkləˈpiːdiə/.  
Tell Sts to read the article to check their answers to a and 
to find out what people used the things for. 
	 Check answers. If you used any of these things yourself, 
tell the class about your experiences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Encyclopaedias: people used them to look up information.
2	 Teletext: people used it like a basic internet on their TV.
3	 Fax machines: people used them to send printed messages 
over the phone.
4	 Walkmans: people used them to listen to music.
5	 The Yellow Pages: people used them to look up the names 
and contact details of local businesses.
6	 An A–Z: people used them to find streets in their city.
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Focus on the task and example. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner if they do 
any of the activities (the chances are they rarely do any of 
them – the objective here is to get them to explain how 
they do these things, e.g. book tickets, find information, 
etc., nowadays).
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
e 11.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
I = interviewer
A
I	 What make of phone do you have?
A	 I have an iPhone.
I	 How old is it?
A	 Er, about two years old.
I	 How often do you change phones?
A	 Not very often, I would say. I like to, er, I’m not particularly worried 
about having the latest phone. I just want one that works well. Er, 
I usually keep my phone about four years – if I don’t lose it, that is.
I	 What do you use your phone for the most?
A	 Probably the internet. And messaging. Things like WhatsApp, 
Facebook messenger.
I	 So you don’t use it much to actually talk to people?
A	 No, I don’t.
I	 What other apps do you use a lot?
A	 I use the weather one quite a lot. And I have a couple of games I 
like playing. And Skype. I use Skype from time to time to talk to 
my brother because he lives in Spain.
I	 Do you have any unusual apps that you sometimes use?
A	 I have one to track the food that I eat, but I don’t use it every day. 
And I have a photo-editing app.
B
I	 What kind of phone do you have?
B	 An Android smartphone. A Samsung, er, Galaxy, I think.
I	 Is it new?
B	 About six months old.
I	 How often do you change phones?
B	 About every two to three years.
I	 What do you use it for the most?
B	 Receiving phone calls from other people, or looking up things on 
the internet.
I	 What apps do you have that you use a lot?
B	 An online banking app. I use that a lot. Email, of course. And the 
Kindle app, the e-reader. 
I	 Do you like reading on your phone?
B	 No, I much prefer reading real books, paper books, but as I always 
have my phone with me, there are lots of times, like on the bus or 
if I’m waiting for somebody, I can read a book on my phone.
I	 Do you have any unusual apps that you sometimes use?
B	 Er, I have an app so I can order a taxi from my local taxi company.
C
I	 What kind of phone do you have?
C	 An iPhone.
I	 How often do you change your phone?
C	 When my contract lets me upgrade it, which is, I don’t know, 
every two or three years.
I	 What do you use your phone for the most?
C	 Er, email, text messages, internet, and phone, I mean, talking. In 
that order.
I	 What apps do you use a lot?
C	 Apart from mail and Google, you mean?
I	 Yes.
C	 Er, Twitter, er, BBC news, and various transport apps for booking 
trains or seeing what time they are.
I	 Do you have any unusual apps that you sometimes use?
C	 I have a ‘night sky’ app. If it’s a starry night, I sometimes use that. 
You point your phone at the sky and it tells you the names of the 
stars and planets and things.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 151@@
151
11C
5	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  the
a	 e 11.13  Focus on the task and play the audio for Sts just 
to listen. If necessary, play it again.
	 Check the answer. 
1  /ðiː/    ​2  /ðə/
e 11.13
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.91
	 Now ask what difference there is between the words after 
the in each group. Elicit that in group 1 the words after 
the (= /ðiː/) begin with a vowel, and in group 2 the words 
after the (= /ðə/) begin with a consonant.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
phrases.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat. Then get Sts to practise 
saying the phrases.
c	 The aim of this exercise is to get Sts talking about topics, 
often generalizing, which will encourage them to use the 
definite article correctly. 
	 Go through the instructions with Sts. Focus on the 
speech bubbles and highlight that because the person is 
speaking in general, they say women and men, and not the 
women and the men.
	 Give Sts time to read the circles. Then put Sts in pairs, A 
and B.
	 A chooses a circle and talks about the three things.  
B listens, reacts, and asks extra questions. Monitor and 
help Sts, making sure that they use articles correctly.
	 B then chooses a circle and talks about three things, and 
A asks for more information. Monitor and help as before.
	 When B has finished, A should choose another circle, and 
they should continue, alternating until they’ve talked 
about all the circles. 
	 Get feedback to see if any of the information was 
surprising / funny / interesting, etc.
4	GRAMMAR  definite article
a	 You could do this as a whole-class activity, discussing each 
sentence in turn, or Sts could do it in pairs or small groups.
	 If Sts worked in pairs or small groups, get some feedback.
b	 Tell Sts to look at the three sentences in a and complete 
rules 1–4 in b.
	 Check answers.
1  Use the    ​2  Don’t use the    ​3  Don’t use the    ​4  Use the
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11C on p.144. 
Grammar notes
This lesson focuses on the use and non-use of the definite 
article. It also revises the uses of the indefinite article that 
Sts have seen so far in Elementary.
The Grammar Bank information covers several uses / 
non-uses of the article, but is not exhaustive, as some 
of the more complex rules, e.g. the use of articles with 
geographical words, will be dealt with at a higher level. 
The difficulties your Sts have with articles will depend, 
to a large extent, on how articles are used or not used in 
their L1.
	 e 11.12  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Focus on the a / an or the? box and go through it with 
the class. 	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 11C on p.145. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a	
1  at university    ​2  by train    ​3  at the weekend    ​4  at home    ​
5  novels    ​6  the best    ​7  the moon    ​8  the man    ​9  the door  ​
10  breakfast
b	
1  –    ​2  –    ​3  The    ​4  –    ​5  –    ​6  The    ​7  the    ​8  the    ​9  –    ​
10  the
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11C. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 152@@
152
PE6
e 11.14
R = Rob, J = Jenny
J	 Rob!
R	 Jenny, hi. Sorry I’m a bit late.
J	 No problem.
R	 Really?
J	 Really!
R	 I got your message. 
J	 Would you like a coffee or something?
R	 No, I’m fine, thanks. So what did you want to talk about? You think 
London is the best city in the world and you don’t want to go 
home.
J	 Not exactly. We’d like you to come to New York.
R	 Me? To New York?
J	 I talked to Barbara about you. You know, Barbara, my boss? She 
loves your articles, too. So…would you like to come over to New 
York and work for us? Just for a month. And write a column for 
New York 24seven. And maybe a daily blog?
R	 Wow, sounds great! What could I call it? An Englishman in New 
York?
J	 Why not? Are you interested?
R	 Yes, very. It’s amazing! But I need to think about it. 
J	 Of course. 
R	 When do I need to decide? 
J	 Before the end of the week.
R	 OK, great. Thank you.
J	 And now, I really have to go.
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen and 
correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 He doesn’t want a coffee.
3	 Jenny has good news.
4	 He thinks An Englishman in New York is a good name.
	 Ask Sts what they think Rob is going to do, but don’t tell 
them yet.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
Function  getting to the airport
Vocabulary  public transport
Lesson plan
In this final Practical English lesson, Sts learn some 
vocabulary related to transport, and functional language for 
using public transport. It’s Jenny’s final morning in London, 
and Rob goes to the hotel to say goodbye. Jenny says that 
she has shown some of his articles to Barbara, her boss in 
New York, and that they would like him to go to New York 
for a month and write a column for New York 24seven, and 
a daily blog. Rob is excited at the idea, but asks for time to 
think about it. Jenny takes a taxi and then a train to get to 
Heathrow Airport, but when she arrives, she discovers that 
she has left her phone in the hotel. At that moment, Rob 
arrives with the phone and tells her that he wants to accept 
Barbara’s offer and go to New York. He finally discovers who 
Eddie is. 
The story is continued in New York in English File  
Pre-intermediate.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 6 
Quick Test 11 
File 11 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 6 
                     Can you remember? 1–11
Online Practice  Practical English 6 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Elicit what happened in the last episode by asking some 
questions, e.g. Where did Daniel take Jenny? What did Daniel 
say to Jenny after the meal? Was she happy about this? Who 
called her during the meal? Was it good news or bad news? 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 5.
1	r JENNY’S LAST MORNING
a	 e 11.14  Books open. Focus on the photo and elicit what 
Sts think is happening. 
	 Focus on sentences 1–5 and go through them with Sts. 
	 Then play the video / audio once the whole way through, 
for them to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Make 
it clear that they don’t need to correct the false sentences 
yet. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  F    ​4  F    ​5  T
	 6	
Practical English  Going home
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 153@@
153
PE6
e 11.16 e 11.17
J = Jenny, R = receptionist, T = taxi driver, TC = ticket clerk
J	 Could you call me a taxi, please? (repeat)
R	 Yes, of course. Where to? 
J	 To Paddington Station. (repeat)
R	 And when would you like it for?
J	 Now, please. (repeat)
J	 How much is it? (repeat)
T	 That’s thirteen sixty, please.
J	 Make it fifteen pounds. (repeat) And could I have a receipt? 
(repeat)
T	 Thank you very much, madam.
J	 Could I have a ticket to Heathrow Airport, please? (repeat)
TC	 Single or return?
J	 Single, please. (repeat)
TC	 Standard or first class?
J	 Standard, please. (repeat)
T	 That’s eighteen pounds. 
J	 Can I pay by credit card? (repeat)
TC	 Yes, of course.
b	 Now focus on the conversations in the chart. Ask Sts Who 
says the You hear sentences in each conversation? and elicit 
that first it is the receptionist, then the taxi driver, and then 
the man at the ticket office. 
	 Then ask Who says the You say sentences? and elicit that 
it is Jenny. Tell Sts that if they want someone to call them 
a taxi, or want to use public transport, they will need the 
You say phrases.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversations and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Where    ​2  for    ​3  13.60    ​4  madam    ​5  return    ​6  first    ​
7  course
	 Go through the conversations line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. Highlight that a single ticket = one way only,  
a return ticket = to a place and then back again,  
standard = a normal ticket, and first class = you pay 
more and travel in a more comfortable part of the train. 
Highlight also the useful phrase Could I have a receipt? and 
elicit that a receipt /rɪˈsiːt/ is a piece of paper showing 
what you paid for something. Point out that the p is not 
pronounced in receipt.
c	 e 11.17  Now focus on the You say phrases. Tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversations again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. Encourage them to copy the rhythm 
and intonation.
e 11.17
Same as script 11.16 with repeat pauses
2	r VOCABULARY  public transport
a	 Focus on the task and get Sts to match the words and 
pictures.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 11.15  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  train    ​2  plane    ​3  bus    ​4  tram    ​5  coach    ​6  taxi
e 11.15
3  bus  2  plane  6  taxi  1  train  5  coach  4  tram
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
	 Finally, tell Sts to cover the words and look at the pictures 
to test themselves.
c	 Focus on the task and get Sts to complete the four 
headings with a word from a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  taxi    ​2  plane    ​3  train    ​4  bus
	 Go through the four texts, dealing with new vocabulary, 
and model and drill pronunciation.
d	 Write the four types of transport on the board. Get Sts to 
close their books. Then elicit two facts for each type, e.g. 
ask Where can you get a taxi? (at a taxi rank) What’s another 
word for a taxi? (a cab), etc. 
3	r GETTING TO THE AIRPORT
a	 e 11.16  Focus on the photos and elicit what Sts think 
is happening and who the people are (a ticket clerk and a 
taxi driver). Model and drill the pronunciation of clerk  
/klɑːk/.
	 Focus on the instructions and the question. Alternatively, 
you could get Sts to close their books and write the 
question on the board. 
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the video / 
audio again if necessary. 
	 Check the answer. 
She gets a taxi and a train.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 154@@
154
b	 Focus on the Social English phrases and go through 
them with the class.
	 In pairs, get Sts to decide who says them.
c	 e 11.19  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
to the five phrases and check. 
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  J    ​2  J    ​3  J    ​4  R    ​5  R
e 11.19
See Social English phrases in Student’s Book on p.93
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  5    ​B  2    ​C  3    ​D  1    ​E  4
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
PE6
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to read the part of the 
receptionist, the taxi driver, and the ticket clerk, and Sts B 
to read Jenny. 
	 In pairs, Sts read the conversations aloud. 
	 Then Sts swap roles.
e	 Sts now role-play the conversation. In the same pairs, get 
them to read the information for their roles. Tell Sts that 
Gatwick is the other main London airport. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write VICTORIA STATION and 
GATWICK AIRPORT on the board to help Sts B remember where 
they want to go.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles when they have finished.
	 You could get some pairs to perform in front of the class.
4	r SAYING GOODBYE
a	 e 11.18  Focus on the photo and ask Sts what’s 
happening.
	 Focus on the sentence beginnings and give Sts time to 
read them.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 she can’t find her phone.
2	 he wants to give Jenny her phone.
3	 come and work in New York.
4	 he lives in California.
5	 Jenny’s younger brother.
6	 she needs to get her plane.
e 11.18
J = Jenny, R = Rob, A = announcement 
J	 Where is it? Where’s my phone?!
R	 Are you looking for this?
J	 Rob! I can’t believe it! My phone! You’re a hero, thank you so 
much. 
R	 No problem. It gave me a chance to see you again. And I had 
more time to think about your offer.
J	 And?
R	 I’d love to accept. I really want to come and work in New York.
J	 That’s great, Rob! I’m so happy.
R	 Me, too. Oh, you had a call from Eddie. I didn’t answer it. Is he 
going to meet you at the airport?
J	 Eddie? No. He’s at college in California.
R	 In California? Does he teach there? 
J	 Teach? No, he’s a student.
R	 A student?
J	 Well, he’s only nineteen. Eddie’s my brother.
A	 Next departure, flight 232 to New York, is now ready for boarding.
J	 I need to go.
R	 Well, have a good journey. 
J	 Thanks, Rob. Bye.
R	 Bye. And see you in New York!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles / showing 
the script, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 155@@
12A
155
	12A		 I’ve seen it ten times!
 G   present perfect
 V   irregular past participles
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
The topic of films and TV series that are based on books 
provides the context to introduce the present perfect. The 
lesson begins with the grammar presentation through 
a conversation about films, TV series, and books. The 
pronunciation focus is on sentence stress, and Vocabulary 
looks at common irregular past participles. The main context 
of the final Listening and Speaking activity is a survey asking 
about film, TV, and book experiences, and Sts learn how to 
ask present perfect questions with ever. 
NB In 12B Sts learn other regular and irregular past 
participles, and contrast the present perfect with the  
past simple. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect p.201 
Communicative  Have you done it? p.250 
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  12A
Online Practice  12A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following cinema questionnaire on the board: 
HOW OFTEN DO YOU GO TO THE CINEMA?  
HOW OFTEN DO YOU WATCH A FILM ON TV OR ONLINE?  
WHAT KIND OF FILMS DO YOU LIKE?  
WHAT’S THE LAST FILM YOU SAW? DID YOU LIKE IT? WHY (NOT)? 
DO YOU HAVE A FAVOURITE ACTOR OR DIRECTOR? 
Get Sts to ask you first, then they ask and answer in pairs.
Get some feedback from various pairs.
1	GRAMMAR  present perfect
a	 Books open. Focus on the images from two films and a TV 
series, and get Sts to match them to the books.
	 Check answers. Ask Sts if they have read any of the books 
or seen any of the films.
1  B    ​2  A    ​3  C
b	 e 12.1  Tell Sts they are going to listen to three 
conversations about the items in a, and they must 
complete the gaps with the phrases in the list. Point out 
that the first one has been done for them.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation to give Sts 
time to complete the gaps with the phrases.
	 Check answers.
1	 Yes, I have, I’ve read the book
2	 No, I haven’t
3	 I haven’t seen it
e 12.1
1	 Stella	 The first Jurassic Park is on TV tonight. Have you seen it?
	
Paul	
Yes, I have. And I’ve read the book. The film’s better than the 
book, I think.
	
Stella	 Let’s watch it then. I know it's an old film, but I haven’t seen 	
	
it.
2	 Matt	 Have you read the Game of Thrones books?
	
Tom	
No, I haven’t. They’re really long! Life’s too short for  
seven-hundred-page books!
	
Matt	 Have you watched the TV series? 
	
Tom	
Yes, I’ve watched the first three seasons, and I’ve 
downloaded the fourth.
3	 Ann	
Have you seen the film It? The recent one.
	
Mike	 Is it the film of the Stephen King book?
	
Ann	
Yes.
	
Mike	 I've heard of it, but I haven't seen it. I've read the book – it's	
	
fantastic.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the gaps before they 
listen to the audio. They then listen and check their answers.
c	 Tell Sts to read the conversations whilst they listen again. 
Play the audio the whole way through.
	 Now focus on the chart and ask Sts, in pairs, to complete 
it, using the conversations to help them, and to answer 
questions 1−5. Point out that the first one (I've read) has 
been done for them.
	 Check answers. 
−
I haven’t read the book.
?
Have you read the book?
f
Yes, I have.
g
No, I haven’t.
1  I have read    ​2  has, hasn’t    ​3  see, read, hear    
​4  watch, download    ​5  No, we don’t.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the chart before 
they listen to the audio again. They then listen and check 
their answers. 
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12A on p.146. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 156@@
12A
156
Grammar notes
Present perfect
The present perfect is presented here in two of the most 
basic uses, i.e. for recent past actions and past experience 
when the time is not referred to. These uses may be 
difficult for Sts if they don’t have an equivalent in their 
language.
The form of the present perfect may also be problematic 
as it is the first time Sts have seen have used as an auxiliary 
verb with all its contractions (I’ve…, he’s…, etc.). 
Regular and irregular past participles
Past participles of regular verbs should not cause any 
problems for Sts since they are the same as the past 
simple. Sts simply have to remember the pronunciation 
rules for -ed endings. 
Many irregular past participles also have the same form 
as the past simple. However, ones which are different (e.g. 
speak–spoke–spoken) may cause problems as Sts may 
confuse the two forms. For this reason, it is worth giving 
special attention to these verbs.
	 e 12.2  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go through the 
rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 12A on p.147. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. In a, 
write the contracted forms on the board. In b and c, tell 
Sts to use contractions in + and − after I, he, etc. 
a	 1	 She hasn’t read the book.
	
2	 You haven’t finished your ice cream!
	
3	 We’ve heard the news.
	
4	 He’s arrived at the airport.
	
5	 They haven’t asked for the bill.
	
6	 We haven’t seen him before.
	
7	 It’s stopped raining.
b	 1	 I’ve changed my email address.
	
2	 My boyfriend hasn’t worked abroad.
	
3	 Have you decided what to do?
	
4	 They haven’t passed the exam.
	
5	 Has he accepted the invitation?
	
6	 She’s studied three languages.
	
7	 The train hasn’t arrived.
	
8	 Have the children tidied their room?
	
9	 My girlfriend hasn’t phoned me.
	 10	 My father’s helped me a lot.
c	 1  They’ve seen    2  He’s passed    ​3  She hasn’t finished    ​
4  He’s painted    ​5  She’s asked
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Tell Sts to complete sentences 1–10 with the past 
participle of a verb from the list. Point out that the first 
one (opened) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. When checking answers, get Sts to read the full 
sentences, e.g. I’ve never opened a bank account.
2  booked    ​3  acted    ​4  played    ​5  killed    ​6  worked    ​
7  believed    ​8  asked    9  travelled    ​10  downloaded
f	 In pairs, Sts say which sentences are true for them.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. Encourage Sts to 
say why, but don’t correct misuse of tenses at this point.
	 Finally, go through each sentence and find out, with a 
show of hands, how many Sts have done each one.
2	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
a	 e 12.3  Focus on the conversation. Play the audio once 
for Sts just to listen. 
e 12.3
See conversation in Student’s Book on p.95
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Remind Sts that the larger words are 
the ones which they should stress more strongly. 
	 Get Sts to practise the conversation in pairs, swapping 
roles. 
b	 Tell Sts to think of three more films or TV series from 
books. Monitor and help Sts write their three titles. The 
titles can be in any language, depending which country 
the films or series are from – but in a monolingual class, 
for British or American films and series, tell Sts the original 
title in English if you can. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Some Sts might have trouble thinking of 
films and TV series, so put Sts in pairs to brainstorm some 
names, and then write them on the board.
	 Sts ask and answer with a partner. Monitor, helping Sts get 
the right rhythm in their questions. 
	 Get feedback from the class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   If Sts have seen a film and read the book, 
ask which one they preferred and why.
3	VOCABULARY  irregular past participles
a	 Tell Sts to focus on the last column of the chart. Explain 
that these are irregular past participles and that Sts need 
to write the infinitive and the past simple in the relevant 
columns. Remind Sts that past participles of irregular 
verbs are sometimes the same as the past simple, but 
sometimes different. 
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner.
b	 e 12.4  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Elicit that the verbs where the past 
participles are different from the past simple are fall, give, 
and see. 
2  fall, fell    ​3  give, gave    ​4  hear, heard    ​5  leave, left    ​6  read, 
read    ​7  see, saw    ​8  tell, told
e 12.4
1	 buy	
bought	
bought
2	 fall	
fell	
fallen
3	 give	
gave	
given
4	 hear	
heard	
heard
5	 leave	 left	
left
6	 read	
read	
read
7	 see	
saw	
seen
8	 tell	
told	
told
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 157@@
12A
157
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker A  10    ​Speaker B  4    ​Speaker C  1    ​Speaker D  12    ​
Speaker E  8    ​Speaker F  2
e 12.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
A	 Yes, I have. I drive a lot in my job, several hours a day, and I like 
listening to books – it’s much better than listening to the radio. I 
probably listen to a couple of books every week.
B	 Yes, I’ve seen Blade Runner at least ten times. It's a really great film, 
I never get tired of it, I always notice something new.
C	 No, never. I’ve definitely fallen asleep watching TV, but never in 
the cinema.
D	 Yes, I have. I got a box set of Downton Abbey for Christmas last 
year, and the next day I watched four episodes one after another.
E	 No, I haven’t. It usually takes me a long time to finish a book, so I 
never read them again.
F	 Yes, I bought the soundtrack of Catching Fire, you know, The 
Hunger Games, after I saw the film. It’s got some amazing music: 
Coldplay, Imagine Dragons, Christina Aguilera.
c	 Now tell Sts that they should listen again and write down 
each speaker’s answer. Play the audio, pausing after each 
speaker to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
See script 12.6
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn't understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Focus on the instructions and the follow-up question. 
Get Sts to ask you question 1. If you answer Yes, I have, get 
them to ask What film was it? If you answer No, I haven't, 
get them to continue with the other questions until you 
answer Yes, I have.
	 Give Sts time to choose six questions in a that they want 
to ask their classmates.
	 Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes. Tell Sts to stand up and 
start. Take part in the activity yourself. Tell Sts that for each 
question they must try to find a different person who 
answers Yes, I have. Remind them to write down people’s 
answers.
	 Stop the activity after five minutes (or when you think 
Sts have had enough time, or when someone has found 
people for all the questions). Get Sts to sit down again. 
EXTRA IDEA   If it is difficult for Sts to mingle in your 
classroom, you could get Sts to interview each other in pairs 
with the 12 questions.
e	 Get Sts to look at their answers and choose two that they 
think are the most interesting. 
	 Get Sts to tell the class their two most interesting answers.
	 Now ask Sts what the difference is between the infinitive 
of the verb read and the past simple and past participle.
read infinitive = /riːd/
read past simple and past participle = /red/
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each past participle 
for Sts to listen and repeat the three forms. Help with 
pronunciation where necessary.
c	 e 12.5  Focus on the instructions and the example, and 
tell Sts they are going to hear the infinitive and they must 
say the past simple and the past participle. Tell Sts that 
the verbs are from a, but they will hear them in a different 
order. Play the audio for Sts to see what they have to do. 
Get Sts to either cover a or to close their books. If Sts close 
their books, write PAST SIMPLE and PAST PARTICIPLE on the 
board. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each infinitive, and elicit the 
past simple and past participle from the whole class. 
e 12.5
buy (pause) bought, bought
see (pause) saw, seen
give (pause) gave, given
fall (pause) fell, fallen
leave (pause) left, left
read (pause) read, read
tell (pause) told, told
hear (pause) heard, heard
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Tell Sts to look at 1−8 and to complete the Verb column 
in each one with a past participle from a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  read    ​2  fallen    ​3  told    ​4  heard    ​5  seen    ​6  bought    ​
7  left    ​8  given
e	 Tell Sts to cover the Verb column, and to say the 
sentences, completing them from memory.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  recognizing topic 	
	 questions
a	 Focus on the Films, books, and TV questionnaire and 
go through 1−12, making sure Sts understand the 
vocabulary, e.g. soundtrack, subtitles, etc. 
	 Give Sts a few minutes to put the verbs in brackets into 
the past participle, and then check answers. Model and 
drill pronunciation.
1  fallen    ​2  bought    ​3  left    ​4  seen    ​5  cried    ​6  seen    ​
7  told    ​8  read    ​9  stopped    ​10  listened    ​11  given    ​
12  watched
	 Don’t get Sts to ask and answer the questions at this stage 
as they will be doing it later in the lesson.
b	 e 12.6  Now tell Sts they are going to listen to six people 
(A–F), each answering one of the 12 questions in a.  
Elicit / Teach that ever in the question Have you ever…? 
means (at some time) in your life. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to work out which question each speaker is answering. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 158@@
158
12B
e 12.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
A = Alison, B = Brett, C = Clare, J = Joe
A	 Let’s go out for dinner next Saturday. We can celebrate that it’s 
nearly the end of term.
B	 Good idea. Where?
A	 Let’s try somewhere new, somewhere that we haven’t been to 
before.
B	 Yeah, good idea.
C	 How about that Indian restaurant near the station, Curry Up?
J	 Curry Up? I’ve been there. It wasn’t very good.
C	 OK. Joe says it’s not great. What about Chinese then? Somebody 
told me The Great Wall is very good.
A	 Yes, I haven’t been there, but people say it’s great.
J	 The Great Wall? I’ve been there. I went there last week. It is good, 
but I don’t really want to go again.
B	 Well, there’s a new Thai place, Thai-Chi. It opened really recently.
J	 Thai-Chi? I’ve been there, too. I went on Wednesday. 
A	 Well, I don’t know. Have you been to Mexican Wave?
J	 Mexican Wave? Yes, I have.
A	 When did you go there?
J	 Last month. I went for dinner with people from work.
A	 The Acropolis? That Greek place?
B	 I’m sure Joe’s been there!
J	 No, I haven’t. I haven't been to The Acropolis. But it closed a few 
months ago.
B	 Oh, this is ridiculous!
A	 OK, Joe, here’s the answer. You cook dinner for us!
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the conversation again, 
and this time they need to complete the chart about Joe. 
Focus on the restaurant names and elicit what kind of 
food each one serves.
	 Play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could elicit anything else Sts can remember 
about the restaurants, e.g. the Indian restaurant (Curry Up) 
wasn’t very good, people say the Chinese restaurant (The 
Great Wall) is very good, etc.
Has he been 
there?
When?
Curry Up (Indian)
f
?
The Great Wall 
(Chinese)
f
last week
Thai-Chi (Thai)
f
on 
Wednesday
Mexican Wave 
(Mexican)
f
last month
The Acropolis (Greek)
g
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn't understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity, making sure Sts 
understand annoying. 
 G   present perfect or past simple?
 V   learning irregular verbs 
 P   irregular past participles
Lesson plan
The main context of the lesson is a conversation between 
a group of friends about where to go for dinner. One of the 
friends has tried all the restaurants his friends suggest. Their 
conversation contrasts the present perfect and the past 
simple in a natural context: Have you been to…? When did you 
go? Why did you go there?. The lesson starts with a Listening 
activity in which Sts are exposed to both the present perfect 
(for past experiences) and the past simple. This leads into 
the grammar focus. In Vocabulary and Pronunciation, Sts get 
more practice in forming and pronouncing irregular past 
participles. The lesson finishes with a Speaking activity in 
which Sts ask opening questions in the present perfect with 
recently and ever, and then simple follow-up questions using 
the past simple.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect or past simple? p.202 
Communicative  Have you ever…? p.251  
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  12B
Online Practice  12B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the names of the following dishes on the board: 
DIM SUM    GREEN CHICKEN CURRY    FAJITAS    MOUSSAKA    
SASHIMI    TAPAS    RISOTTO    TANDOORI CHICKEN 
Then ask Sts In what kind of restaurants would you find them? 
Have you tried them? Do you like them?
1	LISTENING  identifying key information
a	 Books open. Focus on the task. Put Sts in pairs to ask and 
answer the questions.
	 Tell Sts the answer to 1 and elicit some feedback for 2 
and 3.
1	 Indian, Chinese, Italian
b	 e 12.7  Focus on the task and play the audio for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
No, they don’t agree which restaurant to go to.
	12B	He’s been everywhere!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 159@@
159
12B
3	VOCABULARY  learning irregular verbs
a	 e 12.10  Focus on the task and point out that these five 
irregular verbs have the same form for the past simple and 
the past participle.
	 Get Sts to write the infinitives of the verbs.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You could tell Sts that of the 50 most 
common irregular verbs in English, 27 have the same form 
for the past simple and the past participle.
1  get    ​2  have    ​3  lose    ​4  meet    ​5  win
e 12.10
1	 get	
got
2	 have	
had
3	 lose	
lost
4	 meet	
met 
5	 win	
won
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each past participle 
for Sts to listen and repeat the two forms. Help with 
pronunciation where necessary.
b	 e 12.11  Tell Sts that they are now going to look at some 
verbs where the past simple form and the past participle 
are not the same. Give them time to write both the 
infinitive and the past simple.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  be, was / were    ​2  do, did    ​3  eat, ate    ​4  speak, spoke    ​
5  sing, sang
e 12.11
1	 be	
was / were	 been
2	 do	
did	
done
3	 eat	
ate	
eaten
4	 speak	 spoke	
spoken
5	 sing	
sang	
sung
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each past participle 
for Sts to listen and repeat the three forms. Help with 
pronunciation where necessary.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Irregular verbs on p.165, and get them to 
underline the verbs that have the same form for the past 
simple and the past participle. 
	 Check answers by eliciting the infinitive of the verbs.
bring, build, buy 
catch, cost 
feel, find  
get  
have, hear 
leave, lose 
make, meet 
pay, put 
read 
say, send, sit, sleep, spend, stand 
teach, tell, think 
understand 
win
2	GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple?
a	 Focus on the extract from the conversation and give Sts 
time, in pairs, to read it and answer questions 1–3. 
	 Check answers. 
1  present perfect    ​2  past simple    ​3  When did you go there?    ​
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12B on p.146. 
Grammar notes
Present perfect or past simple?
This is intended as a gentle introduction to the contrast 
between the present perfect and the past simple.
Many conversations typically begin with an opening 
question in the present perfect, e.g. Have you been to the 
new French restaurant? Yes, I have, and continue in the past 
tense, e.g. What did you think of it? I loved it.
This grammar point will be dealt with in more detail in 
English File Pre-intermediate.
been or gone?
This can be a tricky grammar point for Sts to assimilate. 
Instead of Have you been to Mexico?, Sts often say 
(incorrectly) Have you gone to Mexico? or Have you been  
in Mexico?.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 12.8 and e 12.9 for Sts to listen and repeat. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 12B on p.147. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
a
1  haven’t finished    ​2  gave    ​3  bought    ​4  Have you ever 
danced    ​5  went
b
1  gone    ​2  been    ​3  gone    ​4  been    ​5  been
c
1  Have…visited    ​2  went    ​3  did…go    ​4  paid    ​5  Were    ​
6  were    ​7  did…stay    ​8  had    ​9  Has…invited    ​10  stopped
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to read the conversation in c to practise 
their pronunciation. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 You could demonstrate this yourself first. Write on the 
board the names of a restaurant you’ve been to recently, 
a film you’ve seen recently, and a place you’ve visited 
recently. Then ask Sts Have you been to / seen / visited x? 
If they say Yes, ask more questions with the past simple. 
Then get Sts to write down their two restaurants, films, 
and places.
d	 Put Sts in pairs to ask and answer their questions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 160@@
160
12B
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the questionnaire and highlight the two groups 
of questions, one group about Recently (= in the last few 
days / weeks) and the other about In your life. Model and 
drill the pronunciation of recently.
	 Point out to Sts that the first column has the heading 
Present perfect and the second Past simple. Elicit which 
words are missing from the questions (column 1: Have 
you, and column 2: did you). Then elicit what form is 
needed for the verb in bold (the past participle). Finally, 
elicit all the questions for 1 (Have you been to the cinema 
recently? What did you see? Did you like it?).
	 Give Sts time to read all the questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the questions for 1 on the board 
(HAVE YOU BEEN TO THE CINEMA RECENTLY? WHAT DID YOU SEE? DID 
YOU LIKE IT?) and leave them up there to help weaker Sts.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get fast finishers to write some 
more Have you ever…? questions of their own.
b	 Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you some 
of the questions from each section. Then put Sts in pairs,  
A and B, and get them to take turns to interview each 
other. You could get Sts A to ask Sts B questions 1–5 
under Recently and Sts B to ask Sts A 1–5 under In your life. 
Then they swap roles. 
	 Monitor and help. 
	 Finally, get feedback from a few Sts. Ask Who has been to 
the cinema recently?, and then get the details. 
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to test each other’s memory like this: 
A (book open): make    B (book closed): made – made
After two minutes, Sts swap roles.
	 Then tell Sts to highlight the verbs where the past 
participle is different from the past simple and try to 
learn them.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12B.
4	PRONUNCIATION  irregular past participles
a	 Focus on the seven sound pictures and elicit the word 
and sound (clock /ɒ/, fish /ɪ/, tree /iː/, up /ʌ/, phone /əʊ/, 
horse /ɔː/, and egg /e/).
	 Now focus on the verbs in the list. Elicit that the first one 
(bought) has the /ɔː/ sound, so Sts should write it in the 
horse column. 
	 Put Sts in pairs, and get them to put the past participles 
into the correct columns. Remind them that this kind 
of exercise is easier if they say the words aloud to 
themselves.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model the pronunciation of the participles 
first, and then get Sts to put them in columns. 
b	 e 12.12  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 12.12
clock /ɒ/	
got, lost
fish /ɪ/	
given
tree /iː/	
eaten, seen
up /ʌ/	
done, sung, won
phone /əʊ/	
spoken
horse /ɔː/	
bought, fallen
egg /e/	
left, met, read
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group for 
Sts to listen and repeat. Give extra practice as necessary. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the past 
participles.
EXTRA IDEA   Draw this bingo card on the board for Sts  
to copy:
 
Sts, in pairs, complete their bingo card with six past 
participles from Irregular verbs on p.165. Alternatively, you 
could just use the past participles from 3a and b.
Call out random infinitives. Keep a note of the ones you 
call out. 
If Sts have one of the verbs you call out on their card, they 
should cross it off. Keep calling until a pair has crossed off all 
their verbs, at which point they should call out Bingo!
Check the winning pair's card. If it’s correct, they have won. 
If it isn’t, continue the game. Once there is a winner, you can 
play Bingo again if there is time.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 161@@
161
12C
	12C	The English File interview
	 Get Sts to read the interview and match a heading to each 
section. Point out that the first one (Your tastes) has been 
done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the interview the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
B  Your lifestyle    ​C  Your home    ​D  Your abilities    ​E  Your places ​
F  Your work experiences
c	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to decide in which sections 
of the interview they think they will find 1–10.
	 Check which section of the interview the sentences might 
be in. Also elicit some feedback on which sentences are 
true and which are false. Don’t tell Sts at this stage if they 
are right or not. 
1  F    ​2  C    ​3  B    ​4  E    ​5  B    ​6  F    7  C    8  C    9  B    10  D
d	 Tell Sts to read the interview again and to mark sentences 
1−10 T (true) or F (false). Remind them to say why the F 
ones are false.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (He lives in London.)
3	 F (Sometimes he doesn’t get up until 10 a.m.)
4	 T
5	 T
6	 F (He read The Lord of the Rings when he was preparing to play 
Gandalf.)
7	 T
8	 F (He loves dogs.)
9	 T 
10	 F (He’d like to learn to sing, play the piano, and speak foreign 
languages.)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss what three things 
they found the most interesting from the interview.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
2	GRAMMAR & SPEAKING  revision: question 
formation
a	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to complete all the 
questions in groups 1–6. Point out that the first one (do) 
has been done for them.
b	 e 12.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers after each group.
1  do, did    ​2  ’s, Are, Did    ​3  can, Can, are    ​4  ’s, did, are    ​
5  ’s, are, do    ​6  have, ’s, Have
 G   revision: question formation
Lesson plan
In this final lesson, Sts revise Grammar, Vocabulary, and 
Pronunciation from the whole course, with a special focus 
on question formation. The lesson is based on an interview 
Sir Ian McKellen kindly gave to the English File authors. Sts 
first read the interview with Ian McKellen and do some 
comprehension exercises. Then, in Grammar and Speaking, 
they revise question formation before interviewing each 
other. Finally, Sts watch or listen to a programme about Judi 
Dench, an actress who has worked in famous productions 
with Ian McKellen. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  revision: question formation p.203 
Communicative  Revision questions p.252 
(instructions p.213)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Judi Dench – a life in acting
For students
Workbook  12C
Online Practice  12C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write these answers on the board, and elicit the questions 
from Sts: 
FRENCH, GERMAN, AND A LITTLE ITALIAN. 
7.00 A.M – BUT LATER AT THE WEEKEND. 
JAZZ, AND SOME CLASSICAL.
YES, I HAVE A DOG CALLED SPOT.
I’M GOING TO GO TO EGYPT.
Possible answers
What languages do you speak?
What time do you get up?
What kind of music do you like?
Do you have a pet?
Where are you going to go for your next holiday?
Then tell Sts that in this lesson they’re going to read an 
interview with a famous actor who answers these questions 
and others.
1	READING  understanding topics
a	 Books open. Tell Sts to look at the characters in the 
photos and ask them if they know Sir Ian McKellen. They 
might recognize him from films such as The Lord of the 
Rings, X-Men, Mr Holmes, The Da Vinci Code, or The Golden 
Compass. 
	 Find out if any Sts have seen any of the films.
b	 Tell Sts that the interview was given exclusively for English 
File and that Sir Ian McKellen answered questions based 
on lessons in Elementary. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 162@@
162
12C
The six films mentioned are Macbeth, A Room with a View,  
Henry V, GoldenEye, Mrs Brown, and Shakespeare in Love.
Judi Dench – a life in acting
Judi Dench is one of a golden generation of British actors who have 
had long and successful careers, including Maggie Smith, Vanessa 
Redgrave, Ian McKellen, Michael Caine, and Anthony Hopkins. She 
has acted in the theatre, on television, and in films in a career of 
nearly sixty years. 
Judith Olivia Dench was born on the ninth of December nineteen 
thirty-four in York in the north of England. Dench’s father was a 
doctor, but she had connections from a very early age to the Theatre 
Royal in York – her father was the theatre’s doctor and her mother 
made costumes for the theatre. As a teenager, Judi Dench acted in 
the York Mystery Plays. These religious plays have been performed in 
York every four years since the fourteenth century.
In the late nineteen fifties and nineteen sixties, she acted with 
Britain’s most important theatre companies, the Old Vic, the Royal 
Court, and the Royal Shakespeare Company.
In the nineteen seventies and nineteen eighties, Dench continued to 
work in the theatre and on British television. In nineteen seventy-
eight, she acted in Shakespeare’s Macbeth with the actor Ian 
McKellen, both in the theatre and on film. Many people think it was 
one of the best ever performances of the play. She also appeared 
in British films like A Room with a View in nineteen eighty-five and 
Henry V in nineteen eighty-nine.
In the nineteen nineties, her career changed with two films. The first 
of these was the James Bond film, GoldenEye, where Dench played 
Bond’s boss, M, normally a part for a man. Dench was a great success 
in the part. She was hard, and at the same time funny. She played 
the part in eight films, with both Pierce Brosnan and Daniel Craig as 
James Bond. The second film that changed her career was Mrs Brown 
in nineteen ninety-seven. Dench played Queen Victoria. This small, 
British film was a great success and she was nominated for an Oscar 
for Best Actress. 
In nineteen ninety-eight, she played Queen Elizabeth I in the 
comedy, Shakespeare in Love. The film was another big hit. It won 
the nineteen ninety-nine Oscar for Best Film, and Judi Dench won 
the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress. She’s only in the film for eight 
minutes, but, as ever, she's absolutely brilliant.
	 Finally, ask Sts if they've seen any of the films, and if they 
liked them.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the events 
in Judi Dench’s life. Point out that the first one has been 
done for them. 
	 Play the video for Sts to watch again and number the 
events in the order in which they happened.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
2	 She acted in the York Mystery Plays.
3	 She worked with the Royal Shakespeare Company.
4	 She was in a production of Macbeth with Ian McKellen.
5	 She appeared in A Room with a View.
6	 She appeared in her first James Bond film.
7	 She played Queen Victoria in the film Mrs Brown.
8	 She played Queen Elizabeth I.
9	 She won an Oscar.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles / showing the script, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate 
/ Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
e 12.13
1	 Your lifestyle
What do you usually do in the morning?
How do you relax?
What did you do last weekend?
2	 Your home
What’s your favourite room in your home?
Are you tidy or untidy?
Did you do a lot of housework last week?
3	 Your abilities
What languages can you speak?
Can you sing or play a musical instrument?
Why are you learning English?
4	 Your places
What’s your favourite place to spend the weekend?
Where did you go for your last holiday?
Where are you going to go for your next holiday?
5	 Your tastes
What’s your favourite time of year?
What book are you reading at the moment?
What kind of TV programmes do you like watching?
6	 Your experiences
What films have you seen recently?
What’s the most beautiful place you’ve ever been to?
Have you ever been to Britain or the USA?
c	 Focus on the task and the example.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A starts by interviewing B with 
group 1. Encourage Sts to ask for more information and 
react to their partner’s answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write some phrases on the board to help 
Sts react and show interest, e.g. Really? How interesting! Me 
too! What about you?.
	 When Sts A have finished asking the questions in group 1, 
Sts B ask the questions in group 2. Make sure they keep 
swapping roles.
	 When they have finished, elicit some interesting answers 
from the class for each group of questions.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write the interview they just 
had with their partner. They should follow the style used in 
the interview with Sir Ian McKellen.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts that they are going to role-play being 
a journalist and a famous person. Tell them to think of a 
famous person who is still alive. When they are ready, put 
them in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A they are journalists and 
Sts B they are the famous person. Tell Sts B to use their 
imagination and invent answers. When Sts A have finished 
their interview, they swap roles.
3	r VIDEO LISTENING  understanding 	
	 biographical information
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary about Judi 
Dench, one of Britain’s best known and most successful 
actresses. 
	 Focus on the film titles and check that Sts understand / 
recognize them. Then play the video for Sts to watch and 
complete the task. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen. 
You may want to tell Sts that The Old Vic and The Royal Court 
are famous theatres in London.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 163@@
163
Revise and Check
	11&12	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  a
e 12.14
1	 Anna 
I = interviewer, A = Anna
I	 What are you doing in the UK?
A	 In the UK, er, I just came for a visit. I’m here the second time in my 
life, and it was always a dream of mine to come to London. Er, yes.
I	 Was there anything that surprised you about the UK when you 
arrived?
A	 I think that the people are very open, and that, um, just 
everybody is so nice, and I also saw some monuments and some 
places I wanted to see, so I was also very impressed about the 
architecture, etc.
2	 Madeleine 
I = interviewer, M = Madeleine
I	 How do people in your country drive?
M	 I think it depends where you are. Where I live in Oregon, 
everything is very safe, much slower, but in New York City 
everything is very fast, very dangerous.
I	 Are you a typical driver for where you live?
M	 I would say so, I d-, I’m a very cautious driver.
3	 Chris 
I = interviewer, C = Chris
I	 Do you have any ambitions for this year?
C	 Um, yes, I’d like to visit my daughter in Australia, and also plan 
towards my retirement.
I	 Do you think you’re going to do them?
C	 Certainly the planning, whether or not I achieve the visit is 
something else.
4	 Talitha 
I = interviewer, T = Talitha
I	 Have you ever seen a film more than three times?
T	 Yes, I really like Lord of the Rings, so I’ve definitely seen that more 
than three times.
I	 What do you like about it?
T	 I love the scenery, um, and I love the imagination.
5	 Martin 
I = interviewer, M = Martin
I	 What phone do you have?
M	 I have an iPhone.
I	 How old is it? 
M	 I believe, I believe my iPhone is now two years old.
I	 How often do you change phones? 
M	 I change phones maybe every three years.
I	 What do you use it for the most?
M	 I mostly use my phone for social media.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 11&12 
Quick Test 12 
File 12 Test 
Progress Test Files 7–12 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  b    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  c    7  b    8  a    9  c    10  a    ​
11  c    ​12  a    ​13  a    ​14  c    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a	
1  slowly    ​2  dangerous    ​3  badly    ​4  quiet    ​5  cold    ​
6  strongly
b	
1  learn    ​2  need    ​3  promise    ​4  want
c	
1  online    ​2  download    ​3  website    ​4  attachment    ​5  wi-fi
d	
1  in    ​2  up    ​3  for    ​4  with
e	
1  seen    ​2  gone    ​3  known    ​4  given    ​5  fallen    ​6  taken
PRONUNCIATION
b	
1  bought /ɔː/    ​5  spoken /əʊ/    ​2  want /ɒ/    ​4  wi-fi /aɪ/    ​
3  women /ɪ/
c	
1  politely    ​2  dangerously    ​3  decide    ​4  attachment    ​
5  website
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	
C is the most positive. B is the most negative.
b	
1  C    ​2  B    ​3  E    ​4  A    ​5  D    ​6  C    ​7  A    ​8  E
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 164@@
	 	
Photocopiable activities
164
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
•	 When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
•	 If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
•	 These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
•	 You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
•	 All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
•	 Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
•	 change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
•	 change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
•	 change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
•	 reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
•	 There is a Grammar activity for each main (A, B, and C) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Communicative activity for each main (A, B, 
and C) lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
All the photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC). It is also available on the 
Classroom Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display 
the worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. 
This will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the 
activities, and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
•	 The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
•	 All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 165@@
165
3B  present simple + , − and ?
a	 2  live    3  do…do    4  do…work    5  Do…like    
6  love    7  Do…work    8  don’t work
b	 2  teaches    3  Does    4  doesn’t    5  works    6  like    
7  doesn’t like    8  rains    9  Do    10  doesn’t    11  Do    12  Do
3C  word order in questions
	
2  Are you a vegetarian?
	
3  Where are your parents from?   
	
4  What phone do you have?
	
5  How many languages do you speak?
	
6  Do you need a new phone?
	
7  How do you spell your surname?
	
8  When do you listen to the radio?
	
9  Where do you do your homework?
 10  Who is your favourite singer?
 11  What do you do at the weekend?
 12  What TV programmes do you watch?
4A  possessive ’s, Whose…?
	
3  It’s Pete’s CD.    4  It’s Rachel’s book.    5  It’s Pete’s 
ticket.    6  They’re Rachel’s scissors.    7  They’re Pete’s music 
books.    8  It’s Keira’s white coat.    9  They’re Rachel’s board 
pens.    10  It’s Toby’s shirt.    11  It’s Pete’s piano.    12  It’s 
Keira’s car.    13  They’re Toby’s tennis balls.    14  It’s Rachel’s 
dictionary.    15  They’re Toby’s trainers.    16  It’s Keira’s bag.
4B  prepositions of time and place (in, on, at, to)
a	 2  at    3  on    4  on    5  in    6  at    7  in    8  on    9  in    
10  at    11  on    12  on    13  at    14  in    15  at
b	 1  in    2  to    3  in    4  at    5  to    6  in / at    7  at    8  to    
9  in / at    10  at
4C  adverbs and expressions of frequency
	
2  He always sleeps for eight hours.
	
3  They sometimes go to the cinema on Friday.
	
4  She meets her friends once a week.
	
5  He is always tired in the morning.
	
6  She never eats meat.
	
7  He often does his homework on the bus.
	
8  He is sometimes late for class.
	
9  They do yoga twice a week.
 10  He hardly ever goes to the hairdresser.
 11  He often goes to the doctor.
 12  She studies English every day.
5A  can / can’t
	
2  can’t take    3  Can…sit    4  can’t find    5  can cook    6  can’t 
hear    7  Can…open    8  can’t park    9  can’t speak    10  Can…
help    11  can’t swim    12  can dance
5B  present continuous: be + verb + -ing
	
1      2  ’s washing    3  ’s listening    4  is…doing    5  are…
doing    6  ’m getting
	
2      7  Are…watching    8  ’s happening    9  ’re 
winning    10  aren’t playing    11  aren’t…watching    12  ’m 
working    13  is watching
	
3      14  are…doing    15  ’re counting    16  aren’t 
counting    17  ’re playing    18  ’s…doing    19  ’s looking
	
4      20  ’s…doing    21  Is…working    22  ’re 
travelling    23  are…doing    24  ’m not working    25  ’m 
looking for
Grammar activity answers
1A  verb be + , subject pronouns
a	 2  She’s    3  You’re    4  They’re    5  It’s    6  I’m    7  We’re    
8  They’re    9  We’re    10  You’re    11  It’s    12  He’s
b	 2  She is    3  You are    4  They are    5  It is    6  I am    7  We are   
8  They are    9  We are    10  You are    11  It is    12  He is
1B  verb be − and ?
1	 2  is    3  Are    4  am    5  ’s    6  ’m    7  ’s    8  are    9  ’m    
10  ’m    11  Are    12  ’m not    13  ’m    14  ’s    15  ’s    16  Is    
17  isn’t    18  ’s    19  are    20  Are    21  aren’t    22  ’re
2	 2  ’s    3  Are    4  ’m not    5  are    6  ’m    7  Is    8  is    9  Are
	
10  ’m not    11  ’m    12  are    13  Is    14  ’s    15  Is    16  isn’t
	
17  Is    18  isn’t    19  Are    20  aren’t    21  ’re
1C  possessive adjectives: my, your, etc.
	
2  his    3  our    4  their    5  your    6  our    7  Their    8  your    
9  my    10  her    11  our    12  my
2A  singular and plural nouns
a	 2  a; magazines
	
3  a; children
	
4  an; airports
	
5  a; universities   
	
6  a; dictionaries
	
7  an; addresses
	
8  a; men
	
9  a; laptops    
 10  a; cities
b	 3  What are they? They’re headphones.
	
4  What is it? It’s a (mobile) phone.
	
5  What are they? They’re keys.
	
6  What are they? They’re newspapers.
	
7  What are they? They’re chairs.
	
8  What is it? It’s a pizza.
	
9  What are they? They’re tissues.
 10  What is it? It’s an umbrella.
 11  What is it? It’s a wallet.
 12  What are they? They’re sandwiches.
2B  adjectives
	
2  It’s a cheap hotel.    3  They’re expensive watches.    
4  It’s a fast train.    5  It’s an easy exercise.    6  She’s a beautiful 
actress.    7  They’re long snakes.    8  They’re old women.    
9  It’s a small car.    10  They’re new boots.    11  It’s a dangerous 
road.    12  They’re tall men.
2C  imperatives, let’s
a	 3  Don’t take    4  listen    5  Don’t stop    6  Turn off    
7  Have    8  Be    9  Sign    10  Slow down
b	 2  Let’s go    3  Let’s have    4  Let’s cross    5  Let’s ask    
6  Let’s check
3A  present simple + and −
	
2  She plays the guitar.	
	8  She listens to music.
	
3  She doesn’t eat meat.	
	9  She doesn’t live in Oxford.
	
4  She doesn’t play tennis.	
	10  She has a cat.
	
5  She goes to the gym.	
	11  She wears glasses.
	
6  She drinks coffee.	
	12  She doesn’t smoke.
	
7  She studies French.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 166@@
166
7C  past simple: irregular verbs
a	 2  was    3  were    4  bought    5  got    6  had    7  got    8  wore  
9  was    10  got    11  was    12  went    13  found    14  drank    
15  put on    16  went    17  were    18  said    19  couldn’t    
20  wasn’t    21  felt    22  got    23  spent    24  didn’t have
b	 2  did they wear    3  did they get    4  was    
5  did they do / drink    6  did they do    
7  did some people say    8  Did they get    
9  did they spend    10  Did they have
8A  past simple: regular and irregular verbs
	
2  didn’t come    3  did you see    4  Did you do    5  was    
6  woke up    7  had    8  drove    9  didn’t have    10  went    
11  came    12  did    13  made    14  did you come    ​
15  arrived    16  sat    17  read    18  checked    19  had    
20  watched    21  went to sleep    22  Did you speak    
23  did she say    24  didn’t talk    25  said    26  called    
27  heard    28  took    29  closed    30  didn’t say    31  left
8B  there is / there are, some / any + plural 
	 	
nouns
a	 3  Is there a double bed in the bedroom? Yes, there is.    
4  Is there a piano in the living room? No, there isn’t.    
5  Is there a plant in the study? No, there isn’t.    
6  Is there a dishwasher in the kitchen? Yes, there is.    
7  Are there any cupboards in the bathroom? Yes, there are.    
8  Are there any chairs in the bedroom? No, there aren’t.
b	 2  There are some plants in the living room.    
3  There’s a mirror in the hall.    
4  There aren’t any books in the living room.    
5  There’s a computer in the study.    
6  There isn’t a clock in the kitchen.    
7  There’s a fireplace in the living room.    
8  There are some shelves in the study.
8C  there was / there were
	
1      2  there wasn’t    3  There was    4  Were there    5  there 
weren’t    6  there was    7  there were
	
2      8  there was    9  Was there    10  there were    11  Were 
there    12  There were
	
3      13  There was    14  there were    15  Were there    16  there 
were    17  there was
	
4      18  There were    19  Were there    20  there 
were    21  there weren’t
9A  countable / uncountable nouns; a / an, 
	 	
some / any
a	 2  Is there any butter? No, there isn’t.    
3  Are there any carrots? No, there aren’t.    
4  Is there any cheese? Yes, there is.    
5  Is there any fish? No, there isn’t.    
6  Is there a / any chicken? Yes, there is.    
7  Are there any eggs? Yes, there are.    
8  Is there any orange juice? No, there isn’t.
b	 2  There’s some tomato juice.    
3  There’s a / some pineapple.    
4  There aren’t any strawberries.    
5  There aren’t any peppers.    
6  There’s some milk.    
7  There are some mushrooms.    
8  There isn’t any ice cream.
5C  present simple or present continuous?
	
1  do…think    ​2  takes    ​3  are having    ​4  are…going    ​5  go    ​
6  are…doing    ​7  ’m waiting    ​8  ’s having    ​9  ’m listening    ​
10  Do…wear    ​11  don’t like    ​12  ’s raining    ​13  rains    
​14  are…crying    ​15  ’m watching    ​16  ’s…stopping    ​17  stops  ​
18  do…see    ​19  meet    ​20  Do…finish    ​21  ’m working    ​ 
22  are…looking    ​23  put    ​24  do…do    ​25  swim    ​ 
26  ’s…trying    ​27  watches
6A  object pronouns: me, you, him, etc.
	
2  us    3  it    4  me    5  you    6  them    7  me    8  her    9  him    
10  them    11  us    12  it    13  her    14  me    15  it    16  you    
17  him    18  them    19  her    20  us
6B  like (+ verb + -ing)
	
2  I don’t mind doing
	
3  I love swimming
	
4  I hate going
	
5  I don’t like sitting
	
6  I love having
	
7  I don’t like waiting
	
8  I don’t mind living
	
9  I like listening
 	
10  I love cooking
 	
11  I hate looking for
 	
12  I don’t like watching
 	
13  I hate getting up
 	
14  I like shopping
6C  be or do?
	
2  ’m    3  Is    4  isn’t    5  ’s    6  do    7  ’re    8  do    9  are    
10  ’s    11  don’t    12  Is    13  Are    14  am    15  ’s    16  ’s    
17  Do    18  don’t    19  are    20  Do    21  is    22  don’t    23  ’s
7A  past simple of be: was / were
	
2  wasn’t (He was American.)
	
3  was
	
4  weren’t (They were from Scandinavia.)
	
5  was
	
6  wasn’t (He was a writer.)
	
7  were
	
8  was
	
9  weren’t (They were philosophers.)
 	
10  was	
 	
11  wasn’t (He was German.)
 	
12  were
 	
13  wasn’t (Her first album was 19.)
 	
14  weren’t (They were from Peru.)
 	
15  was
 	
16  were
 	
17  weren’t (They were Italian.)
 	
18  was
 	
19  were
 	
20  wasn’t (He was a German physicist.)
7B  past simple: regular verbs
	
1      2  didn’t study    3  studied    4  lived    5  did…live    
6  rented    7  Did…talk    8  wanted    9  learned   
	
2      10  Did…like    11  loved    12  didn’t want    13  Did…
travel    14  didn’t travel    15  Did…stay    16  stayed
	
3      17  Did…watch    18  didn’t    19  worked    20  didn’t finish    
21  started    22  missed    23  didn’t arrive
	
4      24  called    25  didn’t answer    26  texted    27  didn’t…text   
28  didn’t talk    29  chatted    30  didn’t chat    31  wanted    
32  danced
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 167@@
167
11A  adverbs (manner and modifiers)
a	 badly   dangerously   well   noisily   carefully   easily   hard    
quietly   patiently   fast   loudly   slowly
b	 2  slowly    3  carefully    4  easily    5  well    6  quietly    7  fast    
8  hard    9  patiently    10  dangerously    11  badly    12  loudly
11B  verb + to + infinitive
a	 2  to be    3  to play    4  to drive    5  to buy    6  to have    
7  to get    8  to do
b	 1  Would    2  Do    3  Does    4  Would    5  Would
11C  definite article: the or no the
	
1      3  –    4  –
	
2      5  –    6  the
	
3      7  –    8  –    9  –
	
4      10  –    11  the    12  –
	
5      13  the    14  –
	
6      15  the    16  the    17  The
	
7      18  –    19  The    20  the
	
8      21  the    22  the
	
9      23  the    24  –    25  –
	
 10      26  –    27  the    28  –
12A  present perfect
	
1  Have…seen    2  ’ve broken    3  haven’t worn    4  ’ve 
bought    5  has travelled    6  Have…met    7  ’ve 
eaten    8  hasn’t finished    9  Has…arrived    10  ’s taken
12B  present perfect or past simple?
	
1      2  did…leave
	
2      3  Have…been    4  went    5  was
	
3      6  Has…arrived    7  phoned
	
4      8  saw    9  didn’t like    10  Have…seen    11  saw    12  loved
	
5      13  Have…seen    14  haven’t    15  stayed    16  didn’t see
	
6      17  Have…been    18  have    19  did…go    20  was    
21  Did…have    22  was
	
7      23  ’ve been    24  ’ve…visited    25  ’ve seen    26  went    
27  had    28  did…enjoy    29  met    30  was
	
8      31  Have…spoken    32  haven’t    33  got    34  did…say    
35  got
12C  revision: question formation
	
2  How did you get
	
3  What was
	
4  Are you having
	
5  Would you…to try
	
6  Where did you go
	
7  Why is…leaving
	
8  Can you play
	
9  Why didn’t you have
 	
10  Have you done
 	
11  Are you going to go out
 	
12  Whose…is
 	
13  How often do…have
 	
14  Why did…go
 	
15  When was…born
 	
16  Have you…eaten
 	
17  Are you going to fly
 	
18  What time does…finish
 	
19  How many…do you sleep
 	
20  What’s…going to do
9B  quantifiers; how much / how many, a lot of, 
	 	 etc.
	
2  many / He eats a lot of burgers.    
3  many / He doesn’t eat many chips.    
4  much / She doesn’t eat any meat.    
5  many / She eats a lot of vegetables.    
6  much / She doesn’t drink much Diet Coke.    
7  much / She drinks a lot of milk.    
8  much / She doesn’t eat much bread.    
9  many / She doesn’t eat any apples.    
 10  much / He doesn’t eat any rice.    
 11  much / He eats a lot of pasta.    
 12  many / He doesn’t drink many cups of espresso.
9C  comparative adjectives
	
2  Skype is older than Facebook.    
3  A Cartier watch is more expensive than a Swatch watch.    
4  New York is hotter than London (in the summer).    
5  An orange is healthier than an apple.    
6  Rome is drier than Buenos Aires.    
7  A man is slower than a horse.    
8  Russia is bigger than Canada.    
9  Shanghai is more crowded than Istanbul.    
 10  Travelling by car is more dangerous than travelling by plane.    
 11  The Burj Khalifa tower is taller than the Empire State Building.    
 12  Stockholm is sunnier than Paris.
10A  superlative adjectives
a	 2  What’s the wettest town in the world?
	
3  What’s the smallest country in the world?
	
4  What’s the highest city in the world?
	
5  What’s the longest beach in the world?
	
6  What’s the driest desert in the world?
	
7  What’s the busiest train station in the world?
	
8  What’s the most populated city in the world?
	
9  What’s the most popular tourist destination in the world?
 10  What’s the most expensive city in the world?
b	 2  Cherrapunji in India
	
3  Vatican City
	
4  La Rinconada in Peru
	
5  Praia do Cassino in Brazil
	
6  the Atacama Desert in Chile
	
7  Shinjuku Station in Tokyo
	
8  Shanghai in China
	
9  France
 10  Zurich in Switzerland
10B  be going to (plans)
	
1      2  ’m going to watch
	
2      3  aren’t going to study    4  ’re going to live
	
3      5  ’m not going to go out    6  ’m going to go to bed
	
4      7  Is…going to be    8  ’s going to bring
	
5      9  are…going to do    10  ’re going to stay    11  Are…going 
to take    12  ’re going to visit
	
6      13  ’s going to buy    14  ’s…going to do    15  ’s going to 
give
10C  be going to (predictions)
	
2  He’s going to listen
	
3  He’s going to win
	
4  They aren’t going to eat
	
5  She’s going to make
	
6  It’s not going to snow
	
7  She’s not going to buy
	
8  He’s going to play
	
9  She’s going to get married.
 	
10  He’s going to take
 	
11  They’re going to visit
 	
12  She’s going to paint
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 168@@
168
1	
I’m  at the airport.
2	
 my teacher.
3	
 in Class 2.
4	
 taxis.
5	
 my house.
6	 Hello. 
 your teacher.
7	
 in this class.
8	
 egg sandwiches.
9	
 in the café.
 
10	
 in Room 231.
 
11	
 my computer.
 
12	
 a student in my class.
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A  GRAMMAR  verb be +, subject pronouns
 	
Complete the sentences with a pronoun (I, You, etc.) and ’m, ’re, or ’s.
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and look at the pictures. 
Say the sentences. Use contractions.
	
Rewrite sentences 1–12 with the full forms (NOT contractions).
 b
1	 I am at the airport.
2	
 my teacher.
3	
 in Class 2.
4	
 taxis.
5	
 my house.
6	
 your teacher.
7	
 in this class.
8	
 egg sandwiches.
9	
 in the café.
 
10	
 in Room 231.
 
11	
 my computer.
 
12	
 a student in my class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 169@@
169
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B  GRAMMAR  verb be − and ?
 	
Complete the conversations with a form of the verb be. Use contractions where possible.
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
1
Juan	
Hi.
Petra	
1Is this Class 2?
Juan	
Yes, it 2             . 3              you in  
this class, too?
Petra	 Yes, I 4             . What 5               
your name?
Juan	
I 6              Juan.
Petra	 My name 7              Petra.
Juan	
Where 8              you from, Petra?
Petra	 I 9              from the Czech Republic.  
And you?
Juan	
I 10              from Madrid.
Petra	
11              you Spanish?
Juan	
No, I 12             . I 13              
Mexican, but I live in Spain.
Petra	 Who 14              our teacher?
Juan	
Her name 15              Diane.
Petra	
16              she English?
Juan	
No, she 17             . She 18              
American.
Petra	 Where 19              the other students?  
20              they in class?
Juan	
No, they 21             . They 22               
in the café!
2
Chris	 Hi, I 1'm Chris.
Oliver	 Hello. My name 2              Oliver. It’s 
my first day here.
Chris	
3              you German, Oliver?
Oliver	 No, I 4             . I’m Swiss.
Chris	 Oh, which city 5              you from?
Oliver	 I 6              from Lucerne, in the centre  
of Switzerland.
Chris	
7              it nice in Lucerne?
Oliver	 Yes, it 8             . It’s beautiful. 
9              you English?
Chris	 No, I 10             . I 11              Irish.
Oliver	 Where 12              you from in Ireland?
Chris	 Dublin, the capital.
Oliver	 Really. 13              Dublin nice?
Chris	 Yes, it 14              great!
Oliver	 15              this my computer?
Chris	 No, it 16             . This is your  
computer here.
Oliver	 Thanks. 17              the boss here?
Chris	 No, he 18             . He’s in a meeting.
Oliver	 19              the other people in the  
office English?
Chris	 No, they 20             . They  
21              from all over the world.  
Have a good first day at work!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 170@@
170
1	 What’s your name?
4	 That’s 
 house.
5	 How do you spell 
 surname?
6	 Oh no! That’s 
 train.
7	
 names are Sophie and Ellie.
 
11	 That’s 
 hotel.
 
12	 Where’s 
 car?
3	 They’re 
 children.
2	 They’re 
 dogs.
8	 This is 
 room.
9	 They’re 
 boots.
 
10	 I think this is 
 bag.
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1C  GRAMMAR  possessive adjectives: my, your, etc.
 	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with my, your, his, her, our, or their.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 171@@
171
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Take turns to ask and answer.
  What is it?  
 It’s a…    What are they?  
 They’re…
2A  GRAMMAR  singular and plural nouns
 	
Complete the SINGULAR column with a or an. Then complete the PLURAL column.
 a
SINGULAR
PLURAL
1	 a         credit card
credit cards
2	
 magazine
3	
 child
4	
 airport
5	
 university
	
Look at the pictures. Write a question with it or they and complete the answers.
 b
1	 What are they?
	
They’re pencils.
2	 What is it?
	
It’s a lamp.
4	
?
	
3	
?
	
8	
?
	
7	
?
	
6	
?
	
5	
?
	
 
12	
?
	
 
11	
?
	
 
10	
?
	
9	
?
	
SINGULAR
PLURAL
6	
 dictionary
7	
 address
8	
 man
9	
 laptop
 
10	
 city
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 172@@
172
women
a car
boots
a road
men
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B  GRAMMAR  adjectives
 	
Write sentences for pictures 1–12. Use an adjective from the list.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and adjectives. Look at the pictures and say the sentences.
1	 He’s a rich man.
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
 
11	
 
12	
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
a man
a hotel
watches
a train
an exercise
an actress
snakes
dangerous
beautiful
small
new
cheap
fast
easy
expensive
tall
old long
rich
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 173@@
173
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2C  GRAMMAR  imperatives, let’s
 	
Complete the conversations with a + or − imperative using a verb from the list.
 a
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
	
Complete the conversations with Let’s… and a verb from the list.
 b
be  ​be  ​close  have  ​listen  ​sign  ​slow down  ​stop  ​take  ​turn off
ask  ​check  ​cross  go  have  ​stop
1	 A	
I’m cold. Close the window, please.
	
B	
OK.
2	 A	
What time is the exam?
	
B	
Tomorrow at 9.00. Don’t be late!
3	 A	
 photos!
	
B	
Why not?
	
A	
Look at that sign – ‘No photographs in 
the museum’.
4	 A	
Sh! Be quiet and 
 to 
the teacher.
	
B	
Sorry.
5	 A	
 here!
	
B	
Why not?
	
A	
It’s a bus stop.
6	 A	

 the TV and finish 
your homework!
	
B	
OK, Dad.
7	 A	
 a good weekend.
	
B	
You too. See you on Monday.
8	 A	
 careful! The coffee 
	
is very hot.
	
B	
OK. Thank you.
9	 A	

 your name here, 	
please.
	
B	
Sure. Can I have a pen?
 
10	 A	

! The speed limit is 
60 kph on this road!
	
B	
I know, but we’re very late!
1	 A	
I’m tired.
	
B	
OK. Let’s stop and sit down.
2	 A	
I’m really thirsty.
	
B	
Me too. 
 to a 
café and have a drink.
3	 A	
I’m hungry.
	
B	
Me too! 
 a 
sandwich.
4	 A	
 the road here.
	
B	
No! It’s really dangerous.
5	 A	
Where’s the bus station?
	
B	
I don’t know. 
 
that man.
6	 A	
What’s the capital of Turkey?
	
B	
I think it’s Ankara, but I’m not sure. 
 on the internet.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 174@@
174
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3A  GRAMMAR  present simple + and −
 	
Look at the picture of Carla’s room. Write positive + and negative − sentences about Carla. 
 a
	
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the picture and say + and − sentences.
 b
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Look at the picture and say true sentences about yourself.  
Remember your partner’s answers.
 
 I don't play the guitar. I eat meat.
Now tell a different partner about your first partner’s answers.
 
 Paula doesn't play the guitar. She eats meat.
1	 like Coldplay She likes Coldplay.
2	 play the guitar 
3	 eat meat 
4	 play tennis 
5	 go to the gym 
6	 drink coffee 
7	 study French 
8	 listen to music 
9	 live in Oxford 
 
 10	 have a cat 
 
 11	 wear glasses 
 
 12	 smoke
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 175@@
175
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3B  GRAMMAR  present simple +, −, and ?
 	
Complete the conversation in the present simple. Use + , −, and ? forms.  
Use the verbs from the list and auxiliaries do and don’t where necessary.
 a
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversation with a partner.
A	 Where are you from?
B	 Poland.
A	 You 1speak English very well.
B	 Thanks. I 2
 here.
A	 What 3
 you 
?
B	 I’m a nurse.
A	 Really? Where 4
 you 
?
B	 At St Thomas’s Hospital, in London.
A	
5
 you 
 your job?
B	 Yes, I 6
 it! But I work very long 
hours.
A	
7
 you 
 at night?
B	 Sometimes. It depends on the week. But 
luckily, I 8
 at weekends.
	
Choose the right word to complete the rest 
of the conversation.
 b
A	 Are you married?
B	 Yes, I’m married to an Englishman.
A	 What 1does he do? (do / does)
B	 He’s a teacher. He 2
 science. (teach / teaches)
A	
3
 he work at the local school? (Do / Does)
B	 No, he 4
. (don’t / doesn’t) He 5
 in London. (work / works)
A	 Does he 6
 his job? (like / likes)
B	 No, he 7
 it very much. It’s a difficult school. (doesn’t like / doesn’t likes)
A	 Are you happy in England?
B	 I like the country, but not the weather. It 8
 all the time. (rain / rains)
A	
9
 you want to go back to Poland one day? (Do / Does)
B	 Of course, but it isn’t easy. My husband 10
 speak Polish. (don’t / doesn’t)
A	
11
 you have children? (Do / Does)
B	 Yes, two boys.
A	
12
 they speak Polish? (Do / Does)
B	 Yes, perfectly.
do  ​like  ​live  love  speak  ​work (x3)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 176@@
176
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3C  GRAMMAR  word order in questions
 	
Put the words in order to make questions.
 a
YOUR PARTNER
1
favourite   What   your   film   is?
2
you   vegetarian   a   Are?
3
your   are   parents   from   Where?
4
phone   have   you   do   What?
5
many   speak   do   languages   you   How?
6
new   you   Do   need   phone   a?
7
surname   spell   you   do   your   How?
8
to   do   the   listen   radio   When   you?
9
Where   homework   you   your   do   do?
10
singer   Who   your   favourite   is?
11
the   you   do   do   What   at   weekend?
12
TV   programmes   watch   you   do   What?
What is your favourite film?	
       
	
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions. Use contractions  
with be where possible, e.g. What’s. Note the answers.
ACTIVATION
Cover the questions and look at the answers. Say the questions.
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 177@@
177
a bag
tennis balls
a ticket
a tennis racket
glasses
a book
a CD
Rachel, an 
English teacher
Pete, a 
music student
Keira, a 
doctor
Toby, a 
tennis player
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4A  GRAMMAR  possessive ’s, Whose…?
Look at objects 1–16. Whose are they? Write 14 more sentences.
ACTIVATION
Cover the sentences. Test a partner or say the sentences.
  Whose is the book?   
	
   
 It’s Rachel’s. Whose are the glasses?   
  They’re Keira’s. 
1	 It’s Toby’s tennis racket.	
2	 They’re Keira’s glasses.	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 10	
 11	
 12	
 13	
 14	
 15	
 16	
1
2
3
4
5
13
16
6
scissors
7
music books
8
a white coat
9
board pens
10
a shirt
11
a piano
12
a car
14
a dictionary
15
trainers
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 178@@
178
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4B  GRAMMAR  prepositions of time and place (in, on, at, to)
 	
Complete the sentences with in, on, or at.
 a
	
Complete the sentences with in, at, or to.
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PREPOSITION columns. Say the sentences.
TIME
PLACE
1	 I usually wake up 
 7.00 every day.	
	
	
	
	
      at
2	 I never work 
 the weekend.
3	 I see my family 
 Sundays.
4	 The party is 
 21st December.
5	 We hardly ever watch TV 
 the evening.
6	 I usually go to bed 
 11.00 p.m.
7	 I go skiing 
 the winter.
8	 I always go out 
 Friday night.
9	 My birthday is 
 January.
 
10	 People usually give presents 
 Christmas.
 
11	 We always go shopping 
 Friday.
 
12	 I get up late 
 Saturday mornings.
 
13	 I sometimes go home 
 lunchtime.
 
14	 We usually have three classes 
 the afternoon.
 
15	 Nurses often work 
 night.
1	 I live 
 a small flat in the city centre.
2	 She usually goes 
 the gym after work.
3	 Do you have a TV 
 your bedroom?
4	 I always have lunch 
 home.
5	 We often go 
 the cinema on Friday evenings.
6	 Let’s play football 
 the park.
7	 The children aren’t 
 school today. It’s a holiday.
8	 I usually go 
 work by train.
9	 On Saturdays, we sometimes have dinner 
 a restaurant.
 
10	 My wife isn’t here at the moment. She’s 
 work.
PREPOSITION
PREPOSITION
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 179@@
179
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4C  GRAMMAR  adverbs and expressions of frequency
 	
Look at the pictures and put the words in order to make sentences.
ACTIVATION
Look at the pictures and make true sentences about you.
 
I go to the gym once or twice a week.
1	 She goes to the gym every day.
goes   every   day   She   to   
the   gym
sometimes   They   the   cinema   
go   to   on   Friday
2	
	
hours   He   sleeps   always   
eight   for
3	
	
week   a   once   meets   She   
her   friends
eats   never   meat   She
5	
	
tired   He   always   is   the   
in   morning
6	
	
4	
	
hairdresser   hardly   ever   goes   
He   to   the
studies   every   day   She   English
 11	
	
He   to   goes   often   the   doctor
 12	
	
 10	
	
often   He   his   homework   on   
the   bus   does
twice   a   week   do   They   yoga
8	
	
9	
	
7	
	
late   He   for   class   
sometimes   is
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 180@@
180
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5A  GRAMMAR  can / can’t
 	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with can / can’t and a verb from the list.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
cook  dance  ​hear  help  find  ​open  ​park  play  ​sit  ​speak  ​swim  ​take
1	 He can’t play the guitar.
2	 You 
 
photos in here!
3	
 I 
 there, please?
5	 Jamie 
 
very well.
6	 The boy 
 
the old man.
4	 He 
 his 
glasses.
 11	She 
  
.
 12	They 
 
very well.
 10	
 you 
 me, please?
8	 Stop! You 
there.
9	 They 
 
French.
7	
 I 
 the window?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 181@@
181
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
5B  GRAMMAR  present continuous: be + verb + -ing
 	
Complete the sentences with the verb in brackets in the present continuous. 
Use contractions where possible.
A	 What’s that noise?
B	 It’s our neighbour.
A	 Not again! What 1’s he doing (do) now?
B	 He
 2
 (wash) his car and he 
3
 (listen) to the radio.
A	 What? At 7.30 on a Sunday morning! Why 4
 he 
 (do) it now?
B	 I don’t know.
A	 What 5
 you 
 (do)?
B	 I 6
 (get) up. I can’t sleep with this noise!
1
A	
7
 you 
 the match (watch)?
B	 Of course we are.
A	 What 8
 (happen)?
B	 We 9
 (win) 1–0, but we  
10
 (not play) very well. Why 11
 
you 
 (not watch) the match?
A	 I 12
 (work) and my boss  
13
 (watch) me.
2
A	 What can you see?
B	 There are three men downstairs.
A	 What 14
 they 
 (do)?
B	 They 15
 (count) money, I think. No, sorry. 
They 16
 (not count) money.  
They 17
 (play) cards.
A	 Can you see Jim?
B	 Yes, he’s upstairs.
A	 What 18
 he 
 (do)?
B	 He 19
 (look) at me!
3
A	 How’s your sister?
B	 She’s fine.
A	 What 20
 she 
 (do) now? 21
 
she 
 (work)?
B	 No, she’s in Thailand at the moment, with two friends.  
They 22
 (travel) round the world.
A	 What 23
 you 
 (do) now?
B	 I 24
 (not work) at the moment.  
I 25
 (look for) a job.
4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 182@@
182
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5C  GRAMMAR  present simple or present continuous?
 	
Put the verbs in the present simple or present continuous. Use contractions where possible.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Talk about two things you do every day, and two things you’re doing at the moment.
1	 A	 What are you doing? (do)
	
B	
I’m checking my emails. (check)
2	 A	 What 1
 you 
 of 
your new phone? (think)
	
B	
It’s great! It 2
 really 
good photos. (take)
3	 A	 What’s that music?
	
B	
My neighbours 3
 a 
party. (have)
4	 A	 Where 4
 you 
? (go)
	
B	
To my parents’ house for lunch. We usually 
5
 there for lunch on 
Sundays. (go)
5	 A	 Hi, Nora! What 6
 you 
 here? (do)
	
B	
I 7
 for a friend. (wait)
6	 A	 Where’s Simon?
	
B	
In the bathroom. He 8
 
a shower. (have)
7	 A	 What’s the answer to number five?
	
B	
Sh! I 9
 to the teacher. 
(listen)
8	 A	
10
 you 
 a uniform  
	
for work? (wear)
	
B	
Yes. I 11
 it. It’s 
horrible. (not like)
9	 A	 Look! It 12
. (rain)
	
B	
Again? It 13
 a lot here. 
(rain)
 10	 A	 Why 14 
 you 
? (cry)
	
B	
Because I 15
 a very 
sad film. (watch)
 11	 A	 Why 16
 the train 
? 
(stop)
	
B	
Because this is the slow train. It 
17
 at every station. 
(stop)
 12	 A	 When 18
 you usually 
 your friends? (see)
	
B	
On Friday night. We always 
19
 after work. (meet)
 13	 A	
What time 20
 you usually 
 work? (finish)
	
B	
About 6.00, but I 21
 
late this evening. (work)
 14	 A	
What 22
 you 
 for? 
(look)
	
B	
My car keys! I always 23
 
them in my bag, but they aren’t there 
now. (put)
 15	 A	
How often 24
 you 
 
exercise? (do)
	
B	
I 25
 in the sea every 
morning. (swim)
 16	 A	
Be quiet! Your mum 26
 
to watch a film on TV. (try)
	
B	
Sorry! She hardly ever 
27
 TV in the 
afternoon. (watch)
	21–27	 Excellent. You understand the difference between the present continuous and the 
present simple.
	15–20	 Quite good, but check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.132) and look 
at the exercise again.
	 0–14	 This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.132). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
27
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 183@@
183
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6A  GRAMMAR  object pronouns: me, you, him, etc.
 	
Complete the sentences with me, you, him, her, it, us, or them. Write in the PRONOUN column.
1	 It’s a great song. I love 
 !	 	
	
	
	
	
	
       it
2	 We can’t speak Italian very well. Can you help 
 ?
3	 The phone’s ringing! Can you answer 
 ?
4	 I often call Ellie, but she hardly ever calls 
 .
5	 Can you go to the boss’s office? She wants to see 
 .
6	 Where are my keys? I can’t find 
 !
7	 Hello again! Do you remember 
 ? My name’s Matt.
8	 Lorna really likes Nick, but I don’t think he likes 
 .
9	 Is Kate’s boyfriend nice? I don’t know 
 .
 
10	 A	 What do you think of these shoes? 
B	 I don’t like 
 . They’re a horrible colour.
 
11	 We don’t know this city. Can you tell 
 some places to visit?
 
12	 This hotel’s very noisy. I don’t like 
 .
 
13	 My sister works in Germany. I don’t see 
 very often.
 
14	 I’m free tonight. Do you want to come to the cinema with 
 ?
 
15	 This exercise is very difficult. I can’t do 
 .
 
16	 Your sister phoned. She needs to speak to 
 .
 
17	 My husband gets home late, but I always have dinner with 
 .
 
18	 George and Natalia are really nice. I like 
 .
 
19	 A	 Excuse me, Julia Parker is here. 
B	 Thanks. Please ask 
 to wait in reception.
 
20	 We’re going to the cinema tonight. Do you want to 
come with 
 ?
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PRONOUN column. Say the sentences again with the pronouns.
PRONOUN
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 184@@
184
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Tell your partner if the sentences are true about you.
 
I don’t like eating in restaurants.
6B  GRAMMAR  like (+ verb + -ing)
 	
Complete the sentences with I love / like / don’t mind / don’t like / hate and  
the -ing form of a verb from the list.
 = I love   
 = I like   
 = I don’t mind   
 = I don’t like   
 = I hate
cook  do  eat  get up  go  ​have  ​listen  ​live  ​look for  ​shop  ​sit  swim  ​wait  ​watch
1
I love eating in restaurants.
2
 housework.
3
 in the sea in summer.
4
 to the dentist.
5
 at the front of the class.
6
 a big party on my birthday.
7
 for the bus.
8
 in a flat.
9
 to loud music in the car.
 
10
 dinner for my family.
 
11
 somewhere to park.
 
12
 films in English.
 
13
 early in winter.
 
14
 online.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 185@@
185
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6C  GRAMMAR  be or do?
 	
Complete the conversations with a form of the verb be or do. Use contractions where possible.
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
Interviewer	
Good evening. 12
 it OK 
if I ask you some questions?
Charlotte	
Yes, fine.
Interviewer	
13
 you enjoying the 
concert this evening?
Charlotte	
Yes, I 14
. I think it
 
15
  really good. The 
orchestra 16
 playing 
very well.
Interviewer	
17
 you have a favourite 
orchestra?
Charlotte	
Mmm, no, I
 18
. I think all 
the orchestras that play at 
the Proms 19
 very good.
Interviewer	
20
 you often come to the Proms?
Charlotte	
Yes, this 21
 my fifth concert this season. And when I 22
 come, 
I listen to the concerts on the radio.
Interviewer	
Oh, I think the concert 23
 starting again. Thank you for talking to me.
Charlotte	
No problem.
Interviewer	
Excuse me. 1Do you have time to answer a 
few questions?
Daniel	 	
Yes, sure. I
 2
 just waiting for 
some friends.
Interviewer	
Great, thanks. 3
 this your first 
time at the Glastonbury Festival?
Daniel	 	
No, it 4
. I come every year. 
It
 5
 quite expensive, but I love it!
Interviewer	
And which bands 6
 you really 
want to see this year?
Daniel	 	
Coldplay and Muse. They 7
 my 
favourite bands
Interviewer	
Why 8
 you like their music?
Daniel	 	
I think their songs 9
 great.
Interviewer	
And what about the weather? It 10
 
awful!
Daniel	 	
Oh, I 11
 mind the rain. It always 
rains at Glastonbury!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 186@@
186
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Make questions and test your partner’s memory. Correct the information if you can.
  Was Mother Teresa born in India?  
No, she wasn't. She was born in Albania.
7A  GRAMMAR  past simple of be: was / were
 	
Complete with was / were or wasn’t / weren’t to make true sentences.
1	 Mother Teresa wasn’t born in India.
2	 Kurt Vonnegut 
 an English writer.
3	 Tchaikovsky 
 the composer of Swan Lake.
4	 The Vikings 
 from Germany.
5	 Gustave Eiffel 
 a famous French engineer.
6	 Roald Dahl 
 a famous British musician.
7	 The Beatles 
 from Liverpool.
8	 Jennifer Lawrence 
 in the Hunger Games 
films.
9	 Socrates and Plato 
 Greek artists.
 
10	 Pablo Picasso 
 Spanish.
 
11	 Beethoven 
 a Swiss composer.
 
12	 Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin 
 the first 
men to walk on the moon.
 
13	 Adele’s first album 
 25.
 
14	 The Incas 
 from Mexico.
 
15	 Marco Polo 
 born in Venice.
 
16	 The Olympic Games 
 in Brazil in 2016.
 
17	 Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci 
 
famous German painters.
 
18	 Barack Obama 
 the 44th President of 
the USA.
 
19	 Monet and Gauguin 
 French painters.
 
20	 Albert Einstein 
 a German politician.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 187@@
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
7B  GRAMMAR  past simple: regular verbs
 	
Complete the conversations in the past tense. Use the verbs in brackets.
Annie	
1Did you study French at university? (study)
Beth	
No, I 2
 French; I 3
 Italian. I 4
 in 
Rome for six months in my third year. (not study, study, live)
Annie	 Where 5
 you 
 in Rome? (live)
Beth	
Near the Forum. I 6
 a house with some Italian students. (rent)
Annie	 7
 you 
 in Italian all the time? (talk)
Beth	
Not always, because they 8
 to practise their English. But I 
9
 to cook great pasta! (want, learn)
1
Alan	
10
 you 
 Brazil? (like)
Ben	
We 11
 it! We 12
 to come home. (love, not want)
Alan	
13
 you 
 around the country? (travel)
Ben	
We 14
 much, because we were only there for two weeks. 
(not travel)
Alan	
15
 you 
 in hotels? (stay)
Ben	
No, we 16
 with Brazilian friends. (stay)
2
3
Dave	
17
 you 
 the match? Arsenal and Real Madrid? (watch)
Carl	
No, I 18
.
Dave	
Why not?
Carl	
I 19
 late last night. I 20
 until 7.00. (work, not finish)
Dave	
But the match 21
 at 7.45. (start)
Carl	
Yeah, but I 22
 my train. I 23
 home until 9.30. 
(miss, not arrive) 
Dave	
What a pity! It was a great game.
4
Sam	
I 24
 you three times last night, but you 25
. 
(call, not answer)
Lucy	
Sorry. I was at the cinema with my sister.
Sam	
And I 26
 you, too. Why 27
 you 
 me back? 
(text, not text)
Lucy	
Because I was angry.
Sam	
Angry? Why? 
Lucy	
Because you 28
 to me at the party last week. You  
29
 to Eva for about an hour. (not talk, chat)
Sam	
I 30
 to Eva for an hour! She had a problem, and she just  
31
 to tell me about it. (not chat, want)
Lucy	
A problem? Is that why you 32
 with her for 20 minutes? (dance)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 188@@
188
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Cover the answers. Take turns to answer the questions. 
Then cover the questions and take turns to make the questions from the answers.
7C  GRAMMAR  past simple: irregular verbs
 	
Complete the blog with the past simple form of the verbs in brackets.
 a
This happened to me a couple of years ago. Some university friends and I wanted to 
celebrate New Year’s Eve at the famous street party in Edinburgh. We 
1knew (know) it  
2
 (be) difficult to get tickets for the party, but we 
3
 (be) really lucky and  
4
 (buy) some online six months before. On 31st December, we 
5
 (get) a fast 
train from London.
We arrived in Edinburgh at 6.00 p.m. and walked from the station to our hotel. We relaxed,  
6
 (have) dinner, and then 
7
 (get) ready to go out. We 
8
 (wear) warm 
clothes, because it 
9
 (be) really cold. We 
10
 (get) to the city centre at about 
9.30 p.m. It 
11
 (be) wet and quite windy. We 
12
 (go) into the first warm bar 
we 
13
 (find) and 
14
 (drink) some whisky. At about 10.30 p.m., we 
15
 
(put on) our warm coats again and 
16
 (go) back outside. The streets 
17
 (be) 
nearly empty! Some people 
18
 (say) ‘The street party is cancelled because of the 
terrible weather.’  We 
19
 (not can) believe it! The weather 
20
 (not be) good, 
but it 
21
 (feel) like a normal winter night in Scotland.
In the end, we 
22
 (get) a taxi back to our hotel and 
23
 (spend) 
midnight in our rooms! We 
24
 (not have) a very happy New Year’s Eve!
	
Complete these questions about the blog.
 b
1	 Where did they buy tickets for the party?	
They bought tickets for the party online.
2	 Why 
 warm clothes?	
Because it was really cold.	
3	 What time 
 to the city centre?	
They got there at about 9.30 p.m.
4	 What 
 the weather like?	
It was wet and quite windy.
5	 What 
 in the bar?	
They drank some whisky.
6	 What 
 at 10.30 p.m.?	
They put on their coats and went outside.
7	 What 
 to them?	
They said ‘The street party is cancelled.’
8	
 a bus back to their hotel?	
No, they didn’t. They got a taxi.
9	 Where 
 midnight?	
They spent midnight in their rooms.
 10	
 a good time?	
No, they didn’t.
A MEMORABLE
NEW YEAR’S EVE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 189@@
189
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Read the conversation again. Then cover it. Can you remember five things  
that Mr and Mrs Thomas did yesterday?
8A  GRAMMAR  past simple: regular and irregular verbs
 	
Complete the conversation with the past tense of the verb in brackets. 
A NEW LIFE
Inspector	
OK, Mr Thomas. Please just relax 
and tell me the problem.
Mr Thomas	 It’s my wife. She 1went (go) out 
yesterday evening. And she 
2
 (not come) 
back.
Inspector	
When 3
 (you / 
see) your wife for the last time?
Mr Thomas	 Yesterday evening, at about nine 
	
	
thirty.
Inspector	
Tell me what happened yesterday. 
4
 (you / do) 
anything unusual?
Mr Thomas	 No, it 5
 (be) 
just a normal day. We 6
 (wake up) at seven. 
I 7
 (have) breakfast. Then I 8
 (drive) to 
work. My wife 9
 (not have) breakfast. In the morning, I think she 
10
 (go) shopping. She 11
 (come) home at 
lunchtime. I don’t know what she 12
 (do) in the afternoon. She 
probably 13
 
(make) dinner.
Inspector	
When 14
 
(you / come) home?
Mr Thomas	 I
 15
 (arrive) 
home at about seven thirty. I 
16
 (sit) down 
and 17
 (read) 
the newspaper, and 
18
 (check) my 
emails. We 19
 
(have) dinner at about eight. After 
dinner, I 20
 
(watch) TV. I 21
 
(go to sleep) in my chair.
Inspector	
22
 (you / 
speak) to your wife at all? What 23
 (she / say) to you?
Mr Thomas	 We 24
 (not talk) during dinner. After dinner, she 
25
 (say), ‘This isn’t a life. I need to go out.’ She 
 
26
 (call) a taxi. I 27
 (hear) the taxi about 15 
minutes later. She 28
 (take) her bag and her coat and 
29
 (close) the door. She 30
 (not say) goodbye.
Inspector	
I see, Sir. I think I know why she 31
 (leave).
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 190@@
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B  GRAMMAR  there is / there are, some / any + plural nouns
 	
Write the questions and short answers.
 a
	
Write + or − sentences.
 b
1	 table / kitchen	
There’s a table in the kitchen.
2	 plants / living room	
3	 mirror / hall	
4	 books / living room	
5	 computer / study	
6	 clock / kitchen	
7	 fireplace / living room	
8	 shelves / study	
1	 shower / bathroom?	
Is there a shower in the bathroom?	
Yes, there is.
2	 pictures / hall?	
Are there any pictures in the hall?	
No, there aren’t.
3	 double bed / bedroom?	
	
4	 piano / living room?	
	
5	 plant / study?	
	
6	 dishwasher / kitchen?	
	
7	 cupboards / bathroom?	
	
8	 chairs / bedroom?	
	
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Work with a partner. Look at the picture again for 30 seconds. 
Then A (picture face up) ask B (picture face down) five questions about the house. Change roles.
  Is there a plant in the study?  
Are there any chairs in the hall?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 191@@
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Say three things that were in the street or area where you live,  
but which are not there now.
8C  GRAMMAR  there was / there were
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form ( + , −, or ?  ) of there was / were.
1
A	
1Was there a supermarket in this town when you were 
a child?
B	 No, 2
. 3
 a baker’s 
and a small shop.
A	
4
 any Italian restaurants? I love 
pizza!
B	 No, 5
, but 6
 a 
café. And 7
 two pubs!
3
A	
13
 a very old castle in the town, 
near where I lived when I was a child. People said 
14
 secret rooms in it.
B	 Really? 15
 any ghosts in the castle, 
too?
A	 Yes, 16
. My aunt saw one once. She 
said that suddenly 17
 a strange 
light, and then she saw a face looking in through the 
window – but she was on the second floor!
4
A	 Did you get anything nice in the sale?
B	 Yes, I did. 18
 some lovely sweaters. 
I got two.
A	 Great! 19
 any jeans?
B	 Yes, 20
, but 21
 any 
in my size.
2
A	 We stayed in a great hotel in Spain. It was on the 
beach and 8
 a really big swimming 
pool, too. 
B	 Cool! 9
 a gym?
A	 Yes, and 10
 two tennis courts.
B	
11
 any restaurants in the hotel?
A	
12
 three! And the food was delicious!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 192@@
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Work with a partner. A (picture face up) asks B (picture face down)  
five questions about what’s in the fridge. Then change roles.
9A  GRAMMAR  countable / uncountable nouns; a / an, some / any
 	
Look at what’s in the fridge. Write the questions and short answers with Is there / Are there + a, an, 
or any.
 a
	
Write + or − sentences with a / an, some, or any.
 b
1	 onions	
There aren’t any onions.
2	 tomato juice	
3	 pineapple	
4	 strawberries	
5	 peppers	
6	 milk	
7	 mushrooms	
8	 ice cream	
1	 sushi?	
Is there any sushi?	
Yes, there is.
2	 butter?	
	
3	 carrots?	
	
4	 cheese?	
	
5	 fish?	
	
6	 chicken?	
	
7	 eggs?	
	
8	 orange juice?	
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 193@@
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer questions 1–12 about yourself.
  How much orange juice do you drink?  
I don't drink much orange juice.
9B  GRAMMAR  quantifiers; how much / how many, a lot of, etc.
 	
Circle much or many. Then answer the question with a complete sentence.  
Use a lot of, not…much, not…many, or not…any.
Fast Food Phil
1	 How much / many orange juice does he drink? 
He doesn’t drink any orange juice.
2	 How much / many burgers does he eat? 
	
3	 How much / many chips does he eat? 
Valerie the Vegetarian
4	 How much / many meat does she eat? 
	
5	 How much / many vegetables does she eat? 
	
6	 How much / many Diet Coke does she drink? 
	
Baby Belinda
7	 How much / many milk does she drink? 
	
8	 How much / many bread does she eat? 
	
9	 How much / many apples does she eat? 
	
 Fabio the Italian Food Fan
 
10	 How much / many rice does he eat? 
 
11	 How much / many pasta does he eat? 
 
12	 How much / many cups of espresso does he drink? 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 194@@
194
Price
a Cartier watch: £4,500
a Swatch watch: £38
expensive
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the information. Compare the things.
9C  GRAMMAR  comparative adjectives
 	
Use the information to make comparative sentences.
3
1	 The Golden Gate Bridge is shorter  
than the Akashi Kaikyo Bridge.
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
  
10	
 
  11	
 
  12	
 
old
Facebook: 2004
Skype: 2003
2
Inventions
hot
London: 24 °C
New York: 28.5 °C
4
Average summer
temperature
dry
Annual rainfall
6
Buenos Aires: 983 mm
Rome: 584 mm
big
Russia: 17,075,200  km2
Canada: 9,984,670  km2
8
Size
dangerous
Deaths per 
year worldwide
10
travelling by car: approx. 1,250,000
travelling by plane: approx. 600
slow
Speed
7
a man: 44.88 kph
a horse: 76.44 kph
Length
1
the Akashi Kaikyō Bridge 
(Japan): 1,991 m
the Golden Gate Bridge 
(USA): 1,280 m
short
Vitamin C
5
an orange: approx. 70 mg per orange
an apple: approx. 9 mg per apple
healthy
People per km2
9
Shanghai: 4,000
Istanbul: 2,500
crowded
Height
11
the Burj Khalifa tower 
(Dubai): 828  m
the Empire State Building 
(New York): 381  m
tall
Paris (France) average hours
sunlight per day: 4.9
Stockholm (Sweden) average hours 
sunlight per day: 5.4
12
Weather
sunny
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 195@@
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1	 big / country / world 
	
What’s the biggest country in the world? 
2	 wet / town / world 
	
?
3	 small / country / world 
	
?
4	 high / city / world 
	
?
5	 long / beach / world 
	
?
6	 dry / desert / world 
	
?
7	 busy / train station / world 
	
?
8	 populated / city / world 
	
?
9	 popular / tourist destination / world 
	
?
 
10	 expensive / city / world 
	
?
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Work with a partner. Cover the questions and look at the answers.  
Take turns to make sentences about each place.
 
Vatican City is the smallest country in the world.
10A  GRAMMAR  superlative adjectives
 	
Write the questions.
 a
	
Match questions 1–10 to the answers below.
 b
Vatican City	
Shinjuku Station in Tokyo	
Praia do Cassino in Brazil	
Shanghai in China	
Russia	
Cherrapunji in India	
Zurich in Switzerland	
the Atacama Desert in Chile	
La Rinconada in Peru	
France	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 196@@
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
10B  GRAMMAR  be going to (plans)
 	
Complete the conversations with be going to. Use the verb in brackets. Use contractions 
where possible.
1
A	
1Are you going to watch the match tonight? (watch)
B	 Yes, but I 2
 it at a friend’s house – nobody in 
my family likes football. (watch)
2
A	 Juan and Pablo 3
 here next year. (not study)
B	 Why not?
A	 Because they 4
 in Washington. (live)
3
A	 I 5
 this evening. (not go out)
B	 Why not?
A	 I need to get up early tomorrow morning. I  
6
 at 10.00. (go to bed)
4
A	
7
 Emma 
 at the party? 
(be)
B	 Yes, and she says that she 8
 her new 
boyfriend. (bring)
5
A	 What 9
 you 
 next 
weekend? (do)
B	 We 10
 with our friends in London. (stay)
A	
11
 you 
 the children? 
(take)
B	 Yes. We 12
 the Science Museum and then go 
sightseeing. (visit)
6
A	 Where’s your sister?
B	 She’s out shopping. She 13
 a new laptop. (buy)
A	 What 14
 she 
 with the old 
one? (do)
B	 She 15
 it to me! (give)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 197@@
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the predictions.
10C  GRAMMAR  be going to (predictions)
 	
Write a prediction with going to for each picture. Use a verb from the list.
not buy  ​not eat  ​get married  learn  listen  ​make  paint  play  not snow  take  visit  win
1	 He’s going to learn Italian.
2	 
 to music.
3	 
 the match.
4	 
 their lunch.
5	 
 a salad.
6	 
 next week.
7	 
 any shoes.
8	 
 the guitar.
9	 
 next month.
 10	 
 his dog for a walk.
 11	 
 the museum.
 12	 
 the bathroom.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 198@@
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
 
She’s eating very noisily.
11A  GRAMMAR  adverbs (manner and modifiers)
 	
Make adverbs from the adjectives.
 a
	
Write sentences for pictures 1–12. Use an adverb from a.
 b
1	 She’s eating very noisily.
2	 He’s driving really 
.
3	 He’s writing 
.
4	 She passed the exam 
very 
.
5	 They’re dancing very 
.
6	 She’s opening the door  
.
7	 She’s running very 
.
8	 He’s working 
.
9	 She’s waiting 
.
 
10	 He’s driving 
.
 
11	 She’s singing really 
.
 
12	 They’re talking 
.
fast
loud
slow
hard 
quiet 
patient 
noisy 
careful	
easy 
bad 
dangerous 
good 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 199@@
199
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
11B  GRAMMAR  verb + to + infinitive
 	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with to + a verb in the infinitive. Use a verb 
from the list.
 a
	
Complete the conversations with Would or Do / Does.
 b
be  ​buy  ​do  drive  ​get  ​go  ​have  ​play
1	 A	
 your flatmates like to come 
	
to dinner?
	
B	
Why don’t you ask them? I’m sure 
	
they’d like to.
2	 A	
 you like classical music?
	
B	
No, I prefer rock music.
3	 A	
 your husband like cooking?
	
B	
Yes, he loves it.
4	 A	
 you like another coffee?
	
B	
No, thanks. Just a glass of water, 
	
please.
5	 A	
 you like to come to the 
	
cinema with us tonight?
	
B	
Sorry, I can’t. I’m going out to a 
	
restaurant with Mark tonight.
5
6
7
8
1
1	 We’re planning 
to go on holiday 
to Mexico next 
summer.
2
2	 We need 
 at 
the airport by 
7.00 a.m.!
3
3	 Would you like 
 
basketball on 
Saturday?
4
4	 She’s learning 
.
5	 Steve wants 
 a 
new computer.
6	 They decided 
 
a swim.
7	 I’m hoping 
 a 
job in a London 
restaurant.
8	 I promise 
 my 
homework when the 
programme finishes.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 200@@
200
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask each other the questions and answer with your own ideas.
11C  GRAMMAR  definite article: the or no the
 	
Complete with the or –.
1	 A	
Which country has 1the best food in 2 the world? 
	
B	
Italy, definitely! I love Italian food! I often 
have 3
 pasta for 4
 
dinner.
2	 A	
What time do you usually go to 5
 
bed?
	
B	
Usually at around 10.00 p.m., but later at 
6
 weekend.
3	 A	
Do you think 7
 men are more 
interested in football than 8
 
women?
	
B	
No! I’m a woman and I really like 
9
 football.
4	 A	
How often do you travel by 10
 train?
	
B	
Every weekday. It’s 11
 easiest way to 
get to 12
 work.
5	 A	
In your family, who has 13
 most 
interesting job?
	
B	
I think 14
 my brother's job is really 
interesting. He's an architect. 
6	 A	
Do 15
 men in this class talk more 
than 16
 women?
	
B	
No! 17
 men are really quiet.
7	 A	 Do you like 18
 animals?
	
B	
Yes, I love them! I have a cat and a dog. 
19
 dog is frightened of 
20
 cat!
8	 A	
How often do you go shopping in 
21
 city centre?
	
B	
Hardly ever! I prefer shopping on 
22
 internet.
9	 A	
What are you going to do when 23
 
lesson finishes today?
	
B	
I’m going to have 24
 lunch with 
25
 my mother-in-law.
 
10	 A	
Do you think 26
 children behave 
worse now than in 27
 past?
	
B	
Yes, I do. I think 28
 teachers have a 
really difficult job!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 201@@
201
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
12A  GRAMMAR  present perfect
 	
Write sentences in the present perfect. Use contractions where possible.
1	
 you 
 this film? (see)
2	 Oh no! I 
 my glasses. (break)
3	 It was a mistake. I 
 it. (not wear)
4	 They 
 a new car. (buy)
5	 Alex 
 all over the world
	
(travel)
6	
 you 
 Jake, my boyfriend?
	
(meet)
7	 They 
 all the biscuits! (eat)
8	 Don’t turn it off! The film 
. (not finish)
9	
 the boss 
?
	
(arrive)
 
10	 He 
 my bag! (take)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 202@@
202
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
12B  GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple?
 	
Write the verbs in the present perfect or past simple. Use contractions where possible.
1	 A	
Where’s Suzie?
	
B	
She 1’s gone home. (go)
	
A	
When 2
 she 
? (leave)
	
B	
About half an hour ago.
2	 A	
3
 you 
 to the new Italian restaurant in Queen Street? (be)
	
B	
Yes, we have. We 4
 last week. The food 5
 great. (go, be)
5	 A	
13
 you ever 
 a ghost? (see)
	
B	
No, I 14
. I 15
 in a haunted hotel a few months ago, but I 
16
 anything. (stay, not see)
6	 A	
17
 you 
 to Paris? (be)
	
B	
Yes, I 18
.
	
A	
When 19
 you 
 there? (go)
	
B	
When I 20
 at school, for an end-of-year trip. (be)
	
A	
21
 you 
 a good time? (have)
	
B	
Yes. It 22
 great. (be)
7	 A	
Where do you want to go on holiday this summer?
	
B	
Well, we 23
 to North America a few times, but we 24
 never 
 South America. How about Peru? (be, visit)
	
A	
Oh, good idea. I 25
 a lot of photos of Machu Picchu, and it looks fantastic! (see)
	
B	
Yes, it does! My friend Ruby 
 26
 there last month, and she 27
  
a great time. (go, have)
	
A	
What 28
 she 
 most about her trip? (enjoy)
	
B	
She 29
 lots of really friendly people, and the food 30
  
delicious. (meet, be)
8	 A	
31
 you 
 to Jake recently? (speak)
	
B	
No, I 32
. What about you? 
	
A	
Well, I 33
 a surprising phone call from him yesterday. (get)
	
B	
Really? What 34
 he 
? (say)
	
A	
He 35
 a new job last week and is planning to move to Australia. (get)
	
B	
Wow!
3	 A	
6
 Mr Hamilton 
? (arrive)
	
B	
No, he 
 7
 a few minutes ago. He’s going to be late. (phone)
4	 A	
I 8
 the new Star Wars film at the cinema last night. I 9
 it. 
10
 you 
 it? (see, not like, see)
	
B	
Yes, I have. I 11
 it last week and I 12
 it. (see, love)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 203@@
203
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the questions and look at the answers. Say the questions.
12C  GRAMMAR  revision: question formation
 	
Write questions for the answers.
1	 What does your brother do? (do)
He’s a doctor.
2	
 to class today? (get)
I came by bus.
3	
 the weather like in New York last weekend? (be)
Awful! It was foggy and 
really cold.
4	
 a good time? (have)
Yes, I am. This place 
is great.
5	
 like 
 windsurfing? (try)
No, I wouldn’t. I can’t swim!
6	
 on holiday last year? (go)
We went to Tenerife.
7	
 he 
 now? (leave)
Because he needs to get 
up early tomorrow.
8	
 a musical instrument? (play)
Yes, I can. I can play 
the guitar.
9	
 breakfast this morning? (not have)
Because I wasn’t hungry.
  
10	
 the homework? (do)
No, I haven’t. I’m going to 
do it this evening.
  
11	
 on Friday night? (go out)
Yes, we are. We have 
tickets for a concert.
 
 12	
 coat 
 this? (be)
It’s mine. Thanks.
  
13	
 you 
 English classes? (have)
Twice a week. On 
Tuesdays and Thursdays.
 
 14	
 Maria 
 home early? (go)
Because she didn’t 
feel well.
 
 15	
 Shakespeare 
? (be born)
In 1564.
  
16	
 ever 
 Mexican food? (eat)
Yes, I have. It’s delicious!
 
 17	
 to Scotland? (fly)
No, we’re going to go 
by train.
  
18	
 your wife 
 work? (finish)
She finishes at 7.00 p.m.
 
 19	
 hours 
 a night? (sleep)
Usually seven or eight.
  
20	 
 your brother 
 after   
university? (do)
He’s going to work 
in television.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 204@@
204
•	 Say the nationalities at random, ticking them off as you go.
•	 When a student / pair shouts Bingo! ask them to say the 
countries on their card. Check that they are the ones  
you have already ticked. If not, continue the game. The 
first student / pair to cross off all the countries on their 
card correctly is the winner.
 EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in groups of three or four to play a 
second game. Tell the groups to choose one person to 
be the caller. Give each caller the list of nationalities and 
each student a new bingo card. Tell the callers to say the 
nationalities at random. Remind them to keep a note of the 
nationalities as they say them.
1C Personal information
A mingle activity
Sts ask and answer questions to complete business cards 
with personal information. Copy and cut up one worksheet 
per eight Sts.
LANGUAGE
What’s your name, please? And your surname?
What’s your email address? Can you spell it? (+ alphabet)
What’s your phone number? (+ numbers 0–10)
•	 If necessary, revise the alphabet and numbers before 
starting.
•	 Put Sts in groups of eight (or fewer, e.g. if you have 20 Sts, 
have two groups of eight and one of four). Use one set of 
cards per group.
•	 Give each student one strip. Focus on the first card and 
tell them that they are that person. Check that they know 
how to say the @ sign (at) and the . (dot). Tell them not to 
worry if they can’t pronounce the names perfectly.
•	 Now focus on the blank cards, and elicit and drill the 
questions they need to ask to get that information (see 
Language). If necessary, write them on the board.
•	 Tell Sts they are at a conference. They must complete  
the blank business cards with information about two 
other people from their group. Demonstrate with a 
student first.
•	 Sts mingle and complete their forms.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to check the 
information they have written down.
Communicative activity instructions
1A You say, you answer
A pairwork matching activity
Sts play matching games to practise greeting phrases, 
numbers, and days of the week. Copy one worksheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Hello, I’m Sally. 
My name’s Tim. Nice to meet you.
•	 Write Hello, I’m Sally. on the board. Then write Nice to meet 
you, Ben. and Hi, Sally, I’m Ben. Ask students which answer 
they think is correct, Hi, Sally, I’m Ben. 
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Give out the worksheets and 
focus on a. Give Sts time to read their sentences.
•	 Explain that Sts A start by reading the sentences in the 
You say column and Sts B choose their answers from the 
You answer column.
•	 Monitor and help if necessary.
STUDENT A
STUDENT B
Hi, I’m Mike. What’s your 
name?
My name’s Sally.
Hi, Mark, this is Anna.
Nice to meet you, Anna.
What’s your phone number?
It’s 07478203124.
How are you?
Fine, thanks. And you?
Hello, I’m George.
Hi, George. I’m Chris. Nice to 
meet you.
STUDENT B
STUDENT A
How are you?
I’m very well, thank you.
What day is it today?
It’s Monday.
Nice to meet you, Jim.
Nice to meet you, too.
Hello! My name’s Ben.
Nice to meet you, Ben. I’m 
Laura.
See you on Saturday. Bye.
Yes, see you on Saturday. 
Goodbye.
•	 Finally, get Sts to repeat the activity, covering the You 
answer column.
1B Nationalities bingo
A bingo game activity
Sts play bingo to practise nationalities and the names of 
countries. Copy one worksheet and cut up one bingo card 
per student. The list of nationalities is for the teacher.
LANGUAGE
Nationalities and countries: American, Poland, etc.
•	 Give each student a bingo card. With classes of more than 
12, give more than one student the same card or give one 
card per pair.
•	 Explain that Sts are going to play a bingo game. Tell Sts 
that you will say a nationality. If they have that country on 
their card, they should cross it out. The first student / pair to 
cross out all the countries should shout Bingo!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 205@@
205
•	 Tell Sts they are going to play dominoes. Let them help 
you explain if they know the rules. Use an example from 
the worksheet if necessary.
This is a library.
This room’s hot.
I’m thirsty.
Turn on the air 
conditioning!
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a set 
of cards.
•	 In groups of three, each student takes four dominoes; in 
groups of four, each student takes three. There should be 
some left.
•	 Sts look at their cards. Clarify any vocabulary problems 
before they start.
•	 One student in each group places a card on the table. The 
person on his / her left places the card that matches the 
sentence correctly at one end of his / her card. If he / she 
doesn’t have a card that matches, he / she misses a turn 
and takes a card from the middle.
•	 Monitor that the game is being played correctly.
•	 The game continues until all the cards are on the table. 
The winner is the first student to use all his / her cards.
3A I work… He works…
Sts use cards to make true sentences 
about themselves and their classmates
Sts make true statements about themselves and in the third 
person singular. Copy and cut up one worksheet per group 
of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Present simple: I / he / she +  , − 
I work in an office.
He doesn’t drink coffee.
•	 Write the verb work on the board. Elicit phrases that go 
with work, e.g. in an office, late. Make sentences using I, e.g. 
I work in an office. I work late., etc., asking Sts if these are 
true for you. If they aren't true, change them to I don’t work 
late., etc.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a set of 
cards. 
•	 Sts take turns to pick up a card and make a sentence that 
is true for them with I / I don’t, until there are no cards left. 
•	 Tell Sts to stay in their groups and that they are going to 
play again, but a bit differently. They have to shuffle the 
cards and repeat, but this time trying to remember what 
other students said, e.g. David doesn’t work in an office., 
Maria drinks coffee.
•	 Monitor to make sure Sts are using the third person 
correctly.
•	 The game ends when Sts have used all the cards.
•	 Get feedback from various groups.
 EXTRA IDEA   Sts shuffle the cards again and try to make only 
positive sentences using the verbs and a collocate which 
makes the sentence true for them, e.g. I drink Diet Coke. I read 
magazines., etc.
2A Mystery objects
A pairwork guessing game
Sts talk about close-up photos of everyday objects. Copy 
one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
What’s this? I think it’s a (pencil).
What are these? I think they’re (sunglasses).
Common objects
•	 Copy the questions and answers in Language onto the 
board. Model and drill pronunciation.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. They take 
turns to ask and answer questions pointing at the photos.
•	 If a pair has answered all the questions they can, but still 
don’t know what some of the objects are, they can ask 
other pairs.
•	 At the end of the activity, go through all the photos and 
ask Sts what they are.
1  scissors    2  a watch    3  a laptop    4  pens 
5  headphones    6  coins    7  an identity card    8  a charger 
9  photos    10  magazines    11  an umbrella    12  glasses 
13  a credit card    14  a lamp    15  a wallet    16  keys
2B Can you name…?
Sts fill in a column with vocabulary
Sts read some adjective + noun phrases and write the names 
of well-known people and objects. Copy one worksheet 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
Adjectives: old / young, rich / poor
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell them 
that they are going to play a game. Each pair has to fill in 
the blank column with names. You could start by eliciting 
expensive makes of watches, e.g. Rolex. Tell Sts that if they 
are the only pair with their answer, they get 3 points; if 
another pair has the same answer, they only get 1 point.
•	 Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes, or up to ten minutes, 
depending on the level of your class. Alternatively, stop 
the game when the first pair fills in the whole column.
•	 When time is up get feedback. Remind Sts of the point 
system. Continue until Sts have shared all their answers. 
Sts add up their points to find the winner.
 EXTRA IDEA   Say some of the Sts’ answers to the class, e.g. 
skiing (a dangerous sport), Bill Gates (a rich person) and elicit 
the adjective + noun phrases.
2C Dominoes
A dominoes game
Sts match different sentences. Copy and cut up one 
worksheet per group of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Imperatives +  , − ; let’s
The room’s hot. Turn on the air conditioning.
I’m tired. Let’s go to a café!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 206@@
206
4A Everyday objects
A Happy Families game
Sts practise everyday objects and possessive ’s. Copy and cut 
up one set of cards per group of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Everyday objects, possessive ’s
Do you have Kate’s dictionary?
Yes, here you are. / No, sorry.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to play a game called Happy 
Families. Sts may have a similar game in their language 
you can refer to.
•	 There are five sets of cards. Write the names of the five 
people on the board and under one of the names, 
the four objects they possess. Point to an object word 
and ask What’s this? Elicit It’s Robin’s book. They’re Robin’s 
headphones. Model and drill pronunciation.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four. Give each group a set of cards. 
One student shuffles and deals the cards face down so 
that each student has five cards.
•	 Tell Sts to look at their cards. Point out the name at the top 
of each card and explain that the three small pictures at the 
bottom are the other objects they need to collect for that 
person.
•	 Sts collect a set of cards by asking the other Sts in the 
group. Tell Sts they can ask anyone in their group, but 
must address one person when asking the question.
•	 When a student is given the card he / she wants, he / she 
must give one of his / her cards to the other student. Sts 
must always have only five cards in their hands.
•	 Now drill the questions and answers in Language.
•	 Demonstrate with one group first.
•	 Sts play the game. One student starts and then it’s the 
turn of the student on his / her left. The game finishes 
when a student has collected a complete set of four cards 
for one of the people. The cards are re-dealt and the game 
starts again.
•	 Monitor to make sure Sts are playing correctly.
•	 The game could be played in groups of five. In this case 
each student has four cards.
3B Present simple questionnaire
A pairwork questionnaire
Sts make questions in the first and third person singular and 
note down their partners’ answers. Copy one worksheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Present Simple all forms
Do you live near a supermarket? No, I don’t.
Does Paula live near a supermarket? Yes, she does.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Give Sts time to look at their questions and check any 
vocabulary problems.
•	 Tell Sts to ask each other the questions and to mark a tick 
(✓) or a cross (✗) in the first column, Do you…?
•	 Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 When Sts have finished, they do b and Sts change 
partners. Put two Sts A and two Sts B together in new 
pairs. Sts tell their partner the name of the person they 
interviewed first. Sts write the name in the gap at the top 
of the second column.
•	 Sts ask each other questions about their partner’s first 
partner. Sts put a tick (✓) or a cross (✗).
•	 Monitor the correct use of Does in the questions.
 EXTRA IDEA   Write What? / Where? / Who? / When? / Why? on 
the board and get students to ask for extra information using 
the question words.
Do you live near a supermarket?
Yes 
Where (is it)?
In Baker Street.  
3C Famous people
A pairwork information exchange 
activity
Sts ask for information to complete sentences. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Word order in questions, question words, present 
simple +  , −
What instrument does Samuel L Jackson play? He plays  
the trumpet.
What restaurants does Jennifer Lawrence like? She likes fast 
food restaurants.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on the photos of the famous people, and the 
incomplete questions. Explain that Sts A and Sts B have 
different information, so they will need to ask each other 
questions to complete the information.
•	 Give Sts time to write their questions. Monitor and help.
•	 When Sts are ready, get Sts A to ask Sts B their first 
question, and to complete the answer. Sts B then ask their 
first question.
•	 Sts continue until they have completed the information.
•	 Finally, get Sts to compare their sentences, and check all 
questions and answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 207@@
207
5A What can you do?
A group card game
Sts turn over cards and try to do the tasks or answer the 
questions. Copy and cut up one worksheet per group of 
three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
can / can’t
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a set of 
cards face down or in an envelope.
•	 Demonstrate the activity by asking a student to turn over 
a card and read the question. You then do the task or 
answer the question.
•	 Tell Sts to continue playing. One student turns over a card 
and the next student has to do the task or answer the 
question. The others in the group decide if it’s correct.
•	 If a card is correctly used, Sts put it aside. If not, the next 
student tries to answer the question or do the task on 
the card.
•	 Sts play until they run out of cards or time is up.
5B Guess what I’m doing!
A miming activity
Sts take a card, mime the action and the others guess what 
he / she is doing. Copy and cut up one worksheet per group 
of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Present continuous: You are waking up.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Write on the board You are… Tell 
Sts you are going to mime a sentence and they need to 
guess exactly what is on the card. Pick up a card and mime 
what’s on it, making sure you elicit the correct sentence 
from Sts.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group a 
set of cards face down.
•	 One student picks up a card and mimes the action. 
The others in the group have to guess the sentence on 
the card.
•	 Monitor to make sure the mimers don’t speak.
•	 Set a time limit. Sts play until they run out of cards or until 
time is up.
 EXTRA IDEA   Students can write their own present 
continuous sentences and mime them in front of the class if 
they want to (or give them to someone else to mime). Make 
sure Sts who mime in front of the class are outgoing and 
comfortable with it.
 EXTRA IDEA   Cut up one sheet, and put Sts in groups. 
Give one card to a student in each group to mime. When 
someone has said the correct sentence, they bring you the 
card and exchange it for another one.
4B Prepositions questionnaire
A pairwork question and answer 
activity
Sts complete the questions and then ask a partner. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Prepositions of time and place: on, in, at, to
Do you have lunch at home during the week?
Do you get up late on Sunday mornings?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B and give out the worksheets.
•	 Give Sts time to complete the questions in a with a 
preposition. Then check answers.
A	 1 at   2 at, on   3 in   4 to, on   5 at   6 at   7 in   8 in   9 on 
10 in, at   11 in
B	 1 to, on   2 in   3 on   4 to, at   5 on   6 at   7 at   8 in, in 
9 in   10 to, on   11 at
C	 1 at   2 on   3 on   4 to, in   5 in   6 on   7 in   8 on   9 to, at 
10 to, at   11 at, in
•	 Tell Sts that the questions are different on worksheets A 
and B. Now tell them to do b and ask each other their 
questions. Encourage Sts to ask their partner for more 
information. Remind them to ‘return’ the questions with: 
What about you? And you?
4C How often? board game
A group board game
Sts talk about how often they do activities using adverbs 
and expressions of frequency. Copy one worksheet for each 
group of three or four students. You will also need one 
counter per student and a dice per group.
LANGUAGE
Present simple + adverbs of frequency: never, 
sometimes, etc.  or expressions of frequency: once a 
week, etc.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to play a board game.
•	 Write on the board get up after 10 o’clock and have a big 
breakfast. Ask Sts to make a sentence with the phrase and 
include an adverb or expression of frequency, e.g. every day.
•	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Give each group a 
worksheet, a dice and a counter or coin for each student. 
Tell Sts to put their counters on the square marked START. 
•	 Sts roll the dice and move clockwise to the corresponding 
square. They make a true sentence using the phrase and 
one of the adverbs or expressions of frequency.
•	 Set a time limit. Students continue until one of them gets 
back to START square or time is up. Monitor and help.
 EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they can remember any of their 
group’s sentences, e.g. Chris buys clothes once a month.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 208@@
208
5C It’s Friday evening
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts ask questions to find out what people are doing or what 
they usually do. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A 
and B.
LANGUAGE
Present Simple or Present Continuous? +  , − , ?
What does he usually do on Friday evenings?
What is he doing this evening?
•	 Write on the board: 
Peter usually 
 on Friday evenings. 
Peter 
 this evening.
•	 Elicit the questions to complete the missing information 
(What does Peter usually do on Friday evenings? What is Peter 
doing this evening?). Complete the sentences with goes to 
the cinema and is doing homework. Now rub Peter out and 
write Sam and Chris. Elicit the changes in the questions and 
in the sentences (What do / are Sam and Chris…?)
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on the examples. Give Sts time to look at the chart 
and think what questions they have to ask.
•	 Sts ask and answer questions to complete their charts. 
Monitor to make sure Sts are asking their questions 
correctly.
•	 When they have finished, tell Sts to compare their charts.
6A The pronoun game
A group matching pairs game
Sts match nouns and pronouns in a game of pelmanism. 
Copy and cut up one worksheet per group of three or four 
Sts. Divide the cards into sentences and pronouns.
LANGUAGE
Subject and object pronouns: I, me, he, him, etc.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to play a game where they have to 
match the pronouns to the nouns in sentences.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group a 
set of the shuffled sentence cards and a set of the shuffled 
pronouns cards face down on the desk.
•	 Sts take it in turns to turn over one sentence card and one 
pronoun card. If the cards match, the student should say 
the sentence aloud, replacing the noun or nouns with the 
pronoun. If the sentence is correct, the student keeps the 
cards and has another turn. If the cards don’t match, the 
student turns the cards over again and puts them at the 
bottom of each pile.
•	 Sts play till there are no more cards. The student with the 
most pairs of cards is the winner.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one worksheet per pair. Get 
Sts to decide which pronoun they should use to replace the 
underlined words. Check answers.
6B Likes and dislikes
A group activity
Sts use cards to ask each other questions about their likes / 
dislikes. Copy and cut up one worksheet per group of three 
or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
like + (verb + -ing)
Do you enjoy meeting new people? No, I don’t. I don’t like 
meeting new people.
•	 Demonstrate with an example on the board: / like do 
sport or exercise. Elicit the full question (Do you like doing 
sport or exercise?) and point out that they need to put the 
underlined verb (do) in the -ing form. Ask several Sts the 
question and elicit Yes, I do / No, I don’t. Now write What 
about you? on the board and get a student to ask you. 
Answer the question. Give more information e.g. No, I 
don’t. I hate doing sport or Yes, I do. I like going to the gym. 
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group a 
set of cards. Set a time limit. One student picks up a card 
and thinks about the question he / she needs to ask, using 
the prompt. The student asks the question and everyone 
in the group answers. Highlight that if a student answers 
No, I don’t, he / she should say how he / she feels about 
the activity with another verb. The last student to answer 
should then return the question with What about you? Sts 
continue picking up cards and asking the question to the 
group.
•	 Sts continue playing until they run out of cards or until 
time is up.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage Sts to give a reason and/or an 
example when they answer ther questions.
6C Tell me about you
A pairwork revision activity
Sts complete the questions and then ask a partner. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Question for revision: be / do
•	 Write a couple of examples on the board and elicit what is 
needed to complete each question: 
What 
 your favourite colour? 
How often 
 you go to the cinema?
	
 you Spanish? 
 you like English class?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Give them time to complete their questions. Check 
answers.
A	 1 is   2 do   3 Do   4 are   5 is   6 is   7 are   8 do   9 do   10 do
B	 1 do   2 do   3 is   4 do   5 are   6 do   7 is   8 Do   9 Do   10 Are
•	 Now tell Sts to ask each other the questions. Point out 
that the questions are different for A and B. Remind Sts 
that when they ask questions beginning What is…? they 
should contract and say What’s…?
•	 Get feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 209@@
209
7A Where were you?
A pairwork activity
Sts ask each other where they were at various times in the 
past. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Past simple verb be: was / were
•	 Draw a clock on the board and quickly revise the time.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. On the board, draw a clock 
showing the time 8:15 and write underneath Yesterday 
morning. Write Where…you at…? and elicit the full question 
(Where were you at 8.15 yesterday morning?).
•	 Elicit answers from different Sts. You may need to revise 
prepositions of place in / at / on (Grammar Bank 4B) and 
write them on the board.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Tell Sts to ask each other where they were at those times. 
Point out that they need to use last night and yesterday 
too, not just the times.
•	 Give students a minute to look at the times. Monitor 
and help.
•	 Sts A then ask their first question and Sts B answer. Then 
Sts B ask their first question and Sts A answer. Monitor 
and help.
•	 When Sts have finished, get feedback to find out where 
various Sts were at different times.
7B Are we in Australia?
A pairwork story-telling activity
Sts put a story in order and then re-tell it. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into cards.
LANGUAGE
Past simple regular verbs: booked, arrived, asked
•	 Ask Sts to give you names of cities in Australia. Elicit any 
information Sts may know about Sydney.
•	 Write the first sentence of the story on the board. Last April 
two British teenagers, Raoul and Emma, wanted to go to Australia 
for their summer holiday. Tell them that this is the beginning 
of a story, and that they are going to put the story in order.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a set of cards. Tell them to 
find the first sentence and then try to put the rest of the 
cards in order.
•	 Check answers. Get Sts to underline the regular verbs and 
drill the pronunciation of the past tense verbs.
•	 Tell Sts to turn the cards over, keeping them in the right 
order, and try to remember the story, turning the cards to 
check. Monitor and help.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   See if any pair can tell a version of the 
story in their own words from memory.
 EXTRA IDEA   Keep back the last sentence and give Sts only 
eight cards. When they have put the story in order, get Sts to 
guess what the last sentence is. Elicit any ideas and then give 
out the last card for them to check. 
You can also let them create different endings for the story 
with their guesses, Sts share their ideas and then you give 
them the last card. Sts decide which is the best ending.
7C Born on 31st December
A pairwork activity
Sts ask for information to complete a text about a famous 
person. This is a two-page activity. Copy one worksheet  
(A and B) per pair.
LANGUAGE
Past simple regular and irregular verbs
•	 Write Anthony Hopkins and Elizabeth Arden on the board 
and ask Sts if they know anything about them. Then tell 
Sts that the two people have something in common, and 
elicit ideas. Then tell them that they were both born on 
31st December.
•	 Explain that Sts are going to ask and answer questions to 
complete a text about these two people. On the board 
write Anthony Hopkins was born on 
. 
and elicit the question (When was Anthony Hopkins born?). 
Tell them that they will have gaps in one of their texts and 
need to make questions in the same way.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on a and go through the Glossary with the class.
•	 Tell Sts A to complete their questions about Anthony 
Hopkins, and Sts B to read the text about him. Monitor 
and help with the questions and any vocabulary 
problems.
•	 When they are ready, Sts A ask their questions, and Sts B 
answer. Sts A complete the text with the information.
•	 They then swap roles for the next text.
•	 When Sts have finished, they can compare their 
worksheets to check their answers.
•	 Finally, focus on d. Sts cover their worksheets and try 
to remember five facts about Anthony Hopkins and 
Elizabeth Arden.
8A Past simple question time
A pairwork activity
Sts practise making questions using prompts. Copy and cut 
up one worksheet per group of three Sts.
LANGUAGE
Past simple regular and irregular verbs
What time did you get up? I got up at 7.
Did you make your bed? Yes, I did.
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to revise the past simple by 
asking and answering questions.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Take a card, write the first 
prompt on the board and elicit the question from Sts. 
Now ask a student the question. Then write another 
prompt and repeat the process. Remind Sts of how the 
rhythm of the question changes depending on whether it 
has a question word or not.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three and give each group a set of 
cards. Set a time limit. Sts then take a card, and ask one 
of the other Sts all the questions on the card. They repeat 
until there are no cards left or time is up.
•	 Monitor and help.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 210@@
210
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage the student who is answering 
the questions to give more information where possible, and 
the student who is asking to try to ask extra questions where 
appropriate.
 EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts to talk about their partner, using their 
answers to the questions. e.g. Katie went to Australia on her 
last holiday. She went with her husband and they stayed in a 
really nice hotel for three weeks. They saw the Sydney Opera 
House. They didn’t have any problems.
8B A place to rent
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts role-play a phone call for information about a place to 
rent. This is a two-page activity. Copy one worksheet (A and 
B) per pair.
LANGUAGE
there is / there are +  , ?
Is there a garage? Yes, there is.
How many bedrooms are there? There are two bedrooms.
•	 Pre-teach estate agent. Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give 
out the worksheets. Explain that they are going to role-
play a phone conversation to rent a place to live.
•	 Focus on a and get Sts to read the instructions. Tell Sts 
A that they are estate agents and have a flat that they 
want to rent out. They must read the instructions and 
information about the flat. Tell Sts B that they are looking 
for a flat to rent. They must read the instructions and 
prepare their questions. Highlight that all the questions 
are with there is / there are except the first two and the last 
two, which are with is. Encourage Sts B not to write the 
missing words, but to remember them.
•	 Monitor and help.
•	 Tell Sts B to focus on the speech bubble and start the 
conversation. Remind Sts that the conversation is on the 
phone. 
•	 At the end of the role-play, find out how many Sts B 
decided to rent the flat.
•	 Focus on b and get Sts to swap roles and do the second 
role-play. 
8C What’s different?
A spot the differences pairwork 
activity
Sts describe the same room in the present and in the past, 
using furniture vocabulary and there is / there are and there was 
/ there were. This is a two page activity. Copy one worksheet (A 
and B) per pair.
LANGUAGE
there is / there are + there was / there were +  , −
Prepositions of place
Furniture
•	 Revise the furniture vocabulary for the activity.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on Room 1 and explain that Sts have pictures of the 
same room, but Sts A have it as it is now and Sts B as it 
was in the 1960s. Ask them to look at their pictures for one 
minute.
•	 Write there is / there are and there was / there were on the 
board. Elicit which they should use for the present and 
which for the past. 
•	 Get Sts A to describe Room 1 to Sts B, using there is / there 
are. Tell Sts B to circle the differences on their picture. 
Point out that there are at least nine differences. Monitor 
and help.
•	 Now Sts B describe Room 1, using there was / there were 
and the Sts A circle the differences.
•	 Sts repeat the activity with Room 2, but this time Sts 
B start and use there is / there are. Sts A then describe 
their bedroom in the 1960s using there was / there were. 
Point out that there are at least nine differences. Monitor 
and help.
•	 Tell Sts to compare pictures and then elicit some 
sentences for each picture from the class. Finally, ask Sts 
which version of each room they prefer.
Room 1 differences:
1	 In the 1960s there were three armchairs. Now there is a 
sofa.
2	 In the 1960s there was one table (in front of the armchairs). 
Now there are two tables (one 	in front of the sofa and one 
next to it).
3	 In the 1960s there was a painting above the fireplace. Now 
there are three above the sofa.
4	 In the 1960s there was a carpet. Now there is a wooden 
floor.
5	 In the 1960s there was a bookcase. Now there isn’t a 
bookcase.
6	 In the 1960s there were two lamps on the floor. Now there 
is one lamp on the table.
7	 In the 1960s there wasn’t a plant (in front of the window). 
Now there’s a plant.
8	 In the 1960s there wasn’t a clock (on the wall). Now there is 
a clock.
9	 In the 1960s there was a TV next to the fireplace. Now there 
is a TV on the wall.
Room 2 differences:
1	 In the 1960s there was a rug. Now there isn’t a rug.
2	 In the 1960s there wasn’t a TV. Now there is a TV.
3	 In the 1960s there were two posters on the wall (above the 
desk). Now there is one poster.
4	 In the 1960s there were two chairs. Now there’s one chair.
5	 In the 1960s there wasn’t a computer (on the desk). Now 
there is a computer.
6	 In the 1960s there was a radio. Now there isn’t a radio.
7	 In the 1960s there was a shelf with some books. Now there 
isn’t a shelf.
8	 In the 1960s there was a plant next to the desk. Now there 
isn’t.
9	 In the 1960s there was a mirror (next to the bed). Now 
there isn’t a mirror.
9A Shopping list
A pairwork checking activity
Sts check items on a shopping list to see what is needed. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Do we need any…? Yes, we need some… / No, we don’t 
need any…
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 211@@
211
•	 Demonstrate the activity by writing a shopping list for 
classroom material on the board, e.g. pens, paper, dictionaries, 
readers, dvds etc. Then ask Sts Do we need any pens? Try 
to elicit Yes, we need some pens or No, we don’t need any 
pens and write the two answers on the board. Continue 
with the other things on the list, ticking or crossing them 
according to what Sts think is needed.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on a. Tell Sts A that they are in the supermarket and 
have made a list, but are not sure what they really need. 
They phone B, who is at home and will look in the fridge 
to see what they have and what they need.
•	 Tell Sts A to start the conversation with Hi. I’m in the 
supermarket. Do we need any… to ask B about the things 
on the list; B looks at his/her picture and answers. A then 
puts a tick (✓) for things they need and a cross (✗) for 
things they don’t need. Monitor and help.
•	 When they have finished, Sts swap roles and do b.
9B How much / many board 
	 	 game
A board game activity
Sts play a game and complete questions with much / many 
and answer them. Copy one worksheet for each group of 
three or four students. You will also need one counter per 
student and a dice per group.
LANGUAGE
How much fruit do you eat a day? Quite a lot.
How many emails did you send yesterday? Not many.
•	 Write on the board:
	 How 
 coffee do you drink a day?
	 How 
 vegetables do you eat a day?
	 and elicit the missing words, reminding Sts that coffee 
is singular uncountable, and that vegetables are plural 
countable.
•	 Get Sts to ask you the questions and answer with a 
quantifier, e.g. a lot / quite a lot / not many / not much / 
 a little / a few / none and then give a bit more detail, 
e.g. a reason or an example. Then ask some different Sts 
the questions and encourage them to answer in the 
same way.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a 
worksheet, a dice, and some counters. Focus on the 
quantifiers in the middle of the board and make sure Sts 
know what they all mean and how to use them.
•	 Sts roll the dice and move clockwise to the corresponding 
square. They have to complete the question they land 
on with much / many and then answer, using one of the 
quantifiers, giving a reason or an example where possible. 
Monitor to make sure Sts play the game correctly.
•	 Either set a time limit or stop the game when one group 
has a winner, i.e. a student who has gone the whole way 
round the board.
9C Guess the comparative
A pairwork activity
Sts read sentences and guess what the missing comparative 
adjective is. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A 
and B.
LANGUAGE
Comparatives: colder, bigger, healthier
Scotland is colder than England.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Write on a piece of paper 
Scotland is colder than England. Do not show this to Sts. 
Then write on the board Scotland is 
 than 
England.
•	 Elicit possible comparative adjectives, getting Sts to say 
the whole sentence. If what they say is not what you have 
on the piece of paper, e.g. Scotland is smaller than England, 
Scotland is more beautiful than England, etc. say Try again, 
until someone comes up with the sentence you have. 
Point out that their sentences are also correct, but that 
the objective is for them to guess the comparative that 
you had.
•	 Put Sts into pairs, A and B, and give out the copies. Tell 
Sts to work individually at first and complete the gaps. 
Remind them that the missing words are all comparative 
adjectives. Monitor, making sure Sts are writing correct 
and logical adjectives.
•	 Now get Sts to sit face to face if possible. B reads out his 
/ her sentence 1 to A. If it’s the same as what A has, he / 
she says That’s right. If not A says Try again, and he / she 
continues guessing comparatives until he / she gets it 
right.
•	 Now A reads his / her completed sentence 2. Sts continue 
until they have said all the sentences.
10A What do you know about 
	 	
the UK?
A quiz about Britain
Sts revise superlatives. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Superlatives: busiest, most popular, etc.
What’s the busiest London airport?
What’s the most popular kind of restaurant?
•	 If necessary, quickly revise the formation of superlatives 
with examples on the board, e.g.: 
The (tall) person in the class is… 
The (popular) sport in the country is…
•	 Give out the worksheets. First, in a get Sts to complete the 
questions individually with superlative adjectives. Check 
answers.
•	 Check answers.
a	 1 busiest   2 most popular   3 biggest   4 longest   5 sunniest 
	 6 the wettest   7 largest   8 most popular   9 oldest 
10 most common   11 highest   12 biggest
•	 Now for b, put Sts in pairs and set a time limit for them to 
choose the correct answers. Monitor and help.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 212@@
212
•	 Give Sts A a set of cards and tell them to shuffle them and 
to lay them on the desk face down. Sts B now choose five 
cards, but don’t turn them over.
•	 Now tell Sts A they are going to turn the cards over one 
by one and use them to predict Sts Bs’ future. Sts B should 
ask for more information.
•	 When Sts have finished, they swap roles and Sts B become 
the fortune tellers. Finally, get some feedback from the 
class and find out what Sts thought about their predicted 
future.
•	 Finally, get some feedback from the class and find out 
what Sts thought about their predicted future. 
11A Read slowly
An adverb group activity
Sts get a sentence and an adverb and have to read their 
sentence in the way their adverb indicates. Copy and cut 
up one worksheet if you have up to 12 students, if not, one 
worksheet per eight students.
LANGUAGE
Adverbs: fast, slowly, quietly
•	 Write i am very angry right now! on the board. Read it in a 
happy voice. Ask Sts How am I reading it? and try to elicit 
happily. Demonstrate a couple more, e.g. quietly, tiredly. 
Make sure you point out you want the adverb and not the 
adjective and remind Sts of the -ly ending.
•	 Explain that they are going to read aloud some sentences 
for other Sts to guess the adverb. If you have a class of up 
to 12, do it as a class activity. For larger classes, divide the 
class into groups. Give each student a cut-out sentence, 
and an adverb.
•	 Sts now read the sentence in the way the adverb indicates 
and others guess the adverb. 
 EXTRA IDEA   Repeat the activity giving Sts different 
sentences and adverbs.
11B Dreams and plans
A pairwork activity
Sts choose six questions from a list to ask their partner. Copy 
a worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Verbs + to + infinitive: want to, need to, would like to, 
hope to, plan to, learn to, forget to
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Give them 
time to read the questions and make sure there are no 
problems with vocabulary.
•	 Now tell Sts to choose six questions to ask their partner. 
Tell them to circle the questions. 
•	 Sts ask each other their chosen questions. Encourage 
them to ‘return’ the questions with What about you? or And 
you? if their questions are different. Monitor and help.
•	 Get feedback to find out about different Sts dreams and 
plans.
•	 Check answers. Find out who got the most answers right.
b   1	 a   2 c   3 b   4 b   5 b   6 a   7 b   8 a   9 a   10 c   11 a   12 c
•	 In the same pairs, Sts write five questions about their 
country or countries. Monitor and help. Sts then ask 
another pair/group their questions.
•	 In d, Sts ask another pair their questions.
10B Future plans
A pairwork activity
Sts use prompts to ask each other questions about their future 
plans using going to. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut 
into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Plans: be going to + verb
•	 Write on the board: 
/ watch the news this evening?
	 / go to a party tonight?
	 / go camping next summer?
•	 Get Sts to ask you the questions and answer, giving 
reasons if possible. Then ask Sts the questions and some 
follow-ups (Why? Why not? Where?, etc.) and elicit the 
three questions with going to.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to ask their partner questions and 
they must also ask follow-up questions. Tell them the 
questions their partner has are different, so they can also 
ask And you?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Give out the worksheets and tell 
Sts to ask each other questions using Are you going to…?
•	 Monitor and help. You can then ask Sts to tell you their 
partner’s future plans, He is going to have lunch with his 
family tomorrow, etc.
•	 Get feedback, asking Sts to tell you their partner’s future 
plans, e.g. Pedro is going to have lunch with his family 
tomorrow, etc.
 EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to cover the questions and tell them to 
ask you any questions they can remember.
10C Predictions
A pairwork role-play
Sts use cards to predict each other’s future. Copy and cut up 
one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Predictions: be going to + verb
•	 These are the same cards that are used in the Student’s 
Book lesson. Take a card, show it to the class and ask What 
does this card mean? Elicit It means you’re going to… Repeat 
with the other cards.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to role-play a fortune teller and 
client activity. Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A are the 
fortune tellers and Sts B are the clients. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 213@@
213
12B Have you ever…?
A class mingle speaking activity
Sts practise the present perfect and the past simple with 
question prompts. Copy and cut up one worksheet for a 
class of 14 Sts or two if more.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect or past simple questions
Have you ever read a book with more than 500 pages? 
What book was it?
•	 Put Sts in groups of six or eight (even numbers where 
possible). A small class of up to 14 Sts can work as a whole. 
Ask each student to write Yes, I have. or No, I haven’t. in big 
letters on two pieces of paper. Give every student in the 
class a question card and tell them to complete the first 
question with the past participle of the verb in brackets. 
•	 Demonstrate first with a different question, e.g. Have you 
ever been to the UK? Sts should lift up either their Yes, I have. 
piece of paper or No, I haven’t. one. Then ask a few past 
simple questions (e.g. When did you go there? Did you like 
it?) to those who answered Yes, I have.
•	 Now in their groups one student asks the group his / 
her first question (Have you ever...?). The rest of the group 
should lift either their Yes, I have. or No, I haven’t. piece of 
paper.
•	 The student who asked the question then chooses a 
student who answered Yes, I have. to ask the follow-up 
questions to. Then another student continues with his / 
her question.
•	 When they have asked their questions, you could give out 
more cards if there are any left.
12C Revision questions
A revision activity
Sts revise and practise key structures from Files 1–12. This 
could be used as a last revision before the final exam. Copy 
and cut up one set of cards per pair.
LANGUAGE
Questions and answers: past, present and future
•	 Tell Sts the object of this activity is to ask and answer as 
many questions as they can to revise the English they 
know. Demonstrate by taking a card and asking one 
student some of the questions. Then take another card 
and quickly copy some of it onto the board. Get Sts to use 
the prompts to ask you complete questions. Remind Sts 
that the symbol / means a word (or words) is missing. 
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give each pair a set of cards. Set a time 
limit, e.g. ten minutes. Sts take turns to take a card and ask 
their partner the questions. Encourage them to ask further 
questions. Monitor, help and correct.
11C Speak for 30 seconds
A board game activity
Sts practise speaking about different topics for 30 seconds. 
Copy one worksheet for each group of three or four Sts. You 
will also need one counter per student and a dice per group.
LANGUAGE
Definite article, the or no the
•	 Tell Sts they are going to play a board game.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a 
worksheet, a dice and some counters.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts roll the dice and move 
their counters. When a student lands on a square, he / she 
must talk about the topic for 30 seconds. Then each of the 
other students can ask an extra question.
•	 Someone in the group times the 30 seconds.
•	 The game finishes when someone reaches FINISH, but 
they must roll the exact number. If they don’t, they move 
any excess backwards.
12A Have you done it?
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts practise asking and answering present perfect questions. 
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect simple
I’ve read the Game of Thrones books. I think / don’t think 
it’s true.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Write two sentences in the 
present perfect on the board for yourself, one true, one 
not true, e.g. i’ve read all the Game of Thrones books. Ask Sts if 
they think it’s true or not and why. Elicit some answers, e.g. 
I think it’s true because you love the TV series. Then tell them 
if your sentences are true or not.
•	 Give each student a worksheet and quickly go through 
the questions, making sure Sts understand all the lexis. 
Tell them to complete the sentences using the verbs in 
brackets, so that half of the sentences are true and half of 
them not true.
•	 For b, explain that they are going to guess which of their 
partner’s sentences are true and which are not.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to read their first 
sentence. Sts B then say whether they think it is true or 
not and why. Sts A then write T or F after the sentence 
depending on what their partner guessed. They continue 
until Sts A have read all their sentences. Then Sts A tell Sts 
B if they guessed correctly or not and why. 
•	 Sts then swap roles.
•	 Get feedback and find out which pairs knew each 
other best. Ask Sts if they found out anything that 
surprised them.
 EXTRA IDEA   Let Sts try to guess how you would complete 
the sentences to make them true for you.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 214@@
214
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A  COMMUNICATIVE  You say, you answer
 	
Have five different conversations with B. Read the sentences in the  
You say column and listen to B’s answer. 
You say
You answer
Hi, I’m Mike. What’s your name?
Nice to meet you, too.
Hi, Mark, this is Anna.
I’m very well, thank you.
What’s your phone number?
Nice to meet you, Ben. I’m Laura.
How are you? 
It’s Monday.
Hello, I’m George.
Yes, see you on Saturday. Goodbye.
	
Now listen to B and respond with a sentence from the You answer column. 
 	
Repeat the activity. Read the You say sentences again. B answers from memory.
	
Now answer B from memory.
 a
 b
c
d
 	
Have five different conversations with A. Listen to A and respond  
with a sentence from the You answer column.
You answer
You say
Hi, George. I’m Chris. Nice to meet you.
How are you? 
It’s 07478203124.
What day is it today?
My name’s Sally.
Nice to meet you, Jim.
Nice to meet you, Anna.
Hello! My name’s Ben.
Fine, thanks. And you?
See you on Saturday. Bye.
	
Now read the sentences in the You say column and listen to A’s answer.
 	
Repeat the activity. Answer A from memory.
	
Now read the You say sentences again. A answers from memory.
 a
 b
c
d
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 215@@
215
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B  COMMUNICATIVE  Nationalities bingo
1
the USA 
Argentina
the Czech 
Republic
Japan
Poland
Turkey
2
England  
Germany  
Brazil
Russia   
France   
China
3
Ireland 
Spain 
Japan
Egypt 
Italy 
China
4
Mexico 
England 
Hungary
Switzerland 
Japan 
Germany
5
Scotland 
Turkey 
Egypt
Russia
the Czech 
Republic
Switzerland
6
Poland
Scotland
Argentina
China  
Ireland  
Spain
7
the USA 
France 
Brazil
Russia
Hungary
Mexico
8
Brazil  
Mexico
Germany
Japan
Egypt  
Italy
9
Turkey
the USA
France
Scotland
Spain
Hungary
10
Ireland
Italy
Argentina
Japan
Poland
the Czech 
Republic
11
Turkey
Switzerland
Brazil
England
Germany
Egypt  
12
China
Argentina
Mexico
Hungary
Scotland
the USA
 	 English
 	 Turkish
 	 German
 	 Argentinian
 	 Irish
 	 Polish
 	 Scottish
 	 Spanish
 	 Mexican
 	 American
 	 Brazilian
 	 Egyptian
 	 Hungarian
 	 Italian    
 	 Russian    
 	 Chinese
 	 Japanese
 	 Czech
 	 French
 	 Swiss
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
B
N
O
I
G
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 216@@
216
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1C  COMMUNICATIVE  Personal information
Name Joanna
Surname DUKE
Email joanna.duke@comet.com
Mobile 07700 960654
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Claire
Surname HARVEY
Email c.harvey@basol.com
Mobile 07702 904678
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Donna
Surname WILLIAMS
Email donna.williams@mail.com
Mobile 07708 990487
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Celine
Surname CARSON
Email carson@compu.com
Mobile 07723 905124
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Thomas
Surname RICHARDS
Email t.richards@freemail.com
Mobile 07711 990498
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Ryan
Surname MANNERS
Email r.manners@freemail.com
Mobile 07700 943864
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Dexter
Surname PITT
Email dexter.pitt@over.com
Mobile 07703 981290
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name Anthony
Surname EASTWOOD
Email a.eastwood@younder.com
Mobile 07706 977892
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
Name 
Surname 
Email 
Mobile 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 217@@
217
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2A  COMMUNICATIVE  Mystery objects
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 218@@
218
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  Can you name…?
an expensive watch
a dangerous sport
a long name
an old song
a very rich person
a strong person
a high mountain
a good actor
a hot drink
a fast car
a difficult language
a terrible film
a very young musician
a cold country
a very beautiful actress
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 219@@
219
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2C  COMMUNICATIVE  Dominoes
This is a library.
Turn on the air  
conditioning!
Have some 
water.
Sit down.
Let’s go to 
a café.
Please be 
careful with it!
Slow down!
Close the 
window.
I’m worried.
Good idea!
The door is 
closed.
Relax!
Cheer up!
Turn left!
Let’s go there!
Don’t cross!
Please turn off 
your mobile.
Read a book.
This room’s hot.
I’m thirsty.
I’m tired.
I’m hungry.
My camera’s 
expensive.
This road is 
dangerous.
I’m cold!
What’s the 
matter?
Let’s stop for 
lunch.
Don’t go in 
there!
I’m stressed.
I’m sad.
Don’t turn right!
This is a  
good hotel.
The light is red.
We’re in class.
I’m bored.
Be quiet, please.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 220@@
220
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3A  COMMUNICATIVE­  I work… He works…
work in an office
read a newspaper
drink coffee
listen to rock music
eat Japanese food
live in a big city
go to the gym
watch the news
do housework in the morning
need a new tablet
speak Spanish
play a musical instrument
study Chinese
have a pet
go to the cinema at  
the weekend
watch an American 
TV series
have a big family
live in a small flat
play basketball
want a sandwich
drive a car
cook Mexican food
like cats
speak three languages
wear a watch
work in the evening
take photos with my phone
do yoga
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 221@@
221
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3B  COMMUNICATIVE  Present simple questionnaire
 	
Ask your partner the questions. Tick (✓) or cross (✗) the boxes in the DO YOU…? column.
	
  Do you live near a supermarket?  
Yes, I do. / No, I don’t.
DO YOU…?
DOES 
 …?
1 	…live near a supermarket
2 	…watch TV in the morning
3 	…travel to other countries a lot
4 	…have a favourite food
5 	…read in bed
6 	…like computer games
7 	…speak French
8 	…play a team sport
	
Change partners and work with another A. Ask about your partner’s first  
partner and tick (✓) or cross (✗) the boxes in the DOES…? column.
	
  Does Paula live near a supermarket?  
Yes, she does.
 a
 b
 	
Ask your partner the questions. Tick (✓) or cross (✗) the boxes in the DO YOU…? column.
	
  Do you go to the cinema a lot?  
Yes, I do. / No, I don’t.
DO YOU…?
DOES 
 …?
1 	…go to the cinema a lot
2 	…cook Italian food
3 	…listen to music on your phone
4 	…drink a lot of water
5 	…wear headphones in the street
6 	…study in the evening
7 	…play the guitar
8 	…work or study at night
	
Change partners and work with another B. Ask about your partner’s first  
partner and tick (✓) or cross (✗) the boxes in the DOES…? column.
	
  Does Pablo go to the cinema a lot?  
No, he doesn’t.
 a
 b
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 222@@
222
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3C  COMMUNICATIVE  Famous people
1	
What instrument does Samuel Jackson play? 
He plays the trumpet.
2	
She likes fast food restaurants.
3	
How many children 
? 
He has 
 children.
4	
She plays tennis and volleyball.
5	
What languages 
? 
He speaks 
 
and 
. 
6	
He collects cars.
7	
What singers 
? 
She likes 
 
and 
.
8	
He works with UNICEF.
9	
Where 
? 
She lives in 
.
 
10	
She cooks Italian food.
 
11	
What TV programme 
? 
He watches 
.
 
12	
She has two dogs.
1	
He plays the trumpet.
2	
What restaurants does Jennifer Lawrence like? 
She likes fast food restaurants.
3	
He has two children.
4	
What sports 
? 
She plays 
 
and 
.
5	
He speaks English and Japanese.
6	
What 
? 
He collects 
.
7	
She likes Lauryn Hill and Alicia Keys.
8	
What organization 
 with? 
He works with 
.
9	
She lives in New York.
 
10	
What food 
? 
She cooks 
 food.
 
11	
He watches The X Factor.
 
12	
How many dogs 
? 
She has 
 dogs.
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
1
1
Samuel
L Jackson
Samuel 
L Jackson
Adele
Adele
Hugh 
Jackman
Hugh 
Jackman
Taylor
Swift
Taylor 
Swift
Brad Pitt
Brad Pitt
Benedict
Cumberbatch
Benedict 
Cumberbatch
Jennifer 
Lawrence
Jennifer 
Lawrence
Tom
Hiddleston
Tom 
Hiddleston
Rihanna
Rihanna
Scarlett 
Johansson
Scarlett 
Johansson
Cristiano 
Ronaldo
Cristiano 
Ronaldo
Charlize
Theron
Charlize 
Theron
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 223@@
223
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4A  COMMUNICATIVE  Everyday objects
Robin
James
Lily
Kate
Will
Robin
James
Lily
Kate
Will
Robin
James
Lily
Kate
Will
Robin
James
Lily
Kate
Will
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 224@@
224
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4B  COMMUNICATIVE  Prepositions questionnaire
	
Ask your partner the questions. Ask for more information.
	
  Do you have lunch at home during the week?  
No, I don’t.
	
  Where do you have lunch? 
 b
 	
Complete the questions with the correct preposition at, in, on, or to.
 a
1	
Do you have lunch 
 home during the week?
2	
Do you get up 
 7.00 
 Saturday mornings?
3	
Where do you go on holiday 
 the summer?
4	
What time do you go 
 bed 
 Fridays?
5	
What do you usually do 
 Christmas?
6	
How do you relax 
 the weekend?
7	
Do you do your English homework 
 the evening?
8	
Do you drink coffee 
 the morning?
9	
Do you go shopping 
 Saturday mornings?
 
10	
Do you have a shower 
 the morning or 
 night?
 
11	
Do you work 
 an office?
 	
Complete the questions with the correct preposition at, in, on, or to.
 a
1	
Do you go 
 bed early 
 Sunday nights?
2	
Do you like the weather 
 the summer in your country?
3	
Do you have classes 
 Tuesday evenings?
4	
Do you go 
 the cinema 
 the weekend?
5	
When do you finish work / your classes 
 Wednesdays?
6	
Do you sleep for eight hours 
 night?
7	
Do you watch TV 
 lunchtime?
8	
Do you prefer to do exercise 
 the morning or 
	
the evening?
9	
Do you make the dinner 
 the evening?
 
10	
Do you go 
 a restaurant for dinner 
 Friday
	
nights?
 
11	
Do you have lunch 
 work / school during the week?
	
Ask your partner the questions. Ask for more information.
	
  Do you go to bed early on Sunday nights?  
Yes, I do.
	
  What time do you go to bed? 
 b
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 225@@
225
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4C  COMMUNICATIVE  How often? Board game
never
hardly ever
usually
often
always
sometimes
once a week
two or three times  
a week
every day
every week
have eggs 
for breakfast
get up 
early on 
Sundays
walk to 
class
sleep  
ten hours 
at night
watch 
films in 
English
be hungry 
between 
meals
cook 
for my 
friends
have 
breakfast 
in bed
eat fruit
get 
takeaway 
pizza
buy new 
clothes
be in  
a hurry
have 
dinner in a 
restaurant
watch 
TV at 
lunchtime
be tired 
in the 
morning
have a 
bath
be 
stressed
do  
exercise
START
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 226@@
226
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
Can you say 
three things you 
can do online?
Can you say the 
days of the week 
in ten seconds?
Can you sleep...
a) in a bus or a 
plane?
b) with the light 
on?
Can you play...
a) chess?
b) the violin?
c) volleyball?
Can you say 
‘Hello’ in five 
languages?
Can you say 
three things you 
can do with your 
mobile?
Can you say 
three things 
you can’t do in 
a library?
Can you sing...
a) a song in your 
language?
b) a song in 
English?
Can you say 
three things you 
have in your 
wallet?
Can you swim 
2 km?
Can you drive...
a) a car?
b) a motorbike?
Can you 
remember the 
phone numbers 
of three people 
in your family?
Can you spell 
these numbers 
correctly?
a) 8
b) 15
c) 30
Can you say 
three places 
where you can’t 
use your mobile?
Can you spell 
your name 
and address in 
English?
Can you 
remember the 
opposites of 
these adjectives?
a) full
b) strong
c) dangerous
Can you draw 
a map of your 
country?
Can you make 
spaghetti?
Can you run...
a) 1 km?
b) 10 km?
Can you count 
down from 20 to 
1 in ten seconds? 
5A  COMMUNICATIVE  What can you do?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 227@@
227
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Guess what I’m doing!
You are waking up.
You are having a shower.
You are writing an email.
You are doing your 
homework.
You are drawing a picture.
You are cooking.
You are playing the piano.
You are talking to your 
boyfriend / girlfriend on 
your phone.
You are watching a 
horror film.
You are waiting for 
somebody.
You are drinking a 
hot coffee.
You are dancing ballet.
You are reading a 
funny book.
You are taking a photo 
of your teacher.
You are crying.
You are looking for 
your keys.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 228@@
228
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5C  COMMUNICATIVE  It’s Friday evening
What do / does 
 usually 
do on Friday evenings?
What is / are 
 doing  
this evening?
MARK
going to a football match
COLIN AND BETH
go out with friends
PAULA
meeting her friends at a 
restaurant
PHIL
have dinner with his girlfriend
BRUCE AND ELLA
travelling to Spain
LUCY AND HANNAH
sing in a choir
What do / does 
 usually 
do on Friday evenings?
What is / are 
 doing  
this evening?
MARK
play football
COLIN AND BETH
having a party at home
PAULA
cook dinner for her friend
PHIL
watching a Star Wars film with a 
friend
BRUCE AND ELLA
play computer games together
LUCY AND HANNAH
driving Lucy’s sister to the airport
Student A
It’s Friday evening. Look at the information and complete the table by asking B questions. Use the 
correct form of the verbs to answer B’s questions.
Student B
It’s Friday evening. Look at the information and complete the table by asking A questions. Use the 
correct form of the verbs to answer A’s questions.
What’s Mark doing this evening? 
He plays football. 
He’s going to a football match.
What does he usually do on Friday evenings?
What does Mark usually do on Friday evenings? 
He’s going to a football match. 
He plays football.
What’s he doing this evening?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 229@@
229
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  The pronoun game
I like Anna.
Wait for  
Harry and me!
Please call  
Jack and Anna  
this evening.
I agree with  
Mrs Chapman.
Jack is very angry.
Sally and Jim 
are getting 
married today.
Mark and I 
are cooking 
the dinner.
I can see  
Matthew.
Do you like  
computer games?
Are you sitting  
on my purse?
I can’t come to  
the meeting.
Silvia can’t come  
to the party.
The dogs are barking.
The weather is  
very cold.
My parents usually 
have lunch with 
Simon and me  
on Saturdays.
Can I speak  
to Martin?
This present is for 
Anna and Richard.
They are talking about 
the children.
THEM
THEM
WE
THEY
HE
SHE
HIM
HIM
HER
HER
IT
IT
US
US
THEY
IT
THEM
THEM
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 230@@
230
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6B  COMMUNICATIVE  Likes and dislikes
/ enjoy meet new people
/ like do the housework
/ enjoy shop online
/ hate cook
/ enjoy travel
/ hate wait for people
/ enjoy do homework
/ hate watch football
/ like go to museums
/ like play computer games
/ like get up early
/ hate go to the dentist
/ enjoy go to the beach
/ hate be late
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 231@@
231
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6C  COMMUNICATIVE  Tell me about you
Student A
Complete the questions with is / are or do. Then ask your partner.
1	
What 
 your favourite season?
2	
How 
 you spell your surname?
3	
 you like dogs?
4	
What TV series 
 you watching at the moment?
5	
When 
 your birthday?
6	
What 
 your email address?
7	
How often 
 you in a hurry?
8	
What kind of food 
 you like?
9	
What sports 
 you like watching?
 
10	
Where 
 you usually have lunch?
Student B
Complete the questions with is / are or do. Then ask your partner.
1	 When 
 you usually see your friends?
2	 Where 
 you go when class finishes?
3	 What 
 your favourite kind of music?
4	 How many cousins 
 you have?
5	 What do you think people in your family 
 
doing at the moment?
6	 How 
 you usually come to class?
7	 What day 
 it tomorrow?
8	
 you enjoy singing in the car?
9	
 you like going to the gym?
 
10	
 you learning another language, apart 
from English?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 232@@
232
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  Where were you?
Student A
Look at the clocks. Ask B questions with 
Where were you…? Answer B’s questions.
  Where were you at half past nine yesterday 
  morning?
Student B
Look at the clocks. Ask A questions with 
Where were you…? Answer A’s questions.
  Where were you at five o’clock yesterday 
  afternoon?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
YESTERDAY MORNING
LAST NIGHT
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON
THIS MORNING
LAST SUNDAY MORNING
LAST SATURDAY 
EVENING
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON
LAST SUNDAY 
AFTERNOON
LAST SATURDAY 
EVENING
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON
THIS MORNING
YESTERDAY MORNING
YESTERDAY EVENING
YESTERDAY EVENING
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON
LAST NIGHT
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 233@@
233
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7B  COMMUNICATIVE  Are we in Australia?
Last April two British teenagers, 
Raoul and Emma, wanted to go 
to Australia for their summer 
holiday.
But it was a 24-hour journey 
by plane and tickets were very 
expensive. 
So, Raoul and Emma looked for 
cheap tickets on the internet. 
They booked two tickets to 
Sydney.
On 4th August they arrived at 
Heathrow airport. They checked 
in and waited for the plane to 
leave.
Six hours later they landed at a 
big airport and changed planes. 
The new plane was very small 
and Emma was worried.
After only an hour the plane 
landed. They looked out of 
the window. It was a very small 
airport!
They showed their tickets to a 
woman in the information desk. 
Raoul asked, ‘When is our next 
flight?’
The woman was surprised. 
‘The next flight? This is the 
end of your journey. You’re in 
Sydney.’
But Raoul and Emma weren’t 
in Sydney, Australia. They were 
in Sydney, Nova Scotia,a small 
town in south-east Canada!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 234@@
234
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7C  COMMUNICATIVE  Born on 31st December
Student A
	
Look at the text about Anthony Hopkins. Complete the questions about him.
	
Ask B for the information and complete the text.
 a
 b
1	 Where was Anthony Hopkins born?
2	 Who 
 he 
 in London?
3	
 
 did he get his first role in?
4	
 
 he decide to go back to London?
5	 What film 
 
 
 an Oscar for in 1991?
6	
 
 he get a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame?
7	 Where 
 he 
 today?
 	
Read about Elizabeth Arden. Then answer B’s questions.
c
	
Cover the information. With your partner, try to remember five facts  
about Anthony Hopkins and Elizabeth Arden.
d
Elizabeth Arden’s real name was Florence Nightingale Graham. She was born on 
31st December 1884 in Ontario, Canada. Her family didn’t have a lot of money 
and she was the fifth of five children. She studied to be a nurse and worked to 
help her family. In 1908 she moved to New York and got a job as an assistant in 
a beauty salon. Two years later she opened her first beauty salon with a friend. 
They called the salon Elizabeth Arden. The salon closed, but she liked the 
name. She changed her name to Elizabeth Arden and used it for her beauty products. She opened 
beauty salons all over the world and became very famous. Elizabeth was also a suffragette – she 
wanted women to get the vote. In a protest march in 1912, all the women wore red lipstick, which was 
Elizabeth’s idea. All her life she never told people how old she was. When she died in 1966, her age, 
81, was a surprise for many people.
Glossary
beauty salon  a place where you can have beauty treatments, e.g. a manicure, a facial, etc.
suffragette  a member of a group of women who worked for women to get the vote in the early 20th century
protest march  an organized walk by many people in order to express their opinions
 
Anthony Hopkins was born on 31st December 1937 in 1
.  
He went to the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama when he was only 
15 years old. Then he went to London to continue his studies and he met  
2
, a very famous actor. He thought Anthony’s acting was really 
good and he gave him a job in his theatre. After that Hopkins acted in many plays 
and critics loved him. He got his first film role in 3
 in 1968, and 
after that acted in more films and in the theatre, but he wasn’t a big star. In 
4
, he decided to go back to London and to forget about the 
cinema. But in 1991 he won an Oscar for 5
, and became very 
famous. He went to live in America, and got three more Oscar nominations, but 
he didn’t win. In 6
 he got a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.  
Today he lives in 7
, California. He is now Sir Anthony Hopkins.
Glossary
critic  a journalist who 
writes about films, 
concerts, etc.
role  an actor’s part in 
a play, film/movie, etc.
ANTHONY HOPKINS
ELIZABETH ARDEN
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 235@@
235
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
Student B
	
Read about Anthony Hopkins. Then answer A’s questions.
 a
1	 What was Elizabeth Arden’s real name?
2	
 
 children 
 her parents have?
3	
 
 did she get in 1908?
4	 What 
 she and her friend 
 their first salon?
5	 What 
 
 
 women to get?
6	
 
 all the women 
 in a protest march in 1912?
7	 How 
 
 she when she died?
7C  COMMUNICATIVE  Born on 31st December
	
Look at the text about Elizabeth Arden. Complete the questions about her.
 	
Ask A for the information and complete the text.
 b
c
	
Cover the information. With your partner, try to remember five facts  
about Anthony Hopkins and Elizabeth Arden.
d
Glossary
beauty salon  a place where you can have beauty treatments, e.g. a manicure, a facial, etc.
suffragette  a member of a group of women who worked for women to get the vote in the early 20th century
protest march  an organized walk by many people in order to express their opinions
 
Anthony Hopkins was born on 31st December 1937 in Port Talbot, Wales. 
He went to the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama when he was only 
15 years old. Then he went to London to continue his studies and he met 
Laurence Olivier, a very famous actor. He thought Anthony’s acting was really 
good and he gave him a job in his theatre. After that Hopkins acted in many 
plays and critics loved him. He got his first film role in The Lion in Winter in 
1968, and after that acted in more films and in the theatre, but he wasn’t 
a big star. In 1990, he decided to go back to London and to forget about 
the cinema. But in 1991 he won an Oscar for The Silence of the Lambs, and 
became very famous. He went to live in America, and got three more Oscar 
nominations, but he didn’t win. In 2003 he got a star on the Hollywood Walk of 
Fame. Today he lives in Malibu, California. He is now Sir Anthony Hopkins.
Glossary
critic  a journalist who 
writes about films, 
concerts etc.
role  an actor’s part in 
a play, film/movie, etc.
Elizabeth Arden’s real name was 1
. She was born on 
31st December 1884 in Ontario, Canada. Her family didn’t have a lot of money and 
she was the fifth of 2
 children. She studied to be a nurse and 
worked to help her family. In 1908 she moved to New York and got a job as an  
3
 in a beauty salon. Two years later she opened her first beauty 
salon* with a friend. They called the salon 4
. The salon closed, 
but she liked the name. She changed her name to Elizabeth Arden and used it for her 
beauty products. She opened beauty salons all over the world and became very famous. Elizabeth was 
also a suffragette – she wanted women to get 5
. In a protest march in 1912, all the 
women wore 6
, which was Elizabeth’s idea. All her life she never told people how 
old she was. When she died in 1966, her age, 7
, was a surprise for many people.
ELIZABETH ARDEN
ANTHONY HOPKINS
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 236@@
236
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
This morning 
What time / get up? / make your bed?
What / have for breakfast? 
When / leave home? 
/ check your email?
How / go to work or school?
Yesterday
Who / have lunch with?
What time / finish work / school?
What / do in the evening?
Where / at 7.30?
/ watch TV? What / watch?
/ go to bed before or after midnight?
When you were  
12 years old
Where / live?
Where / go to school?
What bands or singers / like?
/ have a mobile phone?
Who / your best friend?
What / like doing in your free time?
Last Saturday
/ get up early?
What / do in the morning?
Who / see in the evening?
Where / go in the afternoon?
/ go shopping? What / buy?
Where / be at 10.00?
Your last birthday
What presents / get?
/ go to work or school?
Who / celebrate it with?
/ have a party?
What / do in the evening?
/ have a good time?
Your last holiday
Where / go?
Who / go with?
Where / stay?
How long / stay?
What interesting things / do?
/ have any problems?
8A  COMMUNICATIVE  Past simple question time
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 237@@
237
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  A place to rent
Student A
	
You are an estate agent. This is the advert you have put on your website.  
B phones to ask for information. Answer his / her questions.
 a
	
You are looking for a house to rent. You see this advert on a website.  
Phone the estate agent, B, at Star Homes and ask for information about the house.
	
  Hello. I’m phoning about a house.
	
  The reference is 392117.
	
  Can you tell me about it, please? 
 b
Large furnished flat to rent
For information phone 08081 570981 
(property reference 268559)
Dream Flats
Properties to rent
Large furnished house to rent
For information phone 020 7946 0111 
(property reference 392117)
•	First floor flat in quiet residential area. 
•	Two large double bedrooms and two 
bathrooms with shower. 
•	Big, light living room with modern TV 
and dining table and chairs.
•	Modern kitchen with washing machine, 
dishwasher, and fridge freezer. 
•	Gas central heating.
•	wi-fi internet connection.  
•	Private garage.  
•	5 minutes from shops and public 
transport. 
•	Rent £900 a month.
Properties to rent
What I want to know
Where / the house?
How far / from Oxford?
How many bedrooms and bathrooms / ?
/ a big living room?
What / in the kitchen?
/ central heating?
/ a big garden?
/ a swimming pool?
/ a garage?
How much / the rent?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 238@@
238
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  A place to rent
Student B
	
You are looking for a flat to rent. You see this advert on a website.  
Phone the estate agent, A, at Dream Flats and ask for information about the flat.
	
	  Hello. I’m phoning about a flat.
	
  The reference is 268559.
	
  Can you tell me about it, please? 
 a
	
You are an estate agent. This is the advert you have put on your website.  
A phones to ask for information. Answer his / her questions.
 b
Large furnished flat to rent
For information phone 08081 570981 
(property reference 268559)
Dream Flats
Properties to rent
•	Country house.
•	10 miles from Oxford.
•	Big, light living room with fireplace / 
dining room.
•	Eight double bedrooms, six 
bathrooms, study.
•	New, modern kitchen with washing 
machine, dishwasher, and fridge 
freezer.
•	Gas central heating.
•	Big garden with swimming pool.
•	Double garage. 
•	Rent £5,200 a month.
What I want to know
Where / the flat?
What floor / on?
How many bedrooms and bathrooms / ?
/ big living room?
What / in the kitchen?
/ central heating?
/ wi-fi?
/ a garage?
How far / from shops and public 
transport?
How much / the rent?
Large furnished house to rent
For information phone 020 7946 0111 
(property reference 392117)
Properties to rent
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 239@@
239
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
 	
Now listen to B describe Room 2 as it is today. Circle things that were different in the 1960s.
	
Tell B how the room was different in the 1960s.
  	
	
There wasn’t a computer on the desk. There was a poster of the Beatles above it.
 	
Compare the pictures with B. Which rooms do you like best?
c
d
e
8C  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s different?
Student A
	
Look at Room 1 for one minute. Then describe it to your partner. Say what there is and where.
  	
	
It’s a modern living room. There’s a sofa. In front of the sofa there’s a coffee table.
	
B has a picture of the same room in the 1960s. He/she is going to tell you how it was different. 
Circle the things in the picture.
 a
 b
Room 1  A modern living room
Room 2  A bedroom in the 1960s
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 240@@
240
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
 	
Now describe Room 2 to A.
  	
	
It’s a modern bedroom. There’s a computer on the desk.
	
A has a picture of the same room in the 1960s. He/she is going to  
tell you how it was different. Circle the things in the picture.
 	
Compare the pictures with A. Which rooms do you like best?
c
d
e
8C  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s different?
Student B
	
Look at Room 1 for one minute. It’s a living room in the 1960s. Listen to A  
describe the same room today. Circle things that are different. 
	
Tell A how the room was different in the 1960s.
  	
	
There wasn’t a sofa, there were three armchairs. There wasn’t a lamp on the table…
 a
 b
Room 1  A living room in the 1960s
Room 2  A modern bedroom
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 241@@
241
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9A  COMMUNICATIVE  Shopping list
Student B
	
Listen to A’s questions and look at the picture. 
	
Answer with No, we don’t need any… or  
Yes, we need some…
 a
	
Now look at the list. Ask A Do we need any…? 
for every item on the list.
	
Listen to A’s answers and put a tick (✓) for yes 
and a cross (✗) for no next to each item.
 b
Student A
	
Look at the list. Ask B Do we need any…?  
for every item on the list.
	
Listen to B’s answers and put a tick (✓) for 
yes and a cross (✗) for no next to each item.
 a
	
Now listen to B’s questions and look at 
the picture.
	
Answer with No, we don’t need any… or  
Yes, we need some…
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 242@@
242
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9B  COMMUNICATIVE  How much / many board game
How 
 
time do you 
spend a day 
online?
none 
a few
a little
not many
not much
quite a lot
a lot
How 
 
friends do 
you have on 
Facebook?
How 
 
meat do you eat 
a week?
How 
 text 
messages did you 
send yesterday?
How 
 
countries did you 
visit last year?
How 
 
photos do you have 
on your phone?
How 
 
exercise 
do you do 
a week?
How 
 
fruit do you 
eat a day?
How 
 
games do you 
have on your 
phone and 
computer?
How 
 time 
did you spend doing 
English homework 
last week?
How 
 
people in your family 
speak English?
How 
 
emails do you 
get a day?
How 
 free 
time do you have 
during the week?
How 
 
times do you 
eat out a week?
How 
 tea 
or coffee did you 
drink yesterday?
How 
 
books did you 
read last month?
How 
 
pictures do you 
have on your 
bedroom wall?
START
How 
 
pairs of shoes 
do you have?
How 
 
water do you 
drink a day?
How 
 
money did you 
spend on clothes 
last month?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 243@@
243
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9C  COMMUNICATIVE­  Guess the comparative
1	
	Russia is colder than Spain. 
2	
	The Americans are 
 than the British.
3	
	Swimming is better exercise than walking.
4	
	Oranges are 
 than lemons.
5	
	A Rolls Royce is more expensive than a BMW.
6	
	Driving is 
 than flying.
7	
	Chinese is more difficult to learn than English.
8	
	Basketball players are 
 than footballers.
9	
	Dark chocolate is healthier than white chocolate.
 10	 	 Canada is 
 than Brazil.
 11	 	 The weather in Britain is worse than the weather in Italy.
 12	 	 Tom Cruise is 
 than George Clooney.
1	
Russia is 
 than Spain. 
2	
The Americans are friendlier than the British.
3	
Swimming is 
 exercise than walking.
4	
Oranges are sweeter than lemons.
5	
A Rolls Royce is 
 than a BMW.
6	
Driving is more dangerous than flying.
7	
Chinese is 
 to learn than English.
8	
Basketball players are taller than footballers.
9	
Dark chocolate is 
 than white chocolate.
 10	 	 Canada is bigger than Brazil.
 11	 	 The weather in Britain is 
 than the weather in Italy.
 12	 	 Tom Cruise is shorter than George Clooney.
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 244@@
244
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10A  COMMUNICATIVE  What do you know about the UK?
1	
What’s the 
 London airport? (busy)  
a Heathrow  b Gatwick  c Stansted
2	
What’s the 
 kind of restaurant? (popular) 
a British  b Chinese  c Indian
3	
Which is the 
 city after London? (big) 
a Edinburgh  b Birmingham  c Manchester
4	
Which is the 
 river? (long) 
a The Thames   b The Severn  c The Avon 
5	
Which part of Britain is the 
 (sunny) 
a the south-west  b the south-east  c the north-east
6	
Which is the 
 city? (wet)  
a Cardiff  b Belfast  c Manchester
7	
What’s the 
 football stadium? (large) 
a Old Trafford  b Wembley  c Emirates Stadium
8	
What’s the 
 outdoor activity? (popular) 
a fishing  b walking  c gardening
9	
Which is the 
 university? (old) 
a Oxford  b Cambridge  c London
 
10	
What’s the 
 surname? (common) 
a Johnson  b Miller  c Smith
 
11	
Where’s the 
 mountain? (high) 
a Scotland  b Northern Ireland  c Wales
 
12	
What’s the 
 native animal? (big) 
a horse  b bull  c deer
	
Write the superlative form of the adjective.
 a
	
Work with a partner. Answer the questions.
 	
With your partner, write five questions about your country or countries.
	
Find another pair and ask them your questions.
 b
c
d
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 245@@
245
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10B  COMMUNICATIVE  Future plans
Ask B questions about his / her plans using 
going to. Ask for more information.
  Are you going to go abroad next summer? 
	
	
 Yes, I am.
  Where are you going to go? 
	
	
 I’m going to go to China.
Ask A questions about his / her plans using 
going to. Ask for more information.
  Are you going to make dinner tonight? 
	
	
 Yes, I am.
  What are you going to make? 
	
	
I’m going to make pasta I think.
/ go abroad next summer?
/ make dinner tonight?
/ go shopping this week?
/ come to the next class?
/ have lunch with your 
family tomorrow?
/ stay in bed late 
next Sunday?
/ go to bed early tonight?
/ do any sport or 
exercise tomorrow?
/ watch TV this evening?
/ meet your friends 
next Friday?
/ buy anyone a present 
this month?
/ get up before 
8 o’clock tomorrow?
/ go out next  
 Saturday night?
/ use your computer 
this evening?
/ study English  
at the weekend?
/ spend time with your 
family this weekend?
/ celebrate a friend’s 
birthday next week?
/ work or study late 
this week?
/ do your homework  
this evening?
/ go for a walk later today?
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 246@@
246
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10C  COMMUNICATIVE  Predictions
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 247@@
247
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
11A  COMMUNICATIVE­  Read slowly
LOUDLY
ANGRILY
SLOWLY
FAST
NERVOUSLY
QUIETLY
SADLY
HAPPILY
TIREDLY
POLITELY
SERIOUSLY
RUDELY
Do you have 
a pen?
I lost my keys.
Can I come in?
Go away.
I know the 
answer.
Can you give 
me that book?
I don’t like this 
exercise.
I need to 
help him.
I want to go 
to bed.
We bought 
some theatre 
tickets.
Don’t go in 
there.
Turn off  
the TV.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 248@@
248
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1	 	When did you learn to ride a bike?
2	 	What dish would you like to learn to cook? 
3	 	What are two things you need to do this week?
4	 	What are you planning to do after class?
5	 	What’s the next thing that you want to buy?
6	 	What things do you often forget to do?
7	 	Where would you like to go on your next holiday?
8	 	What did you want to be when you were little?
9	 	Which famous person would you like to have dinner with? 
  10	 	Who are you planning to go on holiday with?
  11	 	Why do you want to learn to speak English?
  12	 	What country would you like to live in?
  13	 	What film do you really want to see?
  14	 	What job do you hope to have in the future?
  15	 	What hobby or activity would you like to try?
11B  COMMUNICATIVE  Dreams and plans
	
Choose six questions to ask your partner.
 a
	
Ask and answer the questions with your partner. Ask for more information.
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 249@@
249
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
11C  COMMUNICATIVE­  Speak for 30 seconds
START
FINISH
fast-food 
restaurants
selfies
my family
the sun
TV series
my house
chocolate
the beach
modern 
clothes
reality 
TV shows
pop music
children
mobile 
phones
music 
festivals
neighbours
in my 
free time
the internet
cooking
ghosts
SPEAK FOR  
30 SECONDS
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 250@@
250
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
12A  COMMUNICATIVE  Have you done it?
1				
	 the Game of Thrones books. (read)
2				
	 Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. (hear)
3				
	 in a fast food restaurant. (work)
4				
	 a Batman film. (see)
5				
	 new jeans recently. (buy)
6				
	 a multi-player game online. (play)
7				
	 in a five-star hotel. (stay)
8				
	 on TV. (be)
9				
	 by boat. (travel)
 10			
	 asleep in class. (fall)
 11			
	 caviar. (eat)
 12			
	 to a famous person. (speak)
	
Complete the sentences in the present perfect, + or – , using the verb in brackets. Make six 
sentences true and six sentences not true for you.
 a
	
Read your sentences to your partner. Can he / she guess which are true?
	
  I haven’t read the Game of Thrones books. 
	
  No, it’s not true – I’ve read all  
  the books and I’ve watched the series. 
 b
I think it’s true because I don’t 
think you like reading.
Have you done it?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 251@@
251
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
12B  COMMUNICATIVE  Have you ever…?
Have you ever 
 (read) 
a book with more than 500 pages?
•	 What book was it?
•	 Did you like it?
•	 Did you recommend it to anyone?
Have you ever 
 (eat) 
Thai food?
•	 Where did you eat it?
•	 What dishes did you eat?
•	 Did you like them?
Have you ever 
 (forget) 
your PIN or password?
•	 When was it?
•	 Was it an important password?
•	 Did you remember it? 
•	 What happened?
Have you ever 
 (lose) 
your keys?
•	 When did you lose them?
•	 What happened?
•	 Did anybody help you?
Have you ever 
 (be) 
late for something important?
•	 What was it?
•	 How late were you?
•	 Why was it important?
Have you ever 
 (sleep) 
more than 12 hours?
•	 When was it?
•	 Why did you sleep so much?
•	 Did anybody wake you up?
Have you ever 
 (buy) 
anything on eBay?
•	 What was it?
•	 How much did it cost?
•	 Did you have any problems with it?
Have you ever 
 (have) 
a surprise birthday party?
•	 When was it?
•	 Where was the birthday party?
•	 Did you have a good time?
Have you ever 
 (speak) 
in public?
•	 When was it?
•	 How did it go?
•	 Did you enjoy it?
Have you ever 
 (send) 
an email or a text message to the 
wrong person?
•	 Who did you send it to?
•	 Who did you mean to send it to?
•	 Was it funny or was it a problem?
Have you ever 
 (play) 
in a band?
•	 When did you do it?
•	 Did you like it? 
•	 What kind of music did you play?
Have you ever 
 (do) 
yoga or pilates?
•	 Where did you do it?
•	 When did you do it?
•	 Did you go alone or with a friend?
Have you ever 
 
(make) a cake?
•	 What kind of cake was it?
•	 Why did you make it?
•	 Was it good?
Have you ever 
 (see) 
a famous singer or group in concert?
•	 Who did you see?
•	 Where was it?
•	 Did you go alone or with a friend?
•	 Did you have a good time?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 252@@
252
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
12C  COMMUNICATIVE  Revision questions
  Personal information
What / name?
How / spell your surname?
Where / you from?
What / your phone number?
What / do?
/ have a big family?
Why / need English?
 Your flat / house
/ live in a house or a flat?
Where / it?
Can…tell me about it?
What / your favourite room?
Can…describe it?
 Preferences
Which do you prefer? Why?
Coke / Pepsi?
summer / winter?
Facebook / Twitter?
watching sport / doing sport?
swimming in the sea / in a pool?
  Can you…?
/ draw or paint well?
/ have a conversation in English?
/ play the guitar?
/ play chess?
/ drive?
/ wear jeans to work / school?
 Time and dates
What / the time now?
What time / the class finish?
When / birthday?
What time / get up on Sundays?
When / your next class?
What / favourite day of the 
week? Why? 
What / the date yesterday?
  The past (be)
Where / you born?
Where / your mother born?
Where / you at 8.00 yesterday 
evening?
Who / you with?
What / your favourite food when 
you were little?
/ at home yesterday at 7.30 in 
the morning?
  Future (going to)
Where / go after class?
/ watch TV this evening?
When / do your homework?
/ go to bed early today? What time?
Where / go this Saturday?
 How often…?
/ go to the gym?
/ have dinner with friends?
/ eat meat?
/ go to bed after 11 o’clock?
/ watch TV in the evenings?
/ go to the doctor?
 Now
What TV series / watching?
What book / read at the moment?
/ it rain now?
What / your teacher wearing?
How / feeling right now?
  Have you ever…?
(be) to the UK?
(see) a ghost?
(break) your arm or leg?
(fall) in love?
(live) in a different place?
(be) to a pop festival?
  Free time
How much free time / have?
What kind of books / like?
What / do when you want to relax?
What / like doing at weekends? 
How often / go to the cinema?
What / your favourite kind of music?
 Everyday activities
Where / usually have breakfast?
What time / usually leave home?
What / usually do in the morning?
What time / usually have lunch?
What time / usually get home? 
What / usually do at weekends?
 The past simple
What / do last night?
What / have for dinner?
What time / go to bed?
How many hours / sleep last night?
Who / dinner with yesterday?
How / come to class today?
 Describe a friend
What / his or her name?
Where / live?
How often / see him or her?
What / do?
Where / you meet for the first time?
What / have in common?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 253@@
253
1A	Days of the week / Numbers 
0–20
	
A pairwork spelling activity
LANGUAGE
Days of the week, numbers 0–20
•	 Give each student a worksheet and tell them to look at 
the letter snakes. Tell them to find the numbers and days 
and write them in the correct place in the lists.
a	 eight, five, twelve, eleven, Thursday, thirteen, twenty, 
Monday, nineteen, fourteen, Saturday, fifteen, Wednesday
•	 For b, get Sts to complete the two lists with the missing 
numbers and days.
•	 Check answers.
•	 In c, get Sts to look at the code and write the words.
c	 1  twelve    2  goodbye    3  museum    4  welcome  
5  nineteen    6  Saturday
•	 In Activation, each student thinks of three words, days, 
or numbers and puts them into the code. Put Sts in pairs 
and tell them to dictate the code numbers to a partner, and 
he / she works out what the words are.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to dictate the code numbers 
to a partner, and he / she works out what the words are.
1B The world
	 	
Filling in information
LANGUAGE
Countries and nationalities
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Focus on a, and tell Sts to 
complete the name of the country and write the nationality, 
using the photos to help them.
•	 Check answers.
a	 2  France, French    	3  Germany, German    4  China, Chinese
	
5  Argentina, Argentinian    	6  Turkey, Turkish
	
7  Poland, Polish    	8  Mexico, Mexican
•	 For b, tell Sts to identify the countries and nationalities from 
the photos and complete the sentences.
•	 Check answers.
b	 1  Japan    2  Brazilian    3  Australia    4  African
	
5  Irish    6  Russia    7  Swiss    8  Czech Republic
•	 In Activation, Sts look at the photos in a and b and say 
the countries and nationalities.
1C	Classroom language
	 	
Completing sentences
LANGUAGE
Common classroom expressions: What page is it?, etc.
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Tell Sts to look at the 
pictures and complete the conversations.
•	 Check answers.
1	 Student
	
Teacher
	
Student
	
Teacher
2	 Teacher
	
Student
	
Teacher
3	 Student
	
Teacher
4	 Teacher
	
Student
	
Teacher
5	 Teacher
	
Teacher
	
Student
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
the conversations.
2A	Things
	 	
An anagram activity
LANGUAGE
Things: key, sunglasses, coin, etc.
•	 Explain to Sts that they are going to solve anagrams of 
common objects and match them to photos. If necessary, 
write a few anagram examples on the board, e.g. sitsue – 
tissue.
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Tell Sts to first solve the 
anagram, and then write it with a / an if the noun is singular. 
Finally, they should match the word to a photo and write 
the number in the box.
•	 Check answers.
b	 a coin 1    c  a purse 11    d  a watch 5    e  a wallet 12
f	 a file 10    g  scissors 9    h  a magazine 6
i	 a laptop 4    j  sunglasses 8    k  a key 2    l  a diary 3
m	 a ticket 13    n  a stamp 14    o  an umbrella 15
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to cover the 
words and look at the photos to test each other.
2B	Opposites crossword
	 	
A crossword activity
LANGUAGE
Common adjectives: fast, slow, etc.
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to solve a crossword. Explain / 
Elicit the meaning of across and down. 
•	 You can either give each student a worksheet, or put Sts 
in pairs and give each pair a worksheet. Sts complete the 
crossword, using the opposites of the adjectives given.
Vocabulary activity instructions
How do you say ‘kot’ in English?
It’s ‘cat’.
How do you spell it?
C-A-T.
Open your books, please.
What page is it?
Eighty-four.
Sorry I’m late!
OK. Sit down.
Answer the questions.
Can you help me, please?
Yes, what’ the problem?
Do exercise A.
Can you match the words and definitions?
I don’t understand.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 254@@
254
Practical English 2  Time
Practising writing times
LANGUAGE
Telling the time: It’s one o’clock, It’s quarter past eight
•	 Give each student a worksheet and get them to look at 
the pictures. Get them to answer the question What time is 
it? by writing the times for each picture.
•	 Check answers.
a	 2  It’s ten past eleven.
	
3  It’s quarter past two.
	
4  It’s ten to five.
	
5  It’s twenty-five to seven.
	
6  It’s twenty-five past nine.
	
7  It’s five past one.
	
8  It’s half past twelve.
	
9  It’s five to six.
    10   It’s quarter to three.
    11   It’s twenty past ten.
    12   It’s twenty to four.
•	 Sts test themselves or each other by covering the 
sentences and asking each other the times.
4A	The family
	 	
Deciding if sentences are true or false
LANGUAGE
Family members: father, son, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student a 
worksheet A or B.
•	 Sts look at the family tree and sentences 1–10. Sts write 
T (true) or F (false) for each sentence. Monitor and help if 
necessary.
•	 For b, tell Sts A to start by reading sentence 1 to Sts B, 
who must say if the sentence is true or false and correct it 
if it is false. Sts then swap roles and take turns reading their 
sentences.
•	 Check answers.
a	 Student A: 1  F  2  F  3  T  4  T  5  F  6  F  7  T  8  F  9  T  10  T
	
Student B: 1  F  2  T  3  T  4  F  5  T  6  F  7  T  8  F  9  T  10  F
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to test each 
other by asking questions, e.g. Who is Sally’s aunt?
4B	A day in the life of a fitness 	
instructor
	 	
Telling a story from pictures
LANGUAGE
Everyday activities: She wakes up at 6.00 a.m.
•	 Give each student a worksheet and explain that this 
is the daily routine of a fitness instructor. Go through the 
sequence quickly to elicit the verbs. Focus on -s for the third 
person.
•	 Check answers.
a	 DOWN  2 difficult  4 empty  5 strong  7 light  8 fast  10 dirty  
15 high  17 old
	
ACROSS  3 expensive  6 small  9 cold  11 different  12 short  
13 beautiful  14 right  16 good  18 rich 
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to cover the 
crossword and use the clues to test each other.
3A	Verb phrases
	 	
Matching phrases and verbs
LANGUAGE
Common verb phrases: listen to music, do exercise, etc.
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Focus on the examples 
and make sure Sts understand them. Then give Sts time to 
complete the VERB column. Highlight that they need to use 
do and play twice.
•	 Check answers.
a	 4  have  5  do  6  go  7  drink  8  live  9  read  10  speak  
11  take  12  study  13  work  14  listen  15  say  16  wear  
17  do  18  play  19  watch  20  like  21  play  22  cook  
23  drive
•	 For Activation, Sts test themselves or each other by 
covering the VERB column and saying the phrases.
 EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs and get them to take turns 
making true sentences with the verb and the first collocate 
in either the positive or negative.
3B	Jobs
	 	
A crossword activity
LANGUAGE
Jobs: waiter, pilot, etc.
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to solve a crossword. Make 
sure they remember the meaning of across and down. 
•	 You can either give each student a worksheet, or put Sts 
in pairs and give each pair a worksheet. Sts complete the 
crossword, using the photos.
•	 Check answers.
DOWN	   1 journalist  2 builder  3 musician  5 hairdresser  
7 doctor  8 actor  9 engineer  11 cleaner  13 pilot  16 vet
ACROSS	   4 nurse  6 policewoman  10 architect  12 dentist  
14 waiter  15 lawyer  17 receptionist  18 soldier
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to test 
themselves or each other by covering the crossword, 
looking at the pictures, and saying the jobs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 255@@
255
and Temperature columns. Point out the example question 
and answer, and remind them of the word degrees.
•	 In their pairs, Sts take turns to ask and answer questions 
about the weather.
•	 When they have finished, Sts should compare charts.
6B	Dates
	 	
A bingo game activity
LANGUAGE
Dates and months: the sixth of July, the twentieth  
of February
•	 Each worksheet has eight bingo cards. Make enough 
copies so each student has a bingo card. 
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to play a bingo game. Give 
each student a bingo card. Tell them that you will read some 
dates. If they have the date on their card, they should cross it 
out. The first student to cross out all the dates should shout 
Bingo!
•	 Read out the dates at the top of the worksheet at random 
and tick them off as you go.
•	 When a student shouts Bingo!, check their card to make 
sure they crossed off the correct dates. The first student to 
cross out all the dates is the winner.
 EXTRA IDEA   If Sts need more practice, make some more 
copies of the cards and the dates and get Sts to play in 
groups with one of the Sts saying the dates. Remind them to 
tick off the dates as they read them.
7C	go, have, get
	 	
Matching verbs and phrases
LANGUAGE
Expressions with go, have, get
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student worksheet  
A or B. Give Sts time to complete the task individually. Check 
answers.
Student A	   1  go  2  get  3  have  4  get  5  go  6  get  7  go  
8  have  9  have  10  go
Student B	   1  have  2  go  3  have  4  have  5  go  6  get  7  go  
8  go  9  have  10  get
•	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to ask and answer their 
questions. Remind them to ask for more information and 
then to ‘return’ the questions, e.g. What about you? / And you?
8B	Race around the house
	
Naming things in the house from  
	
definitions
LANGUAGE
Things in the house and furniture, rooms
1	 She wakes up at 6.00 a.m.
2	 She gets up at 6.15 a.m.
3	 She does exercise.
4	 She has a shower.
5	 She gets dressed.
6	 She has breakfast.
7	 She goes / cycles to work.
8	 She gets to work at 9.30 a.m.
9	 She teaches / works from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m.
 10	 She has lunch at 1.30 p.m.
 11	 She teaches / works from 3.30 p.m. to 5.30 p.m.
 12	 She goes / cycles home.
 13	 She cooks dinner.
 14	 She watches TV.
 15	 She goes to bed at 10.30 p.m.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to describe the fitness 
instructor’s day together. Encourage them to add 
information, e.g. She has cereal and fruit for breakfast 
(picture 6).
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the sequence from the class and 
ask some extra questions, e.g. Where does she have lunch? 
Does she go to work by bus?
5A	More verb phrases
	 	
A puzzle, completing verb phrases
LANGUAGE
Common verb phrases: remember somebody’s name,  
use the internet, etc.
•	 Give each student a worksheet and ask Sts to complete 
the VERBS column with the correct verb, which must make 
sense with the phrase. Focus on the example and count the 
letters in the verb – there is a space for each letter.
•	 Check answers.
a	 2  use    3  swim    4  send    5  find    6  forget    7  tell
	
8  meet    9  look for    10  see    11  help    12  give
	
13  sing    14  take    15  wait for    16  try    17  draw
	
18  run    19  hear    20  call    21  buy    22  leave
	
23  paint    24  talk
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to cover the 
VERBS column and test their partner.
5C	The weather
	 	
A pairwork activity describing the  
	 	
weather
LANGUAGE
Weather words and verbs: It’s sunny, It’s raining, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student a 
worksheet A or B. Give Sts time to do the first exercise 
individually, and then check answers.
1	 windy   2  sunny   3  cloudy   4  raining   5  snowing
•	 Focus on b. Remind Sts of the question What’s the weather 
like? Explain that they are going to ask each other questions 
in pairs to complete the missing information in the Weather 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 256@@
256
LANGUAGE
High numbers: two hundred and fifty-five, one thousand  
five hundred, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student a 
worksheet. Focus on the list of numbers, and elicit how 
to say them. Then give Sts time to individually read the 
sentences and complete them with a number from the list. 
They should not compare at this point. Monitor and help.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to do Activation and 
compare answers. Sts A read sentence 1 to Sts B. If B doesn’t 
agree with the number A has chosen, he / she says what 
he / she thinks the right number is. Monitor and help.
•	 Check answers. You could ask Sts if they were surprised by 
any of the answers. Encourage them to say why.
2	 The total number of countries in the world is one hundred 
and ninety-six (196).
3	 A person with a good level of English knows about five 
thousand (5,000) words.
4	 A hippopotamus normally weighs about one thousand 
seven hundred (1,700) kilograms.
5	 A normal person sleeps for about two thousand nine 
hundred and twenty (2,920) hours every year.
6	 A day has eighty-six thousand four hundred (86,400) 
seconds.
7	 An Olympic swimming pool has two million five hundred 
thousand (2,500,000) litres of water.
8	 Sixty-four million one hundred thousand (64,100,000) 
people live in the UK.
9	 The River Amazon is six thousand nine hundred and 
ninety-two (6,992) kilometres long.
 10	 The novel Emma, by Jane Austen, has one hundred and  
fifty-five thousand eight hundred and eighty-seven (155, 
887) words.
 EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts to look up information on their phones 
and modify the sentences to create their own. They can 
choose a book, for example, and look up the number of 
words on Google.
10A	Places and buildings puzzle
Solving a puzzle to find a hidden 
phrase
LANGUAGE
Buildings and places: post office, chemist’s, etc.
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Explain that Sts have to 
write the answers to the clues in the puzzle. If their answers 
are correct, they will find a phrase in the shaded area down 
the middle of the puzzle.
•	 Get Sts to do a and b individually or in pairs.
•	 Check answers.
a	 1  post office  2  hospital  3  square  4  church  5  chemist’s  
6  mosque  7  bridge  8  town hall  9  market  10  theatres  
11  museum  12  car park  13  river  14  station  15  art gallery
b	 Missing phrase: places in the city
•	 Get Sts to cover the puzzle, look at the definitions, and 
test themselves.
•	 For Activation, if Sts worked individually, put them 
in pairs and tell them to cover the puzzle, look at the 
definitions, and say the words.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give each pair a worksheet. Tell 
them they have to identify house vocabulary as quickly as 
possible.
•	 Start the activity and set a time limit of ten minutes.
•	 Check answers. Pairs who have all the correct 
answers win.
1	 armchair    2  lamp    3  pictures / paintings    4  mirror   
5	 bedroom    6  carpet    7  cooker    8  air conditioning
9	 stairs    10  cupboard    11  fridge    12  bathroom
13	 ceiling    14  washing machine    15  wardrobe  16  shelves
17  garden    18  garage    19  bath    20  central heating
•	 For Activation, tell Sts to cover the furniture words, look 
at the definitions, and then say the furniture words.
8C	Prepositions of place
	 	
A describe-and-draw activity
LANGUAGE
Prepositions of place: on, under, between, etc., furniture
•	 Revise prepositions of place quickly, by making a drawing 
on the board or using the classroom. Remind Sts of there 
is / are, and on the right and on the left.
•	 Tell Sts they will each have a picture of a room which they 
have to describe to their partner. Their partner will draw 
furniture and objects into the picture exactly as their partner 
describes it.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student worksheet 
A or B. Tell Sts A to describe what is in Room 1 for Sts B 
to draw in. When they have finished, they swap roles for 
Room 2.
•	 Finally, get Sts to look at the originals and compare them 
with what they have drawn.
9A	Food
	 	
Naming food from pictures
LANGUAGE
Food: apple, bread, etc.
•	 Give each student a worksheet and tell Sts to use the 
photos to find one food word for each of the letters. Point out 
the examples.
•	 You could do this as a race in pairs. In this case, make sure 
everyone starts at the same time, and set a time limit.
a	 apple    b  bread    c  carrots    e  egg    f  fish   
h  hamburger    i  ice cream    j  juice    l  lettuce   
m  mushrooms    o  onion    p  peas    r  rice    s  sandwich
t  tomatoes    v  vegetables    y  yoghurt
•	 Check answers, getting Sts to spell the words.
•	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to say 
the first letter of five food words for Sts B (with page face 
down) to guess. Then get them to swap roles.
9C	Guess the number
A pairwork activity to practise saying 
and writing high numbers
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 257@@
257
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A  VOCABULARY  Days of the week / Numbers 0–20
 	
Find the numbers and days, and write the words in the right place in the lists.
 a
Numbers
0	
1	
2	
3	
three             
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
 
11	
 
12	
 
13	
 
14	
 
15	
 
16	
 
17	
 
18	
 
19	
 
20	
Days
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
Friday           
7	
	
Complete the lists with numbers and days.
 	
Look at the code. Use it to write the words.
 b
 c
1	   10  7  12  11  17  12	
= 
2	   16  18  18  3  19  13  12	 = 
3	   6  8  15  12  8  6	
= 
4	   7  12  11  20  18  6  12	
= 
5	   4  14  4  12  10  12  12  4	 = 
6	   15  9  10  8  2  3  9  13	
= 
0 = P  1 = H   2 = R  3 = D  4 = N  5 = F  6 = M  7 = W  8 = U  9 = A  10 = T
11 = L  12 = E  13 = Y  14 = I  15 = S  16 = G  17 = V  18 = O  19 = B  20 = C
A
X
t
h
r
e
e
Y
K
G
B
EI
G
HTJ
Q
T
f
r
id
a
y
O
FI
V
E
M
A
Z
T
W
E
L
V
E
C
O
E
L
E
V
E
N
S
X
O
N
E
V
F
O
U
R
TE
E
N
V
CA
AW
SA
T
UR
DA
YF
PU
FI
FT
EE
N
R
U
S
H
WE
D
N
E
S
D
A
Y
T
W
U
D
T
H
U
R
S
D
A
Y
D
KL
PT
HI
RTEE
NI
NS
Q
T
W
E
NT
YN
B
C
M
O
N
D
A
Y
X
O
T
U
E
N
I
N
E
T
E
E
N
E
L
ACTIVATION
Think of three words, days, or numbers and put them into the code.  
Say the code numbers to your partner. He / she writes the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 258@@
258
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B  VOCABULARY  The world
 	
Look at the pictures. Complete the names of the countries and write the nationalities.
 a
	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with a country or nationality.
 b
1	 Geishas are from 
.
2	 Samba is a 
 dance.
3	 Boomerangs are from 
.
4	 Uganda, Kenya, and Ethiopia are 
 
countries.
5	 Guinness is an 
 beer.
6	 Moscow is the capital of 
.
7	 Lindt is 
 chocolate.
8	 Prague is the capital of the 
.
Country: Spain
Nationality: Spanish
1
Country: Ar
Nationality: 
5
Country: Fr
Nationality: 
2
Country: Tu
Nationality: 
6
Country: Ger
Nationality: 
3
Country: Po
Nationality: 
7
Country: Ch
Nationality: 
4
Country: Me
Nationality: 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ACTIVATION
Look at the pictures and say the countries and nationalities.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 259@@
259
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1C  VOCABULARY  Classroom language
 	
Complete the conversations between a teacher and a student.
2
Teacher	

 
  

, please.
Student	
What 
 
 
?
Teacher	
Eighty-four.
3
Student	
Sorry 
 
!
Teacher	
OK. 
 
.
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
1
Student	
How do you say ‘kot’ in 
English?
Teacher	
It’s ‘cat’.
Student	
How 
 
 
 
?
Teacher	
C-A-T.
It’s ‘cat’.
C - A - T.
4
Teacher	

 
questions.
Student	

 
 me, 
?
Teacher	
Yes, what’s the problem?
Yes, what’s
the problem?
5
Teacher	

 
 A. 
Can you match the words 
and definitions?
Student	
I 
 
.
Can you
match the
words and the
definitions? 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 260@@
260
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2A  VOCABULARY  Things
 	
Look at the ANAGRAMS. Order the letters and write the words. Use a / an with  
the singular nouns. Match the words to pictures 1–15.
a	
enidytit arcd
b	 oicn
c	
urpes
d	 tcwha
e	
teawll
f	
life
g	 crossiss
h	
emnaigza
i	
platpo
j	
salsseguns
k	
yek
l	
riady
m	 ckitet
n	
pamst
o	 erumball
a	
an identity card 	
 7
b	
	
c	
	
d	
	
e	
	
f	
	
g	
	
h	
	
i	
	
j	
	
k	
	
l	
	
m	
	
n	
	
o	
	
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
ACTIVATION
Test a partner.
 
What’s number 1? 
ANAGRAMS
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 261@@
261
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B  VOCABULARY  Opposites crossword
 	
Look at the clues and complete the crossword.
 
DOWN 
1	 the opposite of dangerous
2	 the opposite of easy
4	 the opposite of full
5	 the opposite of weak
7	 the opposite of dark
8	 the opposite of slow
 
10	 the opposite of clean
 
15	 the opposite of low
 
17	 the opposite of young
 
ACROSS 
3	 the opposite of cheap
6	 the opposite of big
9	 the opposite of hot
 
11	 the opposite of the same
 
12	 the opposite of tall
 
13	 the opposite of ugly
 
14	 the opposite of wrong
 
16	 the opposite of bad
 
18	 the opposite of poor
ACTIVATION
Cover the crossword and test your partner.
  What’s the opposite of dangerous?  
Safe.
1S
A
F
2
3
E
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 262@@
262
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3A  VOCABULARY  Verb phrases
 	
Match the verbs in the list to phrases 1–23. Write them in the VERB column.
cook  ​do (x2)  ​drink  drive  eat  ​go  ​have  like  ​listen  ​live  need  play (x2) 
read  say  ​speak  ​study  ​take  want  ​watch  ​wear  ​work
1	
 a new phone, new glasses	
	
need
2	
 a coffee	
	
	
	
want
3	
 vegetables, fruit	
	
	
eat
4	
 a garden, two children	
	
5	
 exercise, yoga	
	
	
6	
 to the cinema, to the gym	
	
7	
 mineral water, tea, or coffee	 	
8	
 in a flat, in a big city	 	
	
9	
 a magazine, a book	 	
	
 
10	
 German, two languages	
	
 
11	
 an umbrella, your camera	
	
 
12	
 history, for an exam	 	
	
 
13	
 in an office, in a school	
	
 
14	
 to pop music, to the radio	
	
 
15	
 thank you, hello	
	
	
 
16	
 glasses, jeans	
	
	
 
17	
 housework, homework	
	
 
18	
 the guitar, the piano	 	
	
 
19	
 TV, a film	
	
	
	
 
20	
 animals, Mexican food	
	
 
21	
 tennis, chess		
	
	
 
22	
 dinner, pasta		
	
	
 
23	
 a car, a Toyota	
	
	
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the VERB column. Say phrases 1–23.
 
need a new phone
VERB
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 263@@
263
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3B  VOCABULARY  Jobs
 	
Complete the crossword using the picture clues.
1
2
3
4N
U
R
S
E
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
4
6
10
12
14
15
17
18
8
9
11
13
16
1
2
3
5
7
ACROSS 
DOWN 
ACTIVATION
Test a partner.
 
What’s 1 Down?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 264@@
264
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
PRACTICAL ENGLISH 2  VOCABULARY  Time
 	
Look at the pictures and write the times.
1	
It’s eight o’clock.                     
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
 
11	
 
12	
10
11
12
9
7
4
5
1
6
3
2
8
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Cover the sentences. Point to a clock and ask What time is it?
  What time is it?  
It’s ten to five.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 265@@
265
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4A  VOCABULARY  The family
	
Read your sentences to your partner. He / She says if they are true or false.
	
  Martin is Jemma’s brother.  
False. Martin is Sally’s brother.
ACTIVATION
Test your partner.
  Who’s Dave’s wife?  
Rita.
 b
 	
Look at sentences 1–10. Decide if they are true (T) or false (F).
 a
1	
Martin is Jemma’s brother.
2	
Nick’s wife is a doctor.
3	
Mike’s grandfather is Dave.
4	
Rita has four grandchildren.
5	
Helen’s husband is a vet.
6	
Tom is Nick’s brother.
7	
Andrew is Martin’s uncle.
8	
Nick and Helen have two sons.
9	
Sally is Tom’s niece.
 
10	
Jemma is Dave and Rita’s
	
granddaughter.
	
Read your sentences to your partner. He / She says if they are true or false.
	
  Mike’s father is an engineer.
 
False. Mike’s father is a vet.
ACTIVATION
Test your partner.
  Who’s Dave’s wife?  
Rita.
 b
 	
Look at sentences 1–10. Decide if they are true (T) or false (F).
 a
1	
Mike’s father is an engineer.
2	
Dave and Rita have three children.
3	
Mike is Martin’s cousin.
4	
Sally is Anna and Tom’s daughter.
5	
Andrew is Dave’s son.
6	
Martin is Nick’s nephew.
7	
Tom’s sister is a teacher.
8	
Andrew has two brothers.
9	
Mike and Martin are Rita’s 
grandsons.
 
10	
Jemma’s brother is a student. 
Dave 
retired
Rita 
retired
Nick 
engineer
Helen 
teacher
Andrew 
policeman
Tom 
vet
Anna 
housewife
Martin 
nurse
Sally 
student
Jemma 
doctor
Mike 
hairdresser
Dave 
retired
Rita 
retired
Nick 
engineer
Helen 
teacher
Andrew 
policeman
Tom 
vet
Anna 
housewife
Martin 
nurse
Sally 
student
Jemma 
doctor
Mike 
hairdresser
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 266@@
266
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4B  VOCABULARY  A day in the life of a fitness instructor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
11
10
13
14
15
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 267@@
267
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5A  VOCABULARY  More verb phrases
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Cover the VERBS and test your partner.
  a photo
 
take a photo
1	
r e    m   e    m   b   e     r   	
somebody’s name, 
your friend’s birthday
2	
u 
 
	
	
	
the internet, Google maps
3	
s 
 
 
	 	
	
in the sea
4	
s 
 
 
	 	
	
a text message
5	
f 
 
 
	 	
	
a parking space, a job
6	
f 
 
 
 
 
	
	
somebody’s name
7	
t 
 
 
	 	
	
someone a secret, a story
8	
m 
 
 
		
	
a friend
9	
l 
 
 
  f 
 
	 	
your keys, your wallet
 
10	
s 
 
	
	
	
a film
 
11	
h 
 
 
	 	
	
somebody, a friend
 
12	
g 
 
 
	 	
	
somebody flowers
 
13	
s 
 
 
	 	
	
a song 
 
14	
t 
 
 
	 	
	
a photo
 
15	
w 
 
 
  f 
 
		
a bus
 
16	
t 
 
	
	
	
to do something difficult
 
17	
d 
 
 
	 	
	
a picture
 
18	
r 
 
 	
	
	
a race
 
19	
h 
 
 
	 	
	
a noise
 
20	
c 
 
 
	 	
	
a taxi
 
21	
b 
 
	
	
	
new clothes
 
22	
l 
 
 
 
	
	
your bag on the train
 
23	
p 
 
 
 
	
	
the walls, a picture
 
24	
t 
 
 
  		
	
to a friend
 	
Complete the phrases with the correct verb.
VERBS
PHRASE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 268@@
268
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5C  VOCABULARY  The weather
1	It’s 
.	
2  It’s 
.	
3  It’s 
.	
4  It’s 
.	 5  It’s 
.
1	It’s 
.	
2  It’s 
.	
3  It’s 
.	
4  It’s 
.	 5  It’s 
.
	
Ask B questions to complete your information. 
	
 
 What’s the weather like in Berlin?
City
Weather 
Temperature 
Berlin 
Budapest
cloudy and windy
7°
Istanbul
Moscow
snowing
1°
Warsaw 
Edinburgh
foggy
5°
Buenos Aires 
Santiago 
cloudy and hot
26°
 	
Answer B’s questions. 
	
 
 It’s cloudy and windy and it’s 7 degrees.
 b
 c
	
Answer A’s questions.
	
 
 It’s cold and it’s 4 degrees.
 	
Ask A questions to complete your information.
	
 
 What’s the weather like in Budapest?
City
Weather 
Temperature 
Berlin
cold
4°
Budapest
Istanbul
cloudy and windy
14°
Moscow
Warsaw
raining
12°
Edinburgh
Buenos Aires
sunny and hot
29°
Santiago
 b
 c
Student A
 	
Look at the pictures. What’s the weather like? Complete sentences 1–5.
 a
Student B
 	
Look at the pictures. What’s the weather like? Complete sentences 1–5.
 a
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 269@@
269
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6B  VOCABULARY  Dates
	 11th April
	 1st January
	 19th March
	 21st May
	 12th October
	 30th June
	 18th July
	 25th December
	 8th June
	 2nd November
	 7th May
	 23rd February
	 6th July
	 31st March
	 9th January
	 24th September
	 15th April
	 22nd October
	 14th November
	 29th August
	 16th August
	 27th March
	 20th February
	 17th September
	 8th December 
2/11
18/7
31/3
25/12
11/4
8/6
21/5
16/8
1/1
27/3
B
N
O
I
G
11/4
27/3
6/7
22/10
19/3
21/5
1/1
16/8
14/11
20/2
B
N
O
I
G
17/9
8/12
9/1
31/3
12/10
20/2
11/4
16/8
14/11
8/6
B
N
O
I
G
31/3
9/1
8/12
29/8
14/11
12/10
20/2
15/4
21/5
27/3
B
N
O
I
G
25/12
24/9
8/6
9/1
15/4
29/8
20/2
22/10
6/7
7/5
B
N
O
I
G
1/1
12/10
23/2
16/8
2/11
15/4
30/6
7/5
24/9
31/3
B
N
O
I
G
23/2
29/8
1/1
7/5
19/3
30/6
11/4
6/7
22/10
25/12
B
N
O
I
G
29/8
2/11
31/3
9/1
22/10
11/4
17/9
20/2
30/6
6/7
B
N
O
I
G
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 270@@
270
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7C  VOCABULARY  go, have, get
What time did you 
  
to bed last night?
Did you 
 up early yesterday?
What did you 
 for breakfast 
this morning?
How many emails did  
you 
 yesterday?
Did you 
 to the cinema  
at the weekend?
How often do you 
  
a taxi?
When do you usually 
  
shopping?
Do you usually 
 dinner with 
your family at Christmas?
How many brothers and  
sisters do you 
?
Do you usually 
 home  
after class?
Where did you 
 lunch  
last Saturday?
Did you 
 out last night?
Did you 
 a good time  
last weekend?
What car does your family 
?
Where did you 
 on holiday 
last year?
Do you usually 
 dressed 
before breakfast?
How do you usually 
  
to work / school?
How often do you 
 to bed  
before midnight?
What did you 
 for dinner  
last night?
Do you 
 up at the  
same time during the week  
and the weekend?
Complete the questions with go, have or get. 
Complete the questions with go, have or get.
ACTIVATION
Ask your partner the questions. Ask for more 
information.
ACTIVATION
Ask your partner the questions. Ask for more 
information.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 271@@
271
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B  VOCABULARY  Race around the house
 	
In 10 minutes write as many words as you can for the definitions.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the words and the definitions. Say the words.
1	
It’s usually in a living room. 
It’s for one person to sit 
on. It’s very comfortable. 
an 
3	
You put these on the walls 
to decorate the rooms. 
 	
You can see yourself in it. 
a 
 	
It’s on a table or wall. You 
turn it on when it’s dark. 
a 
11	 You put milk, eggs, and 
vegetables in it. It keeps 
food cool and fresh. 
a 
 	
In the kitchen, you put the 
glasses and plates in this. 
a 
 	
They’re on the wall. You 
can put things on them, 
for example books. 
17	 It’s outside. It has 
flowers and plants. 
a 
5	
It’s a room where you 
sleep. 
a 
15	 You put your clothes 
in this. 
a 
 	
You put your car in here. 
a 
 	
This is on the floor. It 
decorates the room. 
a 
 	
You clean your dirty 
clothes in this. 
a 
7	
It’s in the kitchen. You 
cook on it. It can be gas or 
electric. 
a 
13	 A room has four walls, a 
floor, and... 
a 
19	 In the bathroom, you fill 
this with water. You wash 
in it. 
a 
 	
In summer, you turn it on 
when it’s hot. 
 	
It’s a room where 
you wash. 
a 
 	
You turn it on in winter to 
keep the house warm. 
9	
You use these to go from 
the ground floor to the 
first floor in a house. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 272@@
272
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8C  VOCABULARY  Prepositions of place
1
2
1
2
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 273@@
273
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9A  VOCABULARY  Food
l
n
j
m
o
k
g
e
i
f
h
c
a
b
d
s
p
v
r
t
y
w
ACTIVATION
Work in pairs. A say the first letter of five words for food.  
B (page face down) say the words. Then swap roles.
a =	an	
b =		
c =		
d =	a	
dessert
e =	an	
f =		
g =		
grapes
h =	a	
i =	 an	
j =	 	
k =		
kiwis
l =	 	
m =	
n =		
nuts
o =	an	
p =		
r =		
s =	a	
t =		
v =		
w =	
watermelon
y =	a	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 274@@
274
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9C  VOCABULARY  Guess the number
 	
Complete the sentences with a number from the list.
​196  ​206  1,700  2,920  ​5,000  ​6,992  86,400  ​155,887  ​2,500,000  64,100,000
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Compare answers. Decide which answers you both think are correct.
Listen to your teacher and check your answers. Were you right?
1	
The human body has two hundred and six bones.
2	
The total number of countries in the world is 
. 
3	
A person with a good level of English knows about 
 words.
4	
A hippopotamus normally weighs about 
 kilograms.
5	
A normal person sleeps for about 
 hours every year.
6	
A day has 
 seconds.
7	
An Olympic swimming pool has 
 litres of water.
8	
 people live in the UK.
9	
The River Amazon is 
 kilometres long.
 
10	
The novel Emma, by Jane Austen, has 
 words.
 	
Complete the sentences with a number from the list.
1	
The human body has two hundred and six bones.
2	
The total number of countries in the world is 
. 
3	
A person with a good level of English knows about 
 words.
4	
A hippopotamus normally weighs about 
 kilograms.
5	
A normal person sleeps for about 
 hours every year.
6	
A day has 
 seconds.
7	
An Olympic swimming pool has 
 litres of water.
8	
 people live in the UK.
9	
The River Amazon is 
 kilometres long.
 
10	
The novel Emma, by Jane Austen, has 
 words.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Compare answers. Decide which answers you both think are correct.
Listen to your teacher and check your answers. Were you right?
​196  ​206  1,700  2,920  ​5,000  ​6,992  86,400  ​155,887  ​2,500,000  64,100,000
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 275@@
275
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Elementary  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10A  VOCABULARY  Places and buildings puzzle
	
There is a phrase under the arrow. Find the missing phrase, which is the title of the puzzle.
 b
 	
Read the clues and complete the puzzle.
 a
1	
If you need stamps or want to send a letter, you go here.
2	
You go here if you are very ill or have an accident.
3	
Trafalgar 
 is in London; Times 
 is in New York.
4	
A religious building where Christians go.
5	
You can buy aspirin or medicine here.
6	
Similar to clue 4, but for Muslims.
7	
To walk or drive across a river, you usually go over a 
.
8	
A building where the local government offices are.
9	
An open area of small stalls where you can buy fresh fruit, vegetables, and sometimes clothes.
 
10	
Broadway in New York is a street with a lot of 
.
 
11	
A building where you can see historical, scientific, or cultural objects.
 
12	
An area where you can pay to leave your car.
 
13	
The Thames is the 
 that goes through London.
 
14	
You go here when you want to get a bus or a train.
 
15	
You can see paintings and sculptures here.
1
2
3
4
5
’
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the puzzle and look at the definitions. Say the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
