@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Jerry Lambert
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 
Intermediate
Teacher’s Guide
@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2019
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2019 
2023  2022  2021  2020  2019
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly 
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford 
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for 
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked 
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers 
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach. 
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this 
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403603 0	
Teacher’s Guide
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world whose 
feedback has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both 
in Oxford and around the world) and the design team who have contributed 
their skills and ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and from 
Christina to Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina would also like 
to thank her children Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their constant inspiration.
We would also like to thank the following for permission to reproduce the following 
photographs: Getty Images pp.148 (couple/Thomas Barwick), 149 (students/
Fabrice Lerouge), 156 (man with laptop/Daniel Allan), 169 (Gloria De 
Piero/Oli Scarff), 169 (Sheku Kanneh-Mason/Walter McBride/WireImage), 
169 (Ina Menzer/Franziska Krug), 169 (Jessamyn Stanley/Gary Gershoff), 
210 (bride & groom/Lambert); Oxford University Press pp.167 (lottery 
ticket/Nicemonkey), 167 (ring/genky), 167 (perfume bottles/Metta image), 
186 (runners/wavebreakmedia), 212 (footballer/Brocreative); Shutterstock 
pp.149 (supermarket/antoniodiaz), 167 (Ouro Preto/nicolasdecorte), 
167 (beagle/Africa Studio), 178 (cooking/George Rudy), 178 (family/Monkey 
Business Images), 180 (finance icons/WonderfulPixel), 186 (runners/
pajtica), 210 (two girls/Lopolo), 210 (couple/VGstockstudio), 212 (man/
Kite_rin), 212 (smiling woman/stockfour), 212 (man/Fotoluminate LLC), 
212 (side portrait/mimagephotography), 212 (football/Ollyy), 212 (clapping/
BlueSkyImage), 212 (whistling/triocean), 212 (shocked man/ostill), 212 (eating/
Africa Studio), 212 (ice cream/Dmytro Zinkevych), 212 (woman/Raisa 
Kanareva), 212 (man pointing/ESB Professional), 212 (clothes/begalphoto), 
212 (boy with flower/Rafal Olechowski), 214 (apartments/VOJTa Herout), 
214 (old farm/Helen Hotson), 214 (modern house/Photographee.eu); 
Shutterstock Editorial pp.159 (Sully 2016/Moviestore/REX), 189 (Richard Ward/
Geoff Pugh/REX), 189 (Rachel Riley/Grant Pollard/Invision/AP/REX), 189 (John 
Cooper Clarke/Mike Webster/REX), 189 (Terry Hollands/Steve Meddle/REX), 
211 (Dunkirk 2017/Warner Bros/Kobal/REX), 211 (Wonder Woman 2017/
Moviestore/REX), 211 (Seven Samurai 1954/Toho/Kobal/REX).
Illustrations by: Paul Boston/Meiklejohn Illustration pp.151, 153, 162, 192; Mark 
Duffin p.155; Bess Harding pp.182, 191, 206; John Haslam pp.147, 152, 154, 
158, 160, 161, 163, 165, 168, 184; Joy Gosney p.204; Peter Hudspith pp.164, 
166, 193; Sophie Joyce p.191; Joanna Kerr p.181; Jerome Mireault/Colagene 
p.183; Colin Shelbourn p.207; Dave Smith p.157; Lucy Truman p.203; Kath 
Walker p.182
Grammar photocopiable activities written by: Amanda Begg
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Intermediate students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 1
p.28
File 2 A–B	
1&2 Revise and Check
p.41
File 3 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 2
p.54
File 4 A–B	
3&4 Revise and Check
p.66
File 5 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 3
p.79
File 6 A–B	
5&6 Revise and Check
p.92
File 7 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 4
p.106
File 8 A–B	
7&8 Revise and Check
p.120
File 9 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 5
p.132
File 10 A–B	
9&10 Revise and Check
p.143
Photocopiable activities
p.143
Introduction
p.144
Grammar activity answers
p.147
Grammar activity masters
p.169
Communicative activity instructions
p.176
Communicative activity masters
p.199
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.203
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A	Eating in…and out
present simple and 
continuous, action and  
non-action verbs
food and cooking
short and long vowel 
sounds
10
B	 Modern families
future forms: present 
continuous, be going to,  
will / won’t
family, adjectives of 
personality
sentence stress, word 
stress
14
Practical English Episode 14
introducing yourself and other people, reacting to what people say
2
16
A	Spending money
present perfect and  
past simple
money
o and or
20
B	 Changing lives
present perfect + for / 
since, present perfect 
continuous
strong adjectives: 
exhausted, amazed, etc.
sentence stress
24
Revise and Check 1&2
3
26
A	Survive the drive
choosing between 
comparatives and 
superlatives
transport
/ʃ/, /dʒ/, and /tʃ/, linking
30
B	 Men, women, and 
children
articles: a / an, the,  
no article
collocation: verbs / 
adjectives + prepositions
/ə/, two pronunciations  
of the
34
Practical English Episode 24
giving opinions, agreeing / disagreeing / responses
4
36
A	Bad manners?
obligation and prohibition: 
have to, must, should
phone language
silent consonants
40
B	 Yes, I can!
ability and possibility: can, 
could, be able to
-ed / -ing adjectives
sentence stress
44
Revise and Check 3&4
5
46
A	Sporting superstitions
past tenses: simple, 
continuous, perfect
sport
/ɔː/ and /ɜː/
50
B	 #thewaywemet
past and present habits  
and states
relationships
the letter s, used to
54
Practical English Episode 34
asking for permission, making requests, greeting someone you haven’t seen for  
a long time
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
talking about preferences, agreeing 
and disagreeing
understanding key words in questions, 
predicting content using visual clues
using your own experience to
understand a text
talking about the future, retelling  
a story
understanding a story
identifying reasons
talking about  money and experiences
listening for facts
understanding paragraphing
How long…?, talking about extremes
checking hypotheses, listening for 
specific information
understanding the order of events
tourist role-play, giving opinions
confirming predictions
confirming predictions
generalizing, talking about childhood
understanding points of view
understanding the main point in  
a paragraph
talking about annoying habits and 
manners
understanding problems and advice
assessing a point of view
talking about ability, assessing advice
making inferences, listening for 
specific information
understanding tips and examples
talking about sport, telling an 
anecdote
understanding an interview
understanding how examples support 
main points
talking about present and past habits, 
presenting an opinion
predicting the end of a story, 
understanding facts and supporting 
information
predicting the end of a story
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
6
56
A	Behind the scenes
passive (all tenses)
cinema
regular and irregular past 
participles
60
B	 Every picture tells  
a story
modals of deduction: might, 
can’t, must
the body
diphthongs
64
Revise and Check 5&6
7
66
A	Live and learn
first conditional and future 
time clauses + when, until, 
etc.
education
the letter u
70
B	 The hotel of Mum  
and Dad
second conditional, 
choosing between 
conditionals 
houses
sentence stress, the  
letter c
74
Practical English Episode 4	
making and responding to suggestions, making an excuse and apologizing
8
76
A	The right job for you
choosing between gerunds 
and infinitives
work
word stress
80
B	 Have a nice day!
reported speech: sentences 
and questions
shopping, making nouns 
from verbs
the letters ai
84
Revise and Check 7&8
9
86
A	Lucky encounters
third conditional
making adjectives and 
adverbs
sentence rhythm, weak 
pronunciation of have
90
B	 Digital detox
quantifiers
electronic devices
linking, ough and augh
94
Practical English Episode 54
asking indirect questions
10
96
A	Idols and icons
relative clauses: defining 
and non-defining
compound nouns
word stress
100
B	 And the murderer is…
question tags
crime
intonation in question 
tags
104
Revise and Check 9&10
106
Communication
115
Writing
125
Listening
132
Grammar Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
talking about films
listening for content words
understanding the main point in a 
paragraph
talking about profile pictures,  
making deductions
checking assumption, understanding 
the order of events
understanding humour, checking 
assumptions
talking about school, assessing 
opinions
listening for numbers
understanding points of view
discussing pros and cons, describing 
ideal situations
using prediction to understand 
content
understanding pros and cons
making a presentation
listening and making notes
predicting from evidence
talking about shopping habits
understanding the order of events, 
understanding attitude and tone
predicting the end of a story
talking about luck
listening to summarize
understanding topic sentences
discussing digital habits
understanding attitude
understanding technical language
talking about people and things that 
you admire
listening for facts
reading with purpose
police interview role-play
taking notes
understanding 
referencing
152
Vocabulary Bank
165
Irregular verbs
166
Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 8@@
8
	 	
Course overview
Every lesson focuses on high-frequency vocabulary and 
common lexical areas, but keeps the load realistic. All new 
vocabulary is given with the phonemic script alongside, to 
help students with the pronunciation of new words.
Many lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which 
help present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an 
audio model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
•	 Practice in pronouncing sounds, words, and connected 
speech clearly
•	 Awareness of rules and patterns
•	 Focus on word and sentence stress
Clear, intelligible pronunciation (not perfection) should be 
the goal of students at this level. There is a pronunciation 
focus in every lesson, which integrates clear pronunciation 
into grammar and vocabulary practice. There is an emphasis 
on the sounds most useful for communication, on word 
stress, and on sentence rhythm. Online Practice contains 
the Sound Bank videos which show students the mouth 
positions to make English vowels and consonants. They 
can also review the pronunciation from the lesson at their 
own speed.  There is more practice of pronunciation in the 
Workbook, with audio, which can be found on Online 
Practice.
Speaking
•	 Motivating and accessible topics
•	 The key words and phrases necessary to discuss a topic
•	 Confidence that their language is clear and intelligible
•	 Practice in more extended speaking
•	 Time to organize thoughts before speaking
Lack of self-confidence can be a barrier to successful 
speaking at this level. Each speaking task is supported by 
the necessary Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation and 
designed to help students to feel a sense of progress and 
to show that the number of situations in which they can 
communicate effectively is growing. 
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A and B Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
•	 videos that can be used in class in every File: Practical 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
•	 Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, an End-of-course Test, and an Entry Test, which you 
can use at the beginning of the course
•	 photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities for 
every A and B lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Intermediate 
students need? 
The Intermediate level is often a milestone for students: at 
this point, many students really begin to ‘take off’ in terms of 
their ability to communicate. Some students, however, may 
see the Intermediate level as a ‘plateau’ and feel that they are 
no longer making the progress they were before. Students 
at this level need fresh challenges to help them to realize 
how much they know and to make their passive knowledge 
active, together with a steady input of new language. 
 Grammar
•	 Consolidation and extension of main grammatical 
structures
•	 Practice in using different tenses together
•	 Student-friendly reference material
We have tried to provide contexts for new language that 
will engage students, using real-life stories and situations, 
humour, and suspense. The Grammar Banks give students 
a single, easy-to-access grammar reference section, with 
example sentences with audio, clear rules, and common 
errors. There are at least two practice exercises for each 
grammar point. Students can look again at the grammar 
presented in the lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook 
provides a variety of practice exercises and the opportunity 
for students to use the new grammar to express their  
own ideas.
Vocabulary
•	 Systematic expansion of topic-based lexical areas
•	 Building new words by adding prefixes and suffixes
•	 Opportunities to put new vocabulary into practice
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 9@@
9
and organization to help break the writing process down 
into a series of achievable tasks.
Students can use Online Practice to develop their 
writing skills further. The Discussion board also provides 
opportunities for informal written interaction.
Practical English
•	 Consolidate and extension of functional language
•	 Knowing what to say in typical social situations
•	 Getting used to listening to faster, more colloquial speech
The five Practical English lessons revise and extend 
common situations such as introductions or making polite 
requests, and introduce and practise the language for 
new situations, like expressing opinions or apologizing. 
The story line involving the two main characters, Jenny 
and Rob, continues from where it left off in English File 
Pre-intermediate but it is self-standing, so it can be used 
equally with students who did not use the previous level. 
The lessons also highlight other key `Social English’ phrases, 
for example Could you tell me why… ? and If you don’t mind. 
On Online Practice, students can use the interactive video 
to record themselves and hear their own voice in the 
complete conversation. They can also listen and record the 
Social English phrases. The Workbook provides practice of 
all the language from the Practical English lessons.
Revision
•	 Regular review
•	 Motivating reference and practice material
•	 A sense of progress
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a 
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page 
revises the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of 
each File. 
The right-hand page provides a series of skills-based 
challenges, including street interviews, and helps students 
to measure their progress in terms of competence. These 
pages are designed to be used flexibly according to the 
needs of your students. On Online Practice, for each File, 
there are three Check your 
progress activities. The first is 
a multiple choice activity for 
students to test themselves on 
the Grammar and Vocabulary 
from the File. The second is a 
dictation related to the topic 
and the language of the File 
for students to practise the 
new language in context. 
Finally, there is a Challenge 
activity, which involves a mini-
research project based on a 
topic from the File. Every two 
Files, the Workbook contains 
a Can you remember...? page, 
which provides a cumulative 
review of language students 
have covered in the 
Student’s Book.
Listening
•	 Confidence-building, achievable tasks
•	 Practice in `getting the gist’ and listening for detail
•	 Practice in dealing with authentic spoken language
At Intermediate level students need confidence-building 
tasks which are progressively more challenging in terms 
of speed, length, and language difficulty, but are always 
achievable. Longer listenings are broken into separate parts 
with different tasks, to avoid memory overload. Students 
are exposed to a wide variety of accents, including some 
non-native speakers of English. On Online Practice, for each 
File students can find further listening practice related to the 
topic. They can also access the listening activities from every 
lesson, to practise in their own time, and to read the script to 
check anything that they have found difficult.
Reading
•	 Engaging topics and stimulating material
•	 Exposure to a wide variety of authentic text types
•	 Challenging tasks which help them read more skillfully
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to provide material where 
they feel there is a reason to read and tasks which help them 
to get the most out of a text. This level contains a variety 
of readings from real sources (the British press, magazines, 
websites, forums, infographics) and have been chosen for 
their intrinsic interest and potential to generate a reaction. 
The opinions expressed in these texts do not necessarily 
reflect the view of the English File authors or of Oxford 
University Press.
Writing
•	 Clear models for a variety of text types
•	 An awareness of register, structure, and fixed phrases
•	 A focus on ‘micro’ writing skills
It is often difficult to motivate students to write at this level. 
In English File Intermediate each guided writing activity flows 
out of a main lesson to ensure that students have plenty of 
ideas start with and focuses on key areas of language, style, 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 10@@
10
	 	
Course overview
Workbook 
For language practice after class.
•	 All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Practical English
•	 Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
•	 Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
•	 Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 10 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A and B lessons
Each File contains two four-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the B lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Practical English
Every two Files (starting from File 1) there is a two-page lesson which 
teaches high-frequency, everyday English (e.g. language for asking for 
permission and making requests) and social English (useful phrases like 
How come you’re so late? and I think I’ll go home if you don’t mind). 
The video is in the form of a drama, featuring the two main characters, 
Rob and Jenny. The lessons have a storyline which runs through the level.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, Listening, 
Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and  
Sound Bank. 
The Student’s Book is also available as  
an eBook.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or 
catch up on a class they have missed.
•	 Look again: students can review the language from  
every lesson.
•	 Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, 
Writing, Listening, and Speaking practice.
•	 Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main 
language from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an 
extra challenge.
•	 Interactive video to practise the language from the Practical  
English lessons.
•	 Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
•	 Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, 
dyslexia-friendly texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
•	 Individual sounds
•	 Sounds in key words
•	 Speak and record  
functionality
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
•	 an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
•	 Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
•	 Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
•	 Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 50 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 144 – 168
•	 An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp.169 – 198
•	 Extra speaking practice for every A and B lesson
Vocabulary
see pp.199 – 217
•	 An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 143 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
•	 All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
•	 Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 Answer keys
•	 All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
•	 All the Workbook audio files and scripts
•	 Tests and assessment material, including: an Entry Test; 
Progress Tests; an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every 
File; and complete test for every File. There are A and B 
versions of all the main tests and audio files for all the 
Listening tests
•	 CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
•	 The complete Student’s Book
•	 Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
•	 Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
•	 Dyslexia-friendly texts
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
•	 Short documentary, drama, or 
animation for students at the 
end of even-numbered  
B lessons (2B, 4B, 6B, etc.)
Practical English
•	 A unique series of videos that 
goes with the Practical English 
lessons in the Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
•	 Street interviews filmed in 
London, New York, and Oxford to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook,  
and the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 12@@
1A
12
	1A	 Eating in…and out
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Write this puzzle on the 
board, or read the categories out one by one, and get  
pairs / small groups to write down their answers:
ONE RED FRUIT, ONE YELLOW FRUIT, ONE GREEN FRUIT
TWO KINDS OF FOOD THAT SOME PEOPLE ARE ALLERGIC TO
THREE KINDS OF FOOD THAT COME FROM MILK
FOUR VEGETABLES THAT YOU CAN PUT IN A SALAD
FIVE CONTAINERS THAT YOU CAN BUY FOOD IN
SIX THINGS THAT PEOPLE SOMETIMES HAVE FOR BREAKFAST
Elicit answers and write them on the board (eliciting the 
spelling from Sts if you want to revise the alphabet).
1	VOCABULARY  food and cooking
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
know what a quote is and the website Pinterest. 
	 Give Sts time to complete the gaps with a word or phrase 
from the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any words 
your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
1  pear    2  pasta    3  onions    4  tomato, fruit salad
5  cake    6  cookie
b	 Give Sts time to decide which quote they like best 
and why.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other their 
favourite quote.
	 Get some feedback from the class. You could also tell the 
class which quote is your favourite and why.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Food and cooking  
on p.152. 
Vocabulary notes
Food
In this lexical group, as in many others, there are large 
numbers of useful words, and a selection has been made 
in order not to overwhelm Sts. However, words which 
are important in your Sts’ country because they are very 
common or popular foods may have been left out and it 
is important to teach them and get Sts to add them to the 
Vocabulary Bank page, so that they are equipped with 
the vocabulary they need to do the speaking activities 
which follow.
Cooking
Sts may ask what the difference is between baked and 
roast, as both mean cooked in the oven: baked is used 
for bread, cakes, and most sweet things, and also fruit or 
vegetables. Roast always means cooked with fat, and is 
used especially for meat and potatoes cooked in fat.
	 Focus on 1 Food and get Sts to do a individually or  
in pairs. 
	 e 1.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
 G   present simple and continuous, action and  
non-action verbs
 V   food and cooking
 P   short and long vowel sounds
Lesson plan
The topic of this first lesson is food and cooking. The lesson 
begins with some quotes about food, which lead into the 
Vocabulary Bank, where Sts extend their knowledge of 
words and phrases related to food and cooking. There is 
then a pronunciation focus on short and long vowel sounds, 
which is relevant to this lexical area and will be especially 
useful if your Sts are not familiar with the English File  
sound–picture system. Sts then do a food questionnaire 
before listening to six people, each answering one of the 
questions in the questionnaire. Sts read an article about new 
research which shows that eating at the right time can make 
us happier and healthier.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts listen to an interview 
with Marianna Leivaditaki, the head chef at Morito, a popular 
restaurant in London. Extracts from the interview lead to 
the grammar focus, which is on the present simple and 
continuous, and Sts are introduced to the concept of action 
and non-action verbs. The lesson ends with a speaking 
activity where Sts discuss statements related to food, 
cooking, and restaurants.
If you would like to begin the first lesson without the 
book, there is a Communicative photocopiable Getting to 
know you activity on pp.176–177 (instructions p.169), two 
photocopiable revision Grammar activities on pp.147–148 
(key p.144), and one Vocabulary photocopiable Classroom 
language activity on p.203 (instructions p.199).
There is an Entry Test on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, which 
you can give Sts before starting the course.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  Introduction What do you remember? p.147 
Introduction Don’t make these mistakes! p.148  
present simple and continuous, action and non-action 
verbs p.149 
Communicative  Getting to know you pp.176–177 
(instructions p.169)  
Describing a photo p.178 (instructions p.169) 
Vocabulary  Classroom language p.203 (instructions p.199) 
Food and cooking p.204 (instructions p.199)
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Entry Test
For students
Workbook  1A
Online Practice  1A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 13@@
13
1A
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to make a true sentence about 
themselves using each phrasal verb.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Tell Sts to look at the list of adjectives that are used to 
describe food. You might want to point out that hot here 
means the same as spicy. 
	 Either put Sts in pairs or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, elicit their ideas. Elicit the meaning 
of each adjective and drill pronunciation.
Possible answers
fresh	
fish, vegetables, etc.
frozen	
peas, fish, pizza etc.
hot / spicy	
sauce, chicken, etc.
low-fat	
yogurt, cheese, etc.
raw	
fish, vegetables, etc.
tinned	
tomatoes, tuna, etc.
e	 e 1.5  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Point out that the first 
one (raw beetroot) has been done for them. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to complete the task.
	 Check answers. You may want to point out to Sts that 
yogurt can also be spelled yoghurt. Model and drill 
pronunciation of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
2  spicy prawns, hot food    3  fresh tuna    4  low-fat yogurts    
5  tinned red peppers    6  frozen raspberries
e 1.5
1	 A	 What do I need to make the soup?
	
B	 Well, first of all, you need raw beetroot, not the cooked kind. 
Three or four should be enough.
2	 A	 What are you going to have as a starter?
	
B	 I think I’ll have the spicy prawns. I love hot food.
3	 A	 How should I cook this fresh tuna?
	
B	 Just grill it for a few minutes on each side.
4	 A	 Are you going to the shops? Could you get me some low-fat 
yogurts?
	
B	 Sure. What flavour do you want?
	
A	 Just plain.
5	 A	 What else can I put in this rice salad?
	
B	 Well, we’ve got some tinned red peppers. How about those?
6	 A	 I never buy frozen raspberries.
	
B	 No, they taste OK, but the texture just isn’t the same.
2	PRONUNCIATION  short and long vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
Sts work on distinguishing between two similar sounds 
(one short and one long) and they look at the typical 
spellings for these sounds. Then there are exercises 
to show Sts how useful it is for them to be able to 
understand the phonetic transcription of words given in 
print or online dictionaries.
a	 Focus on the eight sound pictures. If your Sts are not 
familiar with them, explain that the sound pictures give a 
clear example of a word with the target sound, and they 
help Sts remember the pronunciation of the phonetic 
symbol (there is one for each of the 44 sounds of English).
	 Check answers.
e 1.2
Food and cooking
1 Food
Fish and seafood
1	 crab
7	 lobster
5	 mussels
6	 prawns
2	 salmon
3	 squid
4	 tuna
Meat
11	 beef
12	 chicken
9	 duck
10	 lamb
8	 pork
Fruit and vegetables
20	 aubergine
14	 avocado
25	 beetroot
13	 cabbage
24	 cherries
22	 courgette
18	 cucumber
23	 grapes
27	 green beans
26	 lemon
19	 mango
15	 melon
21	 peach
16	 pear
28	 raspberries
17	 red pepper
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs to discuss the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback and write any new words on the 
board.
	 Focus on 2 Cooking and get Sts to do a individually or  
in pairs.
	 e 1.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.3
2 Cooking
6	 baked
5	 boiled
1	 fried
2	 grilled
4	 roast
3	 steamed
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to tell a partner how 
they like the four items to be cooked.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
	 Finally, focus on 3 Phrasal verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 e 1.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.4
3 Phrasal verbs
1	 I eat out a lot because I often don’t have time to cook. Luckily, 
there are lots of good restaurants near where I live.
2	 I’m trying to cut down on coffee at the moment. I’m only having 
one cup at breakfast.
3	 The doctor told me that I should completely cut out all cheese 
and dairy products from my diet.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 14@@
14
1A
cheer yourself up = to make yourself happier
miss /mɪs/ = feel sad because you can’t have sth
b	 e 1.7  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
quickly read all the questions in Your food profile again, 
and make sure they understand them.
	 Point out that the first one has been done for Sts.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 1.7
Emma
Definitely tea. I went to Slovenia on holiday recently, and I was 
staying in a hotel and they didn’t have any real English breakfast tea. 
I really missed it in the mornings. 
Sarah
I absolutely love pasta, and I try and eat it whenever I can, so I would 
find it really difficult to…to live without pasta. Pasta and pesto is my 
favourite meal, and I have it at least twice a week, normally when my 
husband’s away, because he’s always telling me not to eat so much 
pasta.
John
Yes, er, quite often. My wife’s from Asia, from Indonesia, so we 
often…we often eat hot food. Erm, I love hot food, er, curries, any 
Indonesian food. I also love Thai food, like a good green curry.
Rob
I guess, like a lot of people, I tend to eat chocolate in that situation – 
chocolate or ice cream, maybe. Definitely something sweet.
James
Only caffeine, actually, which I didn’t use to be. I used to drink a 
lot of coffee, but a few years ago I started noticing that it was…
it was affecting me quite badly when I drank coffee. I was getting 
headaches and, er, I’ve never been tested for it, but, er, I’ve stopped 
drinking caffeine – caffeine in coffee – and I think…I think I feel 
better.
Sean
I like spicy ones, and I like them with meat, so maybe pepperoni. 
That’s what I always end up ordering in an Italian restaurant.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each speaker 
for Sts to match each one to a question. Play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Sarah  6    John  2c    Rob  4a    James  3    Sean  1b
c	 Tell Sts that they are going to listen to the six speakers 
again and that this time they must write down the food or 
drink the speakers mention.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Emma  tea   
Sarah  pasta   
John  curries, Indonesian food, Thai food   
Rob  chocolate, ice cream   
James  caffeine / coffee    
Sean  meat / pepperoni
	 Elicit and drill the first two words and sounds: fish /ɪ/ and 
tree /iː/. 
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to work out the other 
six words and sounds.
	 Check answers.
3  cat /æ/    4  car /ɑː/    5  clock /ɒ/    6  horse /ɔː/    
7  bull /ʊ/    8  boot /uː/
	 Finally, ask Sts how they know which sounds are long.
The two dots /ː/ tell you that a sound is long.
b	 e 1.6  Focus on the instructions and point out to Sts that 
they have to match the letters in pink in the phrases to 
the sounds in a.
	 Give Sts time, in pairs, to complete the task. Tell them that 
this kind of exercise is easier if they say the phrases aloud 
to themselves. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. Point out to Sts that tuna is pronounced  
/ˈtjuːnə/, not /ˈtuːnə/.
crab salad  3    grilled squid  1    a jar of raspberry jam  4  ​  ​ 
steamed green beans  2    a good cook  7    hot sausages  5  ​
raw pork  6    ​tuna with beetroot  8
e 1.6
3	 cat /æ/  crab salad
1	 fish /ɪ/  grilled squid
4	 car /ɑː/  a jar of raspberry jam
2	 tree /iː/  steamed green beans
7	 bull /ʊ/  a good cook
5	 clock /ɒ/  hot sausages
6	 horse /ɔː/  raw pork
8	 boot /uː/  tuna with beetroot
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could play the audio first for Sts to  
hear the phrases before they do the matching activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding key	
	 words in questions
a	 Focus on the questionnaire and give Sts time, in pairs, to 
try to guess what the words and phrases in bold mean.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
topping /ˈtɒpɪŋ/ = a layer of food that you put on top of a dish, 
to add flavour
filling /ˈfɪlɪŋ/ = food put inside a sandwich
ready-made /redi ˈmeɪd/ = prepared in advance so that you can 
eat it immediately or after heating it
takeaway /ˈteɪkəweɪ/ = a meal that you buy in a restaurant that 
cooks and sells food that you take away and eat somewhere 
else, usually at home
allergic /əˈlɜːdʒɪk/ = when you react badly or feel sick when you 
eat sth
intolerant /ɪnˈtɒlərənt/ = not able to eat particular foods 
without becoming ill
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 15@@
15
1A
5	LISTENING  predicting content using visual clues
a	 Focus on the introduction and read it as a class. You may 
want to elicit from Sts that Cretan is the adjective used for 
someone from Crete, a Greek island.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts some comprehension questions, 
e.g. Where is Marianna’s mother from? (Scotland), Who owned 
a seafood restaurant? (Marianna’s parents), Where does 
Marianna work now? (Morito / London), etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at the photos and 
then tell each other how they think each extract finishes.
	 Get some ideas from the class, but don’t tell Sts if they are 
correct.
b	 e 1.8  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 1 of an 
interview with Marianna, and they must check their 
answers to a.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  my dad caught    ​2  lemon and olive oil    ​3  a small blue 
notebook    ​4  animals, a garden, olive trees, and grapes    ​
5  Greek sandwich with pitta bread
e 1.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
I = interviewer, M = Marianna Leivaditaki
Part 1
I	 With me today I have Marianna Leivaditaki, head chef of the 
Morito restaurant in Hackney. Marianna, what was your favourite 
food when you were a child?
M	 At home we ate a funny mixture because of my parents. Fresh 
fish, bacon and eggs for breakfast on Sundays, and traditional 
apple pies. But my favourite was fish. We ate fish every day, which 
my dad caught. In fact, my dad still goes fishing every night!
I	 Wow!
M	 Yes, we were very lucky because not all families could do that 
– could eat fish every day. Even on an island, fish is expensive, 
unfortunately. 
I	 Did your dad catch fish for the family or for the restaurant?
M	 For both. Except for lobsters. When he caught a lobster, he never 
sold it; it was always for us. We boiled it and ate it with lemon 
and olive oil. You don’t need anything except lemon and olive oil 
when fish and seafood is really fresh. That’s how I cook lobsters 
nowadays in the restaurant, in Morito.
I	 Were you interested in cooking when you were a child?
M	 Oh yes. I spent every evening in our restaurant, and instead of 
playing with the other children, I usually helped in the kitchen. 
I wrote down recipes which I wanted to cook for the family in a 
small blue notebook.
I	 So your love of food and cooking came from your parents?
M	 From my parents and also from my aunt, and from many inspiring 
ladies who surrounded me when I was growing up. My aunt, 
Thia Koula, had animals, a garden, olive trees, and grapes. In 
the summer, I often spent all day with her. She knew everything 
about wild food in Crete. She only ate what she had grown or 
found or made herself. It’s such a beautiful way to eat.
I	 Did you ever eat out as a child?
M	 Never in the evening, because our restaurant was open for dinner 
seven days a week, but occasionally my mum used to buy me 
and my brother souvlaki for lunch, a sort of Greek sandwich with 
pitta bread. Inside it has pork, tomato, red onion, and lots of thick 
yogurt.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions in Your food profile, giving as much information 
as possible. They should see if they have anything in 
common.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering one 
or two of the questions yourself before putting Sts in pairs.
	 Monitor and help with any food vocabulary.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before Sts give feedback, you may want 
to teach them the phrases Both of us… and Neither of us…, 
which they can use to show what they have in common. 
Highlight that the verb is plural after Both of us and singular 
after Neither of us.
	 Get feedback from different pairs to find out if they have 
anything in common.
4	READING  using your own experience to	
	 understand a text
a	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other at what 
time they usually do each activity. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Quickly revise telling the time by drawing 
different clocks on the board and eliciting the times. Remind 
Sts that we can tell the time in two ways, e.g. six thirty or half 
past six.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the question.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Give Sts time to read the article again.
	 Then in pairs, get Sts to answer questions 1–6.
	 Check answers.
1	 Because you’re less likely to be at risk of heart disease as an 
adult.
2	 It can make us more mentally alert.
3	 Having steak and chips for lunch means we digest it better. 
Having it for dinner makes our blood glucose levels higher.
4	 Because our sense of smell and taste are at their best at  
this time.
5	 a  yoga or going for a walk  b  running or cycling
6	 Because it helps us to go to sleep.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary, but not the words  
in d. Model and drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  heart    2  stomach    3  liver    4  brain    5  muscles    6  lung
a	 We have one heart, stomach, liver, and brain. 
b	 We have two lungs.
c	 We have more than two muscles.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the two questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could tell Sts 
what you think about the information in the article.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 16@@
16
1A
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the two scripts on p.125, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other about the 
three questions.
	 Get feedback from various pairs, or simply ask the whole 
class. You could also tell them about yourself.
6	GRAMMAR  present simple and continuous,	
	 action and non-action verbs
a	 Give Sts time to circle the correct form in each sentence. 
	 Then get them to compare with a partner.
b	 e 1.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Give Sts time, in their pairs, to say why they think each 
form is used.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to explain why (in their L1 if 
necessary) the other form is wrong. For 1, they may simply 
‘feel’ that need is correct without being able to explain 
why. This would be a good moment to explain about 
action / non-action verbs (see Grammar notes).
1	 don’t need (It’s a non-action verb, not normally used in the 
continuous.)
2	 I’m making (It’s a temporary action which is only happening 
this week.)
3	 I go (It’s a habitual action.)
e 1.10
1	 You don’t need anything except lemon and olive oil when fish 
and seafood is really fresh.
2	 This week, for example, I’m making ntakos, a Cretan salad made 
with fresh goat's cheese, tomato and bread...
3	 I go to Crete maybe four or five times a year.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.132. If your Sts 
haven’t used the English File series before, explain that all 
the grammar rules and exercises are in this part of the book. 
Grammar notes
Present simple
At this level, Sts should be clear about the form and use of 
the present simple.
Remind Sts of the difference in pronunciation of the third 
person -s, i.e. /s/ (verbs ending in an unvoiced consonant, 
e.g. cooks, eats), /z/ (verbs ending in a vowel sound or 
voiced consonant, e.g. plays, has), and /ɪz/ (verbs where 
you have added -es, e.g. watches, finishes).
Remind them too of the irregular pronunciation of  
(he / she / it) says /sez/ and does /dʌz/.
 !   The present simple is also occasionally used to refer to 
the future, e.g. The next train leaves at 7.30. This use is not 
dealt with here.
Present continuous
Sts who don’t have a continuous form in their language 
may need reminding that this is the form they must 
use when they are talking about temporary actions in 
progress now, this week, this month, etc.
Remind Sts of the use of the present continuous for future 
arrangements. This will be revised fully together with the 
other future forms in 1B.
c	 Now tell Sts to listen again and write down anything else 
about each photo.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then check 
answers.
See script 1.8
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after 
Marianna mentions each photo to give Sts time to make 
notes.
d	 e 1.9  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Part 2 of 
the interview. Focus on the questions and quickly go 
through them.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. You could 
pause after each question is answered to give Sts time to 
make notes. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 She studied psychology at Kent University. She travelled 
round southern Europe and South America. She went back to 
Crete and worked in the family restaurant.
2	 When she was a student, she used to save money and go and 
eat there. Because she wanted to work there.
3	 She became head chef.
4	 It has more Cretan dishes on the menu.
5	 Four or five times a year. They share all the food and always 
order too much.
e 1.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Part 2
I	 So did you always want to be a chef, to have your own restaurant?
M	 No, not at all. I wanted to be a psychologist, and when I was 
eighteen, I came to the UK to study at Kent University. Then I 
decided I didn’t want to be a psychologist after all, and I went 
travelling for a bit – I’d saved some money at university because 
I worked in the evenings. I went all around southern Europe and 
also to South America, to Ecuador. I tried all sorts of different 
dishes and fell in love with food again, so I went back to Crete and 
worked in our family restaurant for two years.
I	 Why did you come back to the UK?
M	 Well, I wanted to continue working as a chef, but I needed a 
bigger challenge. And when I was a student in the UK and I 
missed good food, I used to save money and go to London to 
have dinner in the restaurant called Moro. It wasn’t Greek food, 
but it was Mediterranean, Spanish, North African, and I loved it. 
So when I came back to London, I went to Moro and I said, ‘I want 
a job’ – and they gave me one.
I	 And what happened then?
M	 Well, really slowly, through hard work, and after seven years, I 
became head chef. It was magic. And then the owners of Moro, 
Samantha and Samuel Clark, suggested that I help them open 
Morito.
I	 How is Morito different from Moro?
M	 It’s the same inspiration, and many of the dishes are similar, but 
because I run the kitchen, I have been able to have more Cretan 
dishes on the menu – dishes from my childhood. This week, for 
example, I’m making ntakos, a Cretan salad made with fresh 
goat’s cheese, tomato, and bread.
I	 Do you go back to Crete much?
M	 Yes, I go to Crete maybe four or five times a year. My family’s 
restaurant is closed now, but I go out for lunch with my friends, 
the people I miss when I’m in London. Food comes, and we share 
everything. We always order too much, and by the end of it we 
feel incredibly full.
I	 Well, Marianna, it's been great chatting to you, and thanks for 
coming in.
M	 Thank you very much for having me.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 17@@
17
1A
On a typical day
•  What do you usually have for breakfast?
•  Do you drink fizzy drinks, e.g. Coke? How many glasses do you 
drink a day?
•  Where do you normally have lunch?
•  What do you usually have for lunch during the week?
•  Do you ever cook? What do you make?
•  Do you prefer eating at home or eating out?
At the moment / Nowadays
•  Are you taking vitamins or food supplements at the moment?
•  Are you trying to cut down on anything at the moment?
•  Do you need to buy any food today?
•  Do you want anything to eat right now?
•  Is the diet in your country getting better or worse?
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write the full questions on the 
board and underline the stressed words to help Sts get the 
rhythm correct (see answer key above).
	 Monitor as Sts work in pairs, making sure they are using 
the present simple and continuous correctly. The focus 
here should be on accurate practice of the grammar.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and go through statements 1–6, 
making sure Sts understand each one.
	 Give Sts time to decide whether they agree with each 
statement and to think of three reasons or examples for 
each one.
b	 Focus on the Agreeing and disagreeing box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and tell them to spend at 
least two minutes discussing each topic.
	 Monitor and encourage Sts to use the phrases for 
agreeing and disagreeing. Don’t over-correct, but make 
a note of any errors that you may want to focus on when 
they finish speaking.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   If your Sts are confident, you could give 
them some more sophisticated language for agreeing and 
disagreeing, e.g. I completely / totally (dis)agree, I agree up to a 
point, I couldn’t agree more.
Action and non-action verbs
These are often called Dynamic / Stative or Progressive / 
Non-progressive verbs. We have called them Action / 
Non-action, as we think this helps to make the difference 
clearer for Sts.
When Sts look at the list of common non-action verbs, 
you may want to point out that enjoy isn’t there. It 
describes a state or feeling, so Sts might expect it to be 
a non-action verb, but in fact it’s an exception, and is an 
action verb, e.g. Are you enjoying your dinner? You could 
also point out that look is normally a non-action verb (e.g. 
That looks delicious), but look at is an action verb (e.g. We’re 
looking at the menu).
There are several other verbs which can be both action 
and non-action, e.g. see, feel. The Grammar Bank uses 
have and think as clear examples.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 1.11, 
e 1.12 and e 1.13 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Verbs that can be both action and  
non-action box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  is coming    2  doesn’t want    3  isn’t working    
4  seems    5  aren’t speaking    6  thinks    7  Do we need    
8  I’m having    9  I love    10  tastes
b	
1	 I have high cholesterol, so I never eat fried food.
2	 Are you taking any vitamins at the moment?
3	 Don’t eat the spinach if you don’t like it.
4	 Does your boyfriend know how to cook fish?
5	 We order takeaway pizzas once a week.
6	 What is / ’s your mother making? It smells delicious!
7	 You look sad. What are you thinking about?
8	 I think the diet in my country is getting worse.
9	 How often do you have seafood?
10	 I don’t usually cook red meat.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the question prompts and elicit / explain the 
meaning of diet here (= the food that you eat and drink 
regularly). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Now elicit that the question prompts under On a typical 
day are habitual actions, so should be present simple, and 
Sts must add do you. The ones under At the moment / 
Nowadays are things in progress, and if the verbs are 
action verbs, they should be present continuous; if they 
are non-action, they should be present simple.
	 Elicit the questions from the class to check that they are 
forming the questions correctly, and that they are using 
the correct rhythm, i.e. stressing the ‘information’ words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 18@@
18
1B
	1B	 Modern families
6	 An adopted child is one who has become part of a family 
which is not the one in which he or she was born. An only 
child is a child who doesn’t have brothers or sisters.
7	 ‘Brothers and sisters’ and ‘siblings’ mean the same thing, but 
sibling is a more formal word and is used for both genders.
8	 Your immediate family are your parents, children, brothers, 
and sisters. Your extended family is anyone related to you who 
is not your immediate family, e.g. your uncles, aunts, cousins, 
grandparents, etc.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Then read the introduction 
together and make sure Sts understand survey (= an 
investigation of the opinions, behaviour, etc. of a particular 
group of people) and statistics (= a collection of information 
shown in numbers). You might also want to check they 
know the meaning of the noun row (= argument).
	 Now give Sts time, in pairs, to complete the gaps with the 
numbers from the list.
c	 e 1.14  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  14%    2  45%    3  40%    4  30    5  32    6  10%    7  17%    8  2
e 1.14
The modern family
Family life is changing all over the world, and it’s not just the 
structure of the family, but also its habits. A recent survey of British 
family life showed some surprising statistics.
Family structure
Sixty per cent of families have married parents.
Twenty-two per cent are single-parent families. Only fourteen per 
cent of the single parents are men.
Forty-five per cent of families have one child, forty per cent have 
two, and fifteen per cent have three or more.
Eleven per cent of families have stepchildren.
On average, women get married at thirty and men at thirty-two.
Family habits 
Twenty per cent of families only eat together once or twice a week, 
and ten per cent never eat at the same time.
They visit friends or extended family twice a month.
Seventeen per cent of people have family members who they never 
speak to or contact.
Seventy-five per cent of people are happiest with their families, and 
seventeen per cent with their friends.
The average family has two rows each day, and the most common 
cause is children or teenagers refusing to put down their phones or 
tablets.
	 Remind Sts that this survey was done in the UK. Give 
them time to think which results they think would be very 
different for their country.
	 Get some feedback.
d	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of argue (= to speak angrily to somebody 
because you disagree with them). 
	 Give Sts time to think about their answers.
	 Now go through the Politely refusing to talk about 
something box. Point out that in class Sts do a lot of 
asking and answering questions, and if there are any 
which they would feel uncomfortable answering, to 
respond with this phrase. 
 G   future forms: present continuous, be going to, will / won’t
 V   family, adjectives of personality
 P   sentence stress, word stress
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is the family. Sts begin by revising 
family vocabulary and talking about family life in the UK 
and in their country. The grammar focus is on the three 
most common future forms. Sts will have studied them 
all separately, but probably haven’t had to discriminate 
between them before. There is then a pronunciation focus 
on sentence stress patterns in future forms. 
In the second half of the lesson, the focus shifts to 
relationships between siblings. Sts extend their knowledge 
of adjectives to describe personality, and also practise the 
word stress in these adjectives. Sts then read an article about 
how birth order affects our personality. The lesson ends 
with a listening and speaking about a time they or a sibling 
behaved badly, and a writing focus on describing a person.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  future forms: present continuous, be going to, 
will / won't p.150 
Communicative  Who is it? p.179 (instructions p.169) 
Vocabulary  Personality p.205 (instructions p.199)
For students
Workbook  1B
Online Practice  1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise family words by drawing a quick family tree of your 
family (including, if possible, aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces, 
and cousins) and tell Sts a little about them.
Put Sts in pairs and get them to do the same.
1	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  family
a	 Books open. In pairs, Sts discuss the difference between 
the words and phrases in 1–8.
	 Check answers.
1	 A father is the male parent of a child. A parent is the mother 
or father.
2	 A stepmother is married to your father, but she isn’t your 
biological mother.
3	 A brother-in-law is the brother of your husband / wife, or your 
sister’s husband.
4	 A stepsister is the daughter of your stepmother or stepfather 
and their previous husband or wife. She isn’t biologically 
related to you. A half-sister shares one parent with you, either 
your mother or your father.
5	 A grandfather is your father or mother’s father. A great-
grandfather is your father or mother’s grandfather.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 19@@
19
1B
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the difference between a plan or intention, and an 
arrangement (= a plan for which you have already made 
preparations, e.g. booking a ticket, a hotel, or a table in a 
restaurant).
	 Put Sts in pairs to complete the task. 
	 Check answers.
a plan or intention:  a    a prediction:  d, e    an offer:  b   
an arrangement:  c    a promise:  f
	 From this, elicit from Sts that, generally speaking, we 
use going to for plans and predictions; will / won’t for 
predictions, offers, and promises; and the present 
continuous for arrangements.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.133. 
Grammar notes
Sts often have problems using future forms correctly in 
English, mainly because the future form used depends on 
what the speaker wants to say, e.g. whether he / she wants 
to express a plan or pre-arranged event, or make an ‘instant’ 
decision at that moment. This means that Sts often can’t 
use the same form that they would use in their L1.
The important thing to emphasize is that we use going to 
(or present continuous) for things we have already 
decided to do, i.e. our plans, intentions, or arrangements, 
whereas will + infinitive is used for decisions made at the 
time of speaking, and also for offers, promises, and future 
facts.
A typical mistake here is to use the present simple for 
offers: I carry your bag for you.
Remind Sts that shall is only used with I and we, e.g.  
Shall I…? for offers, or Shall we…? for offers or suggestions. 
Some British people use I / We shall instead of I / We will, 
but it isn’t common, especially in spoken English. Shall / 
shan’t is never used to express an instant decision.
 !   You may want to point out that in song lyrics, going to 
is usually transcribed as gonna (because that is how it 
sounds when sung quickly).
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 1.16, 
e 1.17, e 1.18 and e 1.19 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  Shall    2  ’ll make    3  f    4  Are you going to go    5  won’t tell ​
6  ’re visiting    7  will go down    8  f    9  Shall
b	
1	 I promise I will / ’ll phone every day.
2	 He is / ’s going to do a degree in engineering.
3	 No, I am / ’m working late.
4	 Yes, I will / ’ll have the prawns, please.
5	 OK. Shall we get a takeaway?
6	 No problem, I will / ’ll lend you some.
7	 No, the weather forecast says it is / ’s going to rain / will rain.
8	 Shall I pick you up from from the airport?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Tell them to discuss the 
questions.
	 Monitor and help when necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups.
2	GRAMMAR  future forms
a	 e 1.15  Focus on the instructions. Play the audio once the 
whole way through. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
A	 2; They’re talking about a party that she’s going to.
B	 3; They’re talking about if he can borrow her car.
C	 1; They’re talking about what he’s going to do next year.
e 1.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.125) 
1
A	 So what are you going to do next year, dear? Are you going to go 
to university? Adam? Can you hear me?
B	 Sorry, Gran. What did you say?
A	 I said, ‘Are you going to go to university next year?’
B	 No, Gran. I’ve already told you loads of times. I’m not going to 
go to university. I’m going to look for a job. I need to earn some 
money.
A	 All right, dear, you don’t need to shout. I can hear perfectly well, 
thank you. What’s the time now?
B	 Ten to four. Shall I make you a cup of tea?
A	 Yes, please, dear. That’d be very nice.
2
A	 Bye. See you tomorrow.
B	 Bye. Hey, what do you mean tomorrow? Aren’t you coming back 
tonight?
A	 No, I told you about it yesterday. I’m going to a party at Katie’s. I’m 
staying the night there. 
B	 Who else is going?
A	 Oh, just the usual crowd. You don’t know any of them.
B	 Well, make sure you don’t go to bed too late. And don’t forget 
to…
A	 Bye!
B	 Where’s your coat? You can’t go out like that. It’s going to be cold 
tonight!
A	 Bye!
3
A	 Can I use your car tonight? 
B	 No, you can’t.
A	 You said you didn’t need it. Why can’t I borrow it?
B	 Because you won’t look after it. You’ll drive too fast.
A	 I won’t. I promise I’ll drive really slowly. I’ll be really careful.
B	 Oh, all right, then.
A	 Thanks. See you.
EXTRA IDEA   Alternatively, you could pause the audio after 
each conversation, play it again if necessary, and check the 
answer.
b	 Give Sts time to go through sentences a–f and think what 
the missing words might be.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts, in pairs, to decide before they 
listen again how to complete the gaps.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each conversation. 
	 Check answers.
1	 a  going to go 
b  Shall I make
2	 c  ’m staying    
d  ’s going to be
3	 e  ’ll drive    
f  ’ll be
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 20@@
20
1B
d	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm. Encourage them 
to pronounce the stressed words (in the pink boxes) more 
strongly and not to stress the other words.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the sentences.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible. You 
could demonstrate the activity by answering a couple of 
questions first.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts ask and answer the questions 
in pairs, get them to underline the content words in the 
questions. Check answers and drill the questions.
Is anyone in your family…?
•  getting married in the near future
•  travelling abroad this month
•  having a baby this year
•  celebrating their birthday soon
Are you going to…?
•  do something with a family member this week
•  have a big family get-together soon
•  go on holiday with your family this year
•  visit a relative this weekend
Do you think…?
•  more couples will have just one child in the future
•  more young adults will live with their parents in the future
•  anyone in your family will live to be 90 or older
•  you’ll move away from (or back to) the area where your  
family live
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write possible short responses on the 
board to help Sts to answer the questions, e.g. MAYBE. / 
PERHAPS. / PROBABLY., I DON’T THINK SO., I HAVE NO IDEA. Tell them 
that they should then give a reason for their answer.
4	VOCABULARY  adjectives of personality
a	 Focus on the instructions. Point out the heading, 
Opposites attract, and tell Sts that the adjectives they have 
to complete are the opposites of the first adjectives. Give 
Sts time to complete the adjectives in 1–5.
	 Check answers, eliciting from Sts what the adjectives 
mean. Model and drill pronunciation. You could ask Sts if 
they agree that opposites attract and if they can give any 
examples.
1  shy    2  mean    3  lazy    4  quiet    5  serious
EXTRA SUPPORT   First, elicit the meaning of the adjectives in 
the first half of sentences 1–5. Then give Sts time, in pairs, to 
complete the opposites.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Personality on p.153.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  sentence 
stress
Pronunciation notes
As Sts should already know, in English, words which 
are stressed more strongly are the ones which carry 
information, e.g. I went to the cinema on Friday night. These 
are typically verbs, nouns, adjectives, and adverbs. The 
‘non-information’ words (e.g. personal pronouns, articles, 
and little words like to, of, on, as, etc.) are pronounced less 
strongly, and these words often get shortened when we 
speak, e.g. to becomes /tə/. It is this mixture of stressed 
and unstressed words which gives English its rhythm, and 
Sts need plenty of practice until correct stress and rhythm 
becomes instinctive.
a	 e 1.20  Focus on the Sentence stress box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the sentence, and then elicit with a 
show of hands who thinks the pink words are stressed.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
They are stressed.
e 1.20
See the sentence in Student’s Book on p.11
	 Then play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 1.21  Tell Sts they are going to hear four sentences and 
they must listen for the stressed words and write them in 
the pink boxes in the sentences.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 sister’s, having, baby, April
2	 anyone, family, moving, house, soon
3	 see, parents, weekend
4	 think, live, home, next, year
e 1.21
1	 My sister’s having a baby in April.
2	 Is anyone in your family moving house soon?
3	 Are you going to see your parents at the weekend?
4	 Do you think you’ll live at home next year?
c	 Now tell Sts to look at the words they have written and try 
to remember what the complete sentence or question is.
	 Tell Sts to listen to the audio again and complete any gaps 
they have. Play the audio again. 
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
1	 My sister’s having a baby in April.
2	 Is anyone in your family moving house soon?
3	 Are you going to see your parents at the weekend?
4	 Do you think you’ll live at home next year?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 21@@
21
1B
Suggested answers
mature    honest    charming    sensible    sociable    imaginative  
independent    patient    reliable    self-confident    affectionate
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts, in pairs, to cover the adjectives 
and look at the sentences. They must try to remember the 
adjectives.
	 Focus on 2 Negative prefixes and explain that with some 
adjectives of personality, the opposite is a completely 
different word, but for others you simply add a negative 
prefix. 
	 Focus on the Negative prefixes box and go through it 
with the class. 
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 1.23  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.23
2 Negative prefixes
un- / dis-: unambitious, unfriendly, dishonest, unimaginative,  
unkind, disorganized, unreliable, unselfish, unsociable, untidy
in- / im- / ir-: immature, impatient, irresponsible, insensitive
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Elicit that un- is by far the most common negative prefix. 
Explain also that im- is used before adjectives beginning 
with p or m, e.g. impossible, immature, and ir- is used 
before adjectives beginning with r, e.g. irregular.
	 Finally, ask Sts which adjective + prefix has a positive 
meaning.
Unselfish has a positive meaning.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the columns 
and test themselves.
	 Finally, focus on the False friends box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to write down the first three adjectives 
of personality that come into their heads. 
Get Sts to compare their adjectives with a partner. 
Then tell them that the activity they have just done is a 
personality test. The first adjective they wrote down is how 
they see themselves, the second is how other people see 
them, and the third is what they are really like. 
Ask Sts if they agree with their results.
Vocabulary notes
This Vocabulary Bank gives Sts adjectives to describe 
personality, and also introduces them to using negative 
prefixes to make opposite adjectives. A good print or 
online dictionary will give opposite adjectives, using 
prefixes. Encourage Sts to learn positive and negative 
adjectives with prefixes – this will help them to expand 
their vocabulary more quickly and effectively.
	 Focus on 1 What are they like? and elicit / teach that the 
question What are they like? = What kind of personality do 
they have? 
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. You might want to 
point out that SYN stands for synonym.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Let Sts use their dictionaries to help them 
with this section.
	 e 1.22  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.22
Personality
1 What are they like?
1	 Selfish people think about themselves and not about other 
people.
2	 Spoilt children are rude and behave badly because they are given 
everything they want. 
3	 Mature people behave like adults. 
4	 Honest people always tell the truth and never steal or cheat. 
5	 Charming people have an attractive personality, and people like 
them. 
6	 Sensible people have common sense and are practical. 
7	 Sociable people are friendly and enjoy being with other people. 
8	 Anxious people are often worried or stressed. 
9	 Imaginative people have a good imagination. 
10	 Independent people like doing things on their own, without 
help. 
11	 Bossy people like telling other people what to do.
12	 Insecure people are not confident about themselves. 
13	 Sensitive people can be easily hurt or offended. 
14	 Stubborn people never change their opinion or attitude about 
something. 
15	 Patient people can wait for a long time or accept difficulties 
without getting angry. 
16	 Ambitious people want to be successful in life.
17	 Reliable people are ones who you can trust or depend on.
18	 Self-confident people are sure of themselves and their abilities. 
19	 Rebellious people don’t like obeying rules. 
20	 Moody people have moods that change quickly and often.
21	 Competitive people always want to win.
22	 Affectionate people show that they love or like other people very 
much.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA IDEA   If your Sts’ L1 is a Latin-based language, many of 
these adjectives may be quite similar. Get them to underline 
the ones that are similar, and highlight or circle the ones that 
are completely different.
	 Now focus on Activation and tell Sts, in pairs, to decide 
which are positive. 
	 Get feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 22@@
22
1B
1  the youngest child    2  the oldest child    
3  the only child    4  the middle child
d	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and complete the 
gaps with sentences A–H. Point out that the first one (H) 
has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  C    3  A    4  B    5  E    6  F    7  D    8  G
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Give Sts time to re-read the paragraph that applies 
to them.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other if the 
description is true for them, and if the other descriptions 
are true for people they know.
	 Get feedback from various pairs. You could tell Sts about 
your own situation and how you feel about it.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   If you want to focus on some useful 
phrases from the article, write these sentences on the board 
(without the answer in brackets):
THEY GET IMPATIENT, ESPECIALLY WHEN THINGS GO WRONG.  
(ONLY CHILD)
THEY’RE GOOD AT SORTING OUT ARGUMENTS. (MIDDLE CHILD)
THEY GET ON WITH EVERYBODY. (MIDDLE CHILD)
THEY TEND TO BE AMBITIOUS. (OLDEST CHILD)
THEY CAN LACK DIRECTION IN LIFE. (MIDDLE CHILD)
THEY SPEND A LOT OF TIME BY THEMSELVES. (ONLY CHILD)
THEY TRY TO GET THE ATTENTION OF THEIR PARENTS. (YOUNGEST CHILD)
Ask Sts which category of child they describe (see answers in 
brackets above), and what they mean.
7	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding a	
	 story
a	 Focus on the instructions and the words, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
	 Put Sts in pairs to tell each other what they think the two 
stories are about.
	 Elicit some ideas for each story, but don’t tell Sts if they are 
correct.
b	 e 1.25  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
predictions in a. 
	 Elicit each story.
See script 1.25
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
5	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
Pronunciation note
Adjective prefixes and suffixes
Negative prefixes (e.g. un-, im-, and in- added to 
adjectives) are never stressed, e.g. unfriendly NOT 
unfriendly.
The common adjective endings -ous (e.g. jealous), -able / 
-ible (e.g. sociable, responsible) and -ive (e.g. talkative) are 
also unstressed. The pronunciation of -ous and -able /-ible 
is the /ə/ sound, while -ive is pronounced /ɪv/.
a	 Focus on the task and remind Sts that with multi-syllable 
words, they must always learn which syllable is stressed. 
You may also want to point out that some of these 
adjectives may be very similar to ones in their language, 
but stressed on a different syllable, e.g. ambitious = 
Spanish ambicioso.
	 Now focus on the adjectives, and elicit / explain that 1–4 
are grouped according to their endings, and that 5 is 
adjectives with negative prefixes. 
	 Get Sts, individually or in pairs, to practise saying the 
adjectives aloud, and then to underline the syllable they 
think is stressed. 
b	 e 1.24  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllable.
1	 anxious, ambitious, generous, rebellious
2	 sociable, reliable
3	 responsible, sensible
4	 competitive, talkative, sensitive
5	 unfriendly, insecure, impatient, immature
e 1.24
See words in Student’s Book on p.12
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, ask Sts if the prefixes and suffixes are stressed.
No, prefixes and suffixes are unstressed.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the adjectives.
6	READING  identifying reasons
a	 Either put Sts in pairs or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback from various 
pairs. You could also get a show of hands for each 
‘category’ to find out which is the most common.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Elicit some opinions from Sts, but don’t tell them if they 
are correct. 
c	 Give Sts time to read the article to check their answers 
to b. Tell them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 23@@
23
1B
	 Check answers.
Marilyn
1	 Ten
2	 She was in her bedroom.
3	 Her sister hid her parrot in a cupboard. Marilyn and her 
parents looked for it everywhere and she was very upset.
4	 Her sister showed them where the parrot was, in the 
cupboard.
5	 Marilyn sometimes hides her sister’s things to remind her of 
the parrot incident.
	 Finally, ask the class who they think behaved worse, James 
or Marilyn’s sister.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A that they are James’s 
brother and Sts B that they are Marilyn’s sister. They must 
retell the story from their point of view.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary. 
	 You could get a couple of Sts A and B to tell the class their 
story.
e	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think of a 
time when they were young and they or a sibling / friend 
behaved badly. 
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to tell each 
other their stories. Remind them to use the questions in c 
to help them.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups. If you 
have a story, you could tell it to the class.
8	WRITING  a description of a person
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what a 
self-portrait is (= a painting, etc. that you do of yourself).
	 Read the poem together or give Sts time to read it alone.
	 Now focus on the instructions for lines 1–7 and give Sts 
time to write their own poems.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get Sts to read their poems to each other. You could 
also display them around the classroom and get Sts to 
read them.
e 1.25
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
James
Well, I can remember one terrible thing I did to my brother when we 
were teenagers – I have a twin brother. Um, so we used to fight and 
argue a lot, as…as kids and teenagers. And one time, when we were 
about fifteen, we were fighting, arguing – we shared a bedroom, 
so we were in our room, um, fighting each other, and I accidentally 
stabbed him in the finger with a penknife that I was holding in my 
hand. And it was…it was a total accident, and I was holding it and 
I was kind of threatening him, but I didn’t really mean to…to stab 
him, obviously, um, but I did, and I was absolutely horrified at what 
I’d done. And of course, he – my brother – he looked down at his 
finger, with this blood coming out from where I’d stabbed him, and 
he looked up at me, and he said, ‘I’m going to tell Mum!’, which sort 
of made me laugh because, you know, we were both fifteen at the 
time, and it was a very childish thing to say. And he ran downstairs 
to tell our mum, and I was absolutely terrified that she was going 
to be really angry with me. Which she was, of course. But, um, he 
was fine, by the way – it was a very small cut. He didn’t have to go 
to hospital or anything; it was absolutely fine, but, um, he still now – 
and this is, you know, we’re in our late forties now, so this is thirty 
years ago – but he still sometimes tells people, when we meet them, 
about when I stabbed him. But yeah, it wasn’t a very nice thing to do 
to him!
Marilyn
Well, my sister was four years older than me.  She still is, actually.
Um, I remember once when I was about ten years old, I had a pet, a 
bird. Um, it was a small green parrot called Charlie, and I really loved 
him. He lived in a cage, but I sometimes let him out to fly around 
the house, you know, so, so he could have some freedom. And one 
day, I was in my bedroom and I let him out, but then something 
happened – I can’t remember what – and I forgot about him for a, 
for a while, and then suddenly I couldn’t see him anymore. And, 
well, I looked everywhere for him – I looked all over the house and 
I couldn’t find him anywhere. Oh, I cried and I cried because I was 
sure that he had flown out of the window. And my parents started 
to help me because they felt awful about it as well. And just when I 
was completely hysterical, my sister admitted that, in reality, she had 
hidden him: she had shut him inside a cupboard – can you believe? 
Well, she opened the cupboard and poor Charlie was there; he was 
so frightened, but we were all really relieved to find him. My sister 
was so horrible that day. Of course, now we get on really well, but I 
still remember what she did to poor Charlie, and sometimes when 
she comes to see me, I hide her car keys or her purse or something 
just to remind her of it. Is that bad?
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the two stories again 
and this time they must answer questions 1–5. Give them 
time to read the questions.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after the first story to give 
Sts time to answer the questions. 
	 Check answers.
James
1	 15
2	 In their bedroom
3	 James accidentally stabbed his brother in the finger with a 
penknife.
4	 Their mother was very angry with James, but it was a very 
small cut.
5	 James’s brother still tells other people about when James 
stabbed him.
	 Now play the second story.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 24@@
24
1B
!   Highlight that we normally only use a bit (or a little) with 
negative adjectives.
	 Focus on the Describing a person box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on e and tell Sts to imagine they received the 
email from Angela and they need to write back.
	 Focus on the plan and go through it with the class. 
Remind them to use the language in the Describing a 
person box as well as the Vocabulary Bank Personality 
on p.153.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their description, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
	 Finally, focus on f and get Sts to check their work for 
mistakes before giving it in.
b	 This is the first time Sts are sent to the Writing section at 
the back of the Student’s Book. In this section, Sts will find 
model texts, with exercises and language notes, and then 
a writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercise(s) in class, but set the actual writing 
(the last activity) for homework. 
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A description of a person 
on p.115.
	 Before Sts read the two emails, you might want to check 
they know what an au pair is. You could explain that the 
word is French. Model and drill its English pronunciation 
/əʊ ˈpeə/.
	 Now focus on a and give Sts time to read the two emails 
and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
1	 Because she is looking for an au pair and Sofia’s friend, Kasia, 
told Angela she might be interested in working in England as 
an au pair.
2	 Yes, she does.
	 Now focus on b and tell Sts to read Sofia’s email again and 
to correct the five spelling mistakes.
	 Check answers by getting Sts to spell the correct version 
and write it on the board.
interrested interested 
responsable responsible    
forgetfull forgetful    
fotography photography    
independant independent
	 Now focus on c and tell Sts to read Sofia’s email again and 
answer questions 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 intelligent, hard-working, mature, responsible, friendly, 
independent
2	 She likes going to the cinema, listening to music, and taking 
photos.
3	 She’s quite shy, a bit forgetful, and her English isn’t very good.
4	 Yes, she does.
	 Now focus on d and tell Sts to look at all the highlighted 
expressions in the second email and explain that they are 
all expressions that modify adjectives. Point out that the 
sentences in the chart should go from very positive to 
negative. Show Sts that the first one (very) has been done 
for them.
	 Give Sts time to complete the other sentences in the 
chart.
	 Check answers.
	
  incredibly
	
  really
Kasia is   very      forgetful.
	
  quite
	
  a bit
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 25@@
PE1
25
1	r INTRODUCTION
a	 Books open. Focus on the two photos and tell Sts that 
Jenny and Rob are the main characters in these lessons. 
	 Get Sts to describe them.
b	 e 1.26  Focus on the British and American English box 
and go through it with the class. 
	 Then give Sts a few minutes to read the text and think 
about what the missing words might be.
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for Sts just to watch or listen.
	 Give Sts time to complete the gaps. Then play the audio /
video again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to  
pre-teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
1  magazine    2  British    3  months    4  London    5  New York
6  permanent    7  find    8  family
e 1.26
J = Jenny, R = Rob
J	 My name’s Jenny Zielinski. And New York is my city. I live here and 
I work for a magazine, NewYork 24seven.
R	 My name’s Rob Walker. I’m a writer on NewYork 24seven. You can 
probably tell from my accent that I’m not actually from New York. 
I’m British, and I came over to the States a few months ago.
J	 I met Rob in London, when I was visiting the UK on a work trip. He 
was writing for the London edition of 24seven. We got along well 
right away. I really liked him.
R	 So why am I in New York? Because of Jenny, of course. When 
they gave me the opportunity to work here for a month, I took 
it immediately. It gave us the chance to get to know each other 
better. When they offered me a permanent job, I couldn’t  
believe it!
J	 I helped Rob find an apartment. And now here we are. Together in 
New York. I’m so happy. I just hope Rob’s happy here, too. 
R	 I really loved living in London. A lot of my friends and family are 
there, so of course I still miss it. But New York’s a fantastic city. I’ve 
got a great job, and Jenny’s here, too.
J	 Things are changing pretty fast in the office. We have a new boss, 
Don Taylor. And things are changing in my personal life, too. This 
evening’s kind of important. I’m taking Rob to meet my parents 
for the very first time. I just hope it goes well!
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts some comprehension questions, e.g. 
Where are Rob and Jenny now? (In New York), Who is Don 
Taylor? (The new boss), etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function    introducing yourself and other people, reacting 
to what people say
Language  What a pity!, Never mind., Really?, etc.
Lesson plan
This is the first in a series of five Practical English lessons (one 
every other File) in which Sts learn and practise functional 
language. All the content for these lessons is on video. There 
is also an audio version if you are unable to show the video 
in class.
There is a storyline based on two characters, Jenny Zielinski, 
an American journalist who works in the New York office of 
a magazine called NewYork 24seven, and Rob Walker, a British 
journalist who works in London for the same magazine, but 
who is now working in New York. If your Sts did English File 
Elementary or Pre-intermediate, they will already be familiar 
with the characters. If they aren’t, the first episode begins 
with a brief summary of the story so far, so they will not be at 
a disadvantage.
In the first scene, Jenny takes Rob to meet her parents. 
They arrive late (because of Rob, who has also forgotten 
the chocolates). Jenny tells her parents about her new 
promotion, and Sts then practise reacting to what other 
people say (e.g. to good, bad, interesting, and surprising 
news). In the second scene, Rob struggles at first to impress 
Jenny’s father, but then they find a shared interest – a jazz 
musician.
These lessons can be used with Class DVD, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, or Class Audio CDs (audio only). Sts can find 
all the video content and activities in the Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 1 
Can you remember? 1
Online Practice  Practical English 1 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
If your Sts did English File Pre-intermediate, elicit anything 
they can remember about Rob and Jenny, and write it on 
the board in columns under their names. Leave it on the 
board so that when Sts do 1b, they can see if any of the 
points on the board are mentioned.
If your Sts didn’t do English File Pre-intermediate, introduce 
this lesson by giving the information in the Lesson plan.
EPISODE
	 1	
Practical English  Meeting the parents
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 26@@
26
PE1
1	 T
2	 F (Rob’s desk is always a complete mess.)
3	 F (Rob is meeting Jenny’s parents for the first time.)
4	 T
5	 F (Jenny’s new job is Managing Editor.)
6	 F (She is a manager, but not Rob’s manager.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 1.28  Give Sts a minute to read through the extracts 
from the conversation and to think about what the 
missing words might be.
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  no, believe, You’re    2  pity, Never    3  Really    
4  How, news    5  great
e 1.28
1
J	 Don’t forget the chocolates.
R	 OK. Oh no!
J	 I don’t believe it. Don’t tell me you forgot them?
R	 I think they’re still on my desk.
J	 You’re kidding.
2
J	 Mom, I’m really sorry – we bought you some chocolates, but we 
left them at the office.
S	 What a pity. Never mind.
3
J	 But I also have some good news.
S	 Really? What’s that?
4
S	 So you’ve got a promotion? How fantastic!
H	 That’s great news! 
5
S	 Let’s go and have dinner.
J	 What a great idea!
d	 e 1.29  Focus on the Reacting to what people say 
chart and go through it with the class. You may want to 
point out that What a pity and Never mind are used to 
react to bad news, e.g. I’ve lost my book / My bus is stuck 
in traffic, but not to seriously bad news, e.g. NOT A My 
grandmother died last week. B Never mind.
	 Now focus on the How + adjective, What + noun box 
and go through it with the class.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to watch or listen. 
e 1.29
See chart in Student’s Book on p.15
	 Now play it again, pausing after each phrase for Sts to 
watch or listen and repeat with the correct intonation.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversations in c.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
2	r REACTING TO WHAT PEOPLE SAY
a	 e 1.27  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where are Jenny and Rob? (In a car), How does Jenny 
look? (Not very happy), Who are Jenny and Rob saying hello 
to? (Her parents), etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write the 
questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the two 
questions and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check answers.
He left the chocolates on his desk at work.
She’s got a promotion – she’s now a manager.
e 1.27
J = Jenny, R = Rob, H = Harry, S = Sally
J	 I can’t believe we got here so late.
R	 I’m sorry, Jenny. I had to finish that article for Don.
J	 Don’t forget the chocolates.
R	 OK…Oh no!
J	 I don’t believe it. Don’t tell me you forgot them?
R	 I think they’re still on my desk.
J	 You’re kidding.
R	 You know what my desk’s like.
J	 Yeah, it’s a complete mess. Why don’t you ever tidy it? 
***
R	 We could go and buy some more.
J	 How can we get some more? We’re already late!…Hi there!
H	 You made it!
J	 Sorry we’re late. So, this is my mom and dad, Harry and Sally. And 
this, of course, is Rob.
R	 Hello.
S	 It’s so nice to meet you at last.
H	 Yes, Jenny’s finally decided to introduce you to us.
S	 Come in, come in!
***
J	 Mom, I’m really sorry – we bought you some chocolates, but we 
left them at the office.
S	 What a pity. Never mind.
H	 Yeah, don’t worry about it. We know what a busy young woman 
you are. And your mom has made way too much food for this 
evening anyway.
S	 Oh, Harry.
J	 But I also have some good news.
S	 Really? What’s that?
J	 Well, you know we have a new boss? He’s still new to the job and 
needs support, so today he made me the Managing Editor of the 
magazine.
S	 So you’ve got a promotion? How fantastic!
H	 That’s great news! Hey, does that mean Jenny’s going to be your 
boss, Rob?
R	 Er…yes, I guess so.
J	 Well, not exactly. I’m a manager, but I’m not Rob’s manager.
S	 Let’s go and have dinner.
J	 What a great idea!
	 Focus on the British and American English box and go 
through it with the class.
b	 Focus on sentences 1–6. Go through them with Sts and 
make sure they understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Remind them to correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 27@@
27
PE1
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 1.31  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  see    2  really    3  things    4  mean    5  because    
6  incredible    7  guy    8  ahead
e 1.31
1	 How do you see your career?
2	 Not really. I’m more of a writer.
3	 Oh, you know, interviews, reviews, things like that…
4	 I mean, I like photography.
5	 That’s because most of them are of Jenny.
6	 How incredible!
7	 Well, he’s a really nice guy.
8	 Go ahead, son!
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  8    B  5    C  2    D  3    E  1    F  6    G  4, 7
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
f	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication How awful! How fantastic!, A on p.106, 
B on p.111. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use appropriate 
intonation.
	 When they have finished, get some Sts to tell the class a 
piece of news (real or invented) and get Sts to react to it. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 1.
3	r HARRY FINDS OUT MORE ABOUT ROB
a	 e 1.30  Focus on the photos and ask Sts what they think 
they are talking about.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer.
The evening ends well.
e 1.30
H = Harry, J = Jenny, R = Rob, S = Sally
H	 You know, our Jenny has done incredibly well, Rob. She’s the first 
member of our family to study at Harvard. She’s a very capable 
and ambitious young woman.
J	 Oh, Dad.
R	 No, it’s true, Jenny.
H	 But what about you, Rob? How do you see your career? Do you 
see yourself going into management?
R	 Me? No. Not really. I’m more of a…a writer.
H	 Really? What kind of things do you write?
R	 Oh, you know, interviews, reviews…things like that…and I’m 
doing a lot of work for the online magazine…
J	 Rob’s a very talented writer, Dad. He’s very creative.
H	 That’s great, but being creative doesn’t always pay the bills.
J	 You know, my dad’s a very keen photographer. He took all of 
these photos.
H	 Oh, Rob won’t be interested in them.
R	 But I am interested. I mean, I like photography. And I think I 
recognize some of these people.
H	 That’s because most of them are of Jenny.
R	 But there are some great jazz musicians, too.…That’s Miles 
Davis…and isn’t that John Coltrane? And that’s Wynton Marsalis.
H	 You know about Wynton Marsalis?
R	 Know about him? I’ve interviewed him!
H	 How incredible! I love that guy. He’s a hero of mine.
R	 Well, he’s a really nice guy. I spent a whole day with him, chatting 
and watching him rehearse.
H	 Really? I want to hear all about it.
S	 Have a cookie, Rob.
H	 Go ahead, son! Sally makes the best cookies in New York!
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–6. Elicit / Explain the meaning of impressed by.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1	 Harvard
2	 No, he isn’t, because he thinks creative people, like writers, 
sometimes don’t earn enough to pay the bills.
3	 He likes taking photographs.
4	 Jenny
5	 Famous jazz musicians
6	 That he knows about Wynton Marsalis (Harry’s idol) and has 
interviewed him and spent the day with him.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 28@@
28
2A
	2A	 Spending money
1
1  Russia, rouble    ​2  China, lei    ​3  Japan, yen    ​4  Poland, zloty    ​
5  Brazil, real    ​6  Mexico, peso    ​7  Switzerland, franc    ​
8  Hungary, forint
France uses the euro and Turkey uses the lira.
2
a	 False (They were made around 600 BC by the Lydians of Asia 
Minor, present-day Turkey.)
b	 True
c	 False (For example, in the UK most banknotes are made of 
polymer, a flexible plastic material.)
d	 False (For example, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, etc. 
don’t.)
e	 True
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Money on p.154. 
Vocabulary notes
Verbs
Remind Sts of the difference between lend and borrow 
with these examples: Can I borrow your book? / Can you 
lend me your book?
Nouns
Make sure Sts are clear that loan is the general word for 
money lent by an individual or bank to another person, 
and mortgage is specifically money lent by a bank or 
building society to buy a house or flat.
Phrasal verbs
Highlight that take out and pay back are separable, i.e. you 
can also put the particles (out and back) after the noun, 
e.g. When can you pay me the money back?
Also highlight the difference between live on (= have 
enough money for your basic needs, e.g. I can live on 250 
euros a week) and live off (= receive the money you need 
to live from somebody / something because you don’t 
have any yourself, e.g. I have to live off my parents while I’m 
looking for a job.)
	 Focus on 1 Verbs and get Sts to do a individually or in 
pairs. 
	 e 2.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts are clear about the meaning 
of all the verbs. 
e 2.1
Money
1 Verbs
1	I’m going to inherit two thousand pounds.
2	I save money every week.
3	He has promised to lend me fifty euros. 
4	I need to borrow twenty pounds from my mum.
5	I often waste money.
6	I can’t afford to buy that car.
7	The mechanic charges me one hundred pounds.
8	They cost two hundred dollars.
9	I owe Jim one hundred pounds.
10	 I want to invest some money.
11	 I earn one thousand pounds a month.
12	 My house is worth about two hundred thousand euros.
13	 We want to raise money for the new hospital.
 G   present perfect and past simple
 V   money
 P   o and or
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts revise some important uses of the present 
perfect and how it contrasts with the past simple. They also 
learn common words and phrases to talk about money.
The lesson begins with a money quiz. This provides a 
lead-in to the vocabulary focus, which is followed by a 
pronunciation spot about different pronunciations of the 
letters o and or. The new lexis is consolidated through a 
reading activity which focuses on an article about a woman 
who tried to spend as little money as possible for an 
entire year.
In the second half of the lesson, a conversation where two 
people are arguing about money provides the context for 
the grammar focus. This leads into a money questionnaire 
with Sts asking and answering questions in the present 
perfect and past simple. Finally, Sts read and listen to true 
stories about three people who lost money in different 
scams.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect and past simple p.151 
Communicative  Are you a saver or a spender? p.180 
(instructions p.170) 
Vocabulary  Money p.206 (instructions p.199)
For students
Workbook  2A
Online Practice  2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the verb SPEND on the board and elicit the two nouns 
most commonly used after spend (time and money).
Then elicit the form of a verb following spend time (the 
gerund), and the preposition after spend money (on).
Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer these questions:
What do you often spend a lot of time doing during the 
holidays? 
What do you usually spend money on at weekends?
Get some feedback from various pairs.
1	VOCABULARY  money
a	 Books open. Put Sts in small groups and get them to do 
The money quiz.
	 Check answers, and with a show of hands, find out if any 
groups got all the answers correct.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 29@@
29
2A
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  o and or
Pronunciation notes
The letter o is quite tricky for Sts, as it has several different 
possible pronunciations. There are some spelling–
pronunciation rules you might want to point out / elicit 
after you have done the exercises. You can also help Sts by 
highlighting the exceptions.
•	 o between two or several consonants is often /ɒ/, e.g. 
sorry, follow. There are some exceptions, e.g. worry.
•	 o + one consonant + e is usually /əʊ/, e.g. hope, alone, 
but there are several common words which have the 
/ʌ/ sound, e.g. some, money.
•	 The letters ol and oa between consonants are usually 
/əʊ/, e.g. told, road.
•	 The letters or between consonants are usually /ɔː/, e.g. 
airport, but common exceptions are work and world, 
which are /ɜː/.
Encourage Sts to use a dictionary to check pronunciation 
when they are not sure.
a	 Focus on the question and the three sentences, making 
sure Sts understand the word rhyme. Elicit the answers 
from the class.
1  sunny    ​2  funny    ​3  honey
b	 Focus on the activity and elicit the three words and 
sounds, i.e. up /ʌ/, clock /ɒ/, and phone /əʊ/. Point out that 
the first one (borrow) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts two minutes to put the words in the correct 
column. Remind them that it is easier to do this kind of 
exercise if they say the words aloud to themselves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 2.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 2.5
up /ʌ/  done, money, nothing, some, won, worry
clock /ɒ/  borrow, cost, dollar, honest, promise, shopping
phone /əʊ/  clothes, loan, note, owe, sold
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Give more practice if these 
sounds are a problem for your Sts.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 Now tell Sts to focus on the words with the letters or. In 
pairs, get Sts to answer the two questions.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answers to d before playing the 
audio.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the sentences on the right 
and see if they can remember them.
	 Focus on 2 Prepositions and emphasize that Sts must 
write the preposition in the Preposition column, not in 
the shaded gap in the sentence (this is so they can test 
themselves later).
	 e 2.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Point out the silent b in debt /det/.
e 2.2
2 Prepositions
1	 Would you like to pay cash or by credit card?
2	 I paid for the dinner last night. It was my birthday.
3	 I spent fifty pounds on books yesterday.
4	 My uncle invested all his money in property.
5	 I don’t like lending money to friends.
6	 I borrowed a lot of money from the bank.
7	 They charged us sixty euros for a bottle of wine.
8	 I never get into debt. I hate owing people money.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the Preposition 
column and see if they can remember the prepositions.
	 Next, focus on 3 Nouns and get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs.
	 e 2.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.3
3 Nouns
1	 bill
2	 salary
3	 tax
4	 loan
5	 budget
6	 mortgage
7	 contactless payment
8	 insurance
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce, 
e.g. mortgage /ˈmɔːgɪdʒ/ (pointing out the silent t). 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the words and see if they 
can remember what the definitions mean.
	 Finally, focus on 4 Phrasal verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 e 2.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.4
4 Phrasal verbs
1	 I took out two hundred euro from a cash machine.
2	 Can I pay you back the money you lent me next week?
3	 I have to live off my parents while I’m at university.
4	 It’s difficult for me and my wife to live on only one salary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 30@@
30
2A
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and then mark sentences 
1–7 T (true) or F (false). Remind them to correct the false 
ones. You could point out that there is one sentence for 
each paragraph of the article.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1	 F (She couldn’t use buses or flights, etc.)
2	 F (She had plenty of cheap food, but it was boring.)
3	 T
4	 F (She had a bag of chips in East Anglia.)
5	 F (She is much slimmer and fitter.)
6	 T
7	 T
	 Finally, deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and 
drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
e	 Focus on the Compound nouns box and go through 
it with the class. You might also want to tell Sts that 
occasionally compound nouns are hyphenated, e.g. 
make-up, or one word, e.g. sunglasses.
	 Now tell Sts to look at the words in the circle and 
underline six more compound nouns in the article that 
start with a word in the circle.
	 Check answers.
olive oil    ​electricity bill    ​cleaning products    ​cycling trip    ​
beauty treatments    ​tap water
f	 Focus on the would for imaginary situations box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could also tell 
Sts if you could do what Michelle did.
4	GRAMMAR  present perfect and past simple
a	 Focus on the picture and elicit what the relationship is 
between the two people (husband / wife or boyfriend / 
girlfriend).
	 Focus on the task and tell Sts to read the conversation 
quickly and answer the question. 
	 Check the answer.
They are arguing about money.
b	 e 2.8  Tell Sts to complete the conversation with the 
verbs in either the present perfect or the past tense. 
Point out that the first one (haven’t seen) has been done 
for them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
2  ’ve just bought    ​3  did…cost    ​4  were    ​5  Have…seen    ​ 
6  arrived    ​7  haven’t paid    ​8  bought    ​9  didn’t need    ​
10  worked    ​11  needed    ​12  needed
e 2.8
D = David, K = Kate
D	 I haven’t seen those shoes before. Are they new?
K	 Yes. I’ve just bought them. Do you like them?
D	 They’re OK. How much did they cost?
K	 Oh, not much. They were a bargain. Under a hundred pounds.
D	 You mean ninety-nine pounds ninety-nine. That isn’t cheap for a 
pair of shoes. Anyway, we can’t afford to buy new clothes at the 
moment. 
e	 e 2.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
The letters or are normally pronounced /ɔː/ when they’re 
stressed.
Work and worth are pronounced /ɜː/ (this applies to most words 
beginning wor- + consonant).
e 2.6
See words in Student’s Book on p.16
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Elicit more words beginning wor- where the 
pronunciation is /wɜː/, e.g. word, worse, world.
f	 e 2.7  Tell Sts they must listen and write the six sentences 
they hear.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
e 2.7
1	 Let’s go shopping for clothes.
2	 Can I borrow some money?
3	 He won a million dollars.
4	 I’ve done nothing wrong.
5	 They can’t afford to pay the mortgage.
6	 I work in a store.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model and drill each sentence before 
putting Sts in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
g	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Money Q&A, A on p.106, B on p.111. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Sts A start with their first question. Sts B answer, giving 
as much information as possible, and then ask their first 
question to Sts A. 
	 While Sts are doing the activity, monitor and help with any 
vocabulary problems, e.g. charity, sales, etc.
	 Get some feedback from the class. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
3	READING  understanding paragraphing
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to read 
the article and match the paragraphs to topics 1–7.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT  Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary. 
A  2    ​B  6    ​C  3    ​D  1    ​E  4    ​F  7    ​G  5
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 31@@
31
2A
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 Have you ever booked a flight online?
2	 Soon. I have / ’ve already saved nearly €1,000.
3	 Have you paid the phone bill yet?
4	 Have your parents ever lent you money?
5	 I don’t know. I have / ’ve never used it.
6	 We have / ’ve just won the lottery!
7	 I have / ’ve already spent my salary.
8	 No, thanks. I have / ’ve just (or already) had one. 
b
1	 f
2	 g Has your sister paid you back yet?
3	 f
4	 g When did you buy that leather jacket?
5	 g They finished paying back the loan last month.
6	 f
7	 f
8	 g I’m sure I didn’t borrow any money from you last week.
9	 f
10	 g Did you see the Batman film on TV yesterday?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
5	SPEAKING
a	 This questionnaire practises the contrast between the 
past simple and present perfect and also provides an 
opportunity for free-speaking.
	 Focus on the instructions and point out the two examples 
in the speech bubbles. Point out that the Have you ever…? 
questions in the questionnaire are in the present perfect 
because they are asking about your whole life until now.
	 Point out that the first circle has been completed (saved). 
Give Sts time to complete the gaps in the questions in the 
other circles.
	 Check answers, checking that Sts are pronouncing the 
past correctly, especially the regular verbs (/seɪvd/,  
/ˈweɪstɪd/, /ɪnˈherɪtɪd/).
2  lent    ​3  wasted    ​4  bought    ​5  inherited    ​6  lost    ​7  won    ​
8  forgotten    ​9  lost    ​10  taken out    ​11  bought, sold
b	 Focus again on the example speech bubbles. Remind Sts 
that the first question is in the present perfect, but if the 
answer is Yes, then the follow-up questions, asking for 
more information, should be in the past simple because 
you are now referring to a specific time in the past, e.g. 
How much was the deposit?
	 Put Sts in pairs. You could either get one student to ask 
all the questions and then Sts swap roles, or Sts can take 
turns to ask each other a question and the same question 
can be returned using What about you?
	 Get some whole-class feedback by finding out, e.g. how 
many people in the class have sold something on the 
internet and asking individual Sts to talk about their 
experience. 
K	 Why not?
D	 Have you seen this?
K	 No. What is it?
D	 Our phone bill. It arrived this morning. And we haven’t paid the 
house insurance yet.
K	 Well, what about the iPad you bought last week?
D	 What about it?
K	 You didn’t need a new one. The old one worked perfectly well.
D	 But I needed the new model.
K	 Well, I needed some new shoes.
c	 Now tell Sts to answer questions 1–3 in pairs. Tell them to 
look at the conversation to help them. 
	 Check answers using the examples in the conversation in 
a to exemplify the rules.
1	 PS (e.g. How much did they cost?)
2	 PP (e.g. Have you seen this?)
3	 PP (e.g. I’ve just bought them.)
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.134. 
Grammar notes 
In Grammar Bank 2A the main uses of the present 
perfect are pulled together and contrasted with the 
past simple. This is all revision from English File Pre-
intermediate, but it is the first time Sts have compared 
the two forms in such detail. If you know your Sts’ L1, 
some careful use of L1 / L2 contrast could help here.
Present perfect
The most important point to emphasize is that we use 
the present perfect for a past action or actions where no 
specific time is mentioned or understood, e.g. I’ve been 
to Paris twice. I’ve already seen that film.* Have you ever met 
Jack’s wife? 
*In American English the past simple is used here.
It is also used for very recent past actions (often with just). 
In this context it is often used to give a piece of news 
or information, e.g. Did you hear? Lina has broken her leg. 
Guess what! I’ve found a new job! I’m sleepy. I’ve just got up. 
(No past time expression is used).
Typical mistakes: I’ve been to Paris last year. I already saw 
that film. Lina has broken her leg this morning.
Past simple
The most important point to emphasize is that when 
we use the past simple, a specific time in the past is 
mentioned, e.g. Did you see the match last night?, or 
understood between the speakers, e.g. Did you see the 
match? (We both know it was last night). So, for example, 
a question beginning What time…? or When…? will 
normally be in the past simple.
Typical mistakes: Have you see the match last night? When 
have they arrived? What time have you got up today?
Refer Sts to the Irregular Verbs list on p.165 and explain 
that this is their reference list. Get Sts to go through the 
list quickly in pairs, checking that they know what the 
verbs mean. Encourage them to highlight verbs they 
didn’t know or for which they had forgotten the past form. 
Test them periodically on the past and participle forms. 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 2.9, 
e 2.10 and e 2.11 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 32@@
32
2A
P	 Ah, the friend abroad who needs help. But it isn’t really a friend: 
it’s a scammer who is using this friend’s email account. Often 
this scam is obvious, either because you know your friend isn’t 
abroad, or because the email has grammar and spelling mistakes. 
So always be suspicious of any strange emails from friends.  
The next story is from Carl in Hastings.
C	 I got an email saying that I’d won quite a lot of money in the 
lottery in Spain. It looked official, and some of it was in Spanish, 
and last year I was on a holiday in Spain and I did buy a lottery 
ticket, so I believed it. So I emailed back and they replied and 
said the easiest thing was for me to send them my bank account 
details, and they’d pay the money direct into my bank. So I did – 
and I feel so stupid saying this now – and of course the next day 
my account was completely empty. Luckily, it was the day before 
pay day, and I only had about two hundred pounds in there. But I 
learned my lesson.
P	 Yes, so again, never believe an email or message saying you’ve 
won a lottery, especially if you never bought a ticket.  
Our last story is from Paul in Bristol.
Pa	I’d just got back from work, it was about six o’clock, and the phone 
rang and a very polite woman said it was Barclay’s Bank Security 
Division, and that there was a problem with my account. She said 
that somebody had tried to use my password online, and that 
my account wasn’t safe. I was in the middle of buying a flat, and 
I thought, ‘Oh no! This sounds bad!’ because I had quite a lot of 
money in the account. She said the best solution was to transfer 
all the money into a new account to make sure it was safe. So she 
gave me an account number and an account name – it was my 
name; it was called ‘Paul Kay new account’ – and I thanked her. 
And immediately after the call, I went online and transferred all 
my money to this new account. And that was the last time I saw it. 
It was a real disaster: I lost twenty thousand pounds and I couldn’t 
buy my flat.
P	 It’s natural to co-operate if you think your bank is phoning you, 
but your bank will never ask you on the phone to transfer money 
to another account. If you get suspicious, just hang up, wait ten 
minutes, then phone your bank to check if it really was them. 
So, what’s the most important thing to remember if you don’t 
want to be the victim of a scam? Be very suspicious of strange 
emails from friends or from someone saying that you’ve won a 
prize, and the same for phone calls from your bank. And above 
all, never, never give your bank account or credit card details to 
anybody, either in an email or on the phone, unless you are one 
hundred per cent sure who they really are. 
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again, and this time they 
need to complete the gaps in the summaries with one or 
two words.
	 Give Sts time to read the summaries.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each story to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers.
1  email    ​2  wallet    ​3  credit card    ​4  money    ​5  believed    ​
6  bank account    ​7  phone call    ​8  bank    ​9  account    ​ 
10  new account
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to try to complete the gaps 
before playing the audio again. Then play the audio for Sts to 
listen and check.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.125–126, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could model the activity first by 
getting Sts to choose a couple of questions to ask you and 
eliciting follow-up questions.
6	LISTENING  listening for facts
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit different scams 
from Sts. If you know of one, you could also tell the class 
about it.
b	 Give Sts time to read the email and think about what they 
would do if they received one like that. Tell them not to 
worry about the mistakes in the email.
	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss what they would do.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pre-teach some lexis to make 
sure Sts understand the email, or ask some comprehension 
questions after Sts have read the email, e.g. Where does 
Naomi Cooper live? (In Nigeria), Who died last month? (Her 
parents), Why does she need your help? (She wants to take  
her parents’ money out of Nigeria and needs an account in 
the UK.), etc.
c	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to read 
the email again and correct the ten mistakes.
	 Check answers, by eliciting the answers onto the board.
Businness  ​Business    ​  have died  ​died      ​there  their    
​I am needing  ​I need      ​ can to transfer  ​can transfer    ​ 
dolars  ​dollars      ​acount  ​account      ​him  ​it    
​I want organize  ​I want to organize      ​ you  your
d	 e 2.12  Tell Sts they are going to listen to three people 
calling a radio programme to talk about how they lost 
money in a scam. Tell Sts the first time they listen, they 
must write down how much money each person lost. 
They must also listen for the most important advice the 
presenter gives. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare answers, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Heather lost over £2,000.  ​Carl lost about £200.  ​Paul lost £20,000.
Never give your bank account or credit card details to anybody, 
either in an email or on the phone.
e 2.12
(script in Student’s Book on pp.125–126)
P = presenter, H = Heather, C = Carl, Pa = Paul
P	 Hello, and welcome to Five-Minute Money. Today we’re talking 
about scams and scammers. Over three million people a year 
are victims of scams in the UK, and they lose an average of one 
thousand two hundred pounds each, so we all need to know 
what to look out for. We’re going to hear three listeners’ stories, 
and for each scam, we’ll explain how to stay safe.  
Our first story is from Heather in Edinburgh.
H	 A few months ago I got an email from a friend who was away 
in Berlin. He said he’d lost his wallet and needed money to get 
home. He asked me for my credit card details, and I thought, ‘Well, 
he needs my help,’ so I sent him a reply with my card number 
and everything. But there was no reply, and I got suspicious, and 
I checked my credit card, and somebody had stolen over two 
thousand pounds. And of course I never got it back.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 33@@
33
2B
	2B	 Changing lives
3	 How long have you lived in this town?
4	 How long have you known your best friend?
Answer Sts’ questions using for and since and elicit from the 
class when you use these words (for = period of time,  
since = a point in time).
Finally, you could get Sts to ask each other questions 3 and 4.
!   If a student (who already knows the tense) uses the 
present perfect continuous to ask question 3, point out to 
the class that this is another form of the present perfect 
which they are going to study in this lesson.
1	LISTENING  checking hypotheses
a	 e 2.13  Books open. Focus on the instructions and make 
sure Sts can remember what a charity is (= an organization 
for helping people in need).
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–9 and make sure they 
understand all the lexis, e.g. lorry, take shelter, head teacher, 
etc. You may want to pre-teach orphan (= a child without 
a mother or father), as this comes up in the listening.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Play it again 
if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 In 2008
2	 They were on safari to see the mountain gorillas.
3	 It broke down.
4	 A primary school for orphans
5	 It was in a terrible condition. The walls were falling down, the 
blackboards were broken, and there weren’t many desks.
6	 She started teaching them English songs.
7	 A new school
8	 To set up a charity to raise money to rebuild the school
9	 On 14 March 2010
e 2.13
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Part 1
The charity Adelante Africa was started in two thousand and eight. 
That summer, a group of Spanish and British tourists had travelled 
to Uganda on safari to see the mountain gorillas. Halfway through 
the trip, in a small rural village called Igayaza, the lorry they were 
travelling in broke down. While a mechanic repaired the lorry, the 
group took shelter in a nearby building. It was a primary school for 
orphans, children without parents, but it was in a terrible condition. 
The walls were falling down, the blackboards were broken, and there 
weren’t many desks. But the children were wonderful: very bright 
and friendly. One of the tourists was a primary school teacher, and 
she started teaching them English songs. She was amazed at how 
quickly they learned. When they left, they asked the head teacher 
how they could help, and he said, ‘What we need is a new school.’ 
When the tourists arrived home from their holiday, they decided 
to set up a charity to raise money to rebuild the school. Two years 
later, on the fourteenth of March twenty ten, the new school opened 
with seventy-five children – and since then, Adelante Africa hasn’t 
stopped.
 G   present perfect + for / since, present perfect continuous 
 V   strong adjectives: exhausted, amazed, etc. 
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts revise the present perfect (with for and 
since) and they are introduced to the present perfect 
continuous. The context is provided by the story of a group 
of Spanish and British tourists whose holiday to Uganda 
changed their lives and led them to set up a charity, 
originally to help build a new school for orphan children, but 
which has now expanded into many different projects.
The lesson begins with a short radio programme about the 
charity Adelante Africa, followed by an interview with Jane 
Cadwallader, one of the founder members. Then sentences 
from the listening are used to contextualize the grammar 
presentation. This is followed by a pronunciation focus on 
sentence stress in present perfect continuous sentences and 
a speaking activity where Sts put the grammar into practice. 
The first half of the lesson finishes with a writing activity 
where Sts write an informal email. 
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read a blog by a BBC 
presenter who took part in a 500-mile challenge to the 
South Pole to raise money for charity. The lexical focus in this 
part of the lesson is on using strong adjectives, like furious 
and exhausted. The lesson ends with a video documentary 
about a charity bake sale at Oxford University Press.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables  
Grammar  present perfect + for / since, present perfect 
continuous p.152 
Communicative  How long have you been…? p.181  
(instructions p.170)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The Great OUP Bake Sale
For students
Workbook  2B
Online Practice  2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise the present perfect with for and since by writing these 
prompts on the board: 
1	 HOW LONG / BE A TEACHER? 
2	 HOW LONG / WORK AT THIS SCHOOL?  
3	 HOW LONG / LIVE IN THIS TOWN? 
4	 HOW LONG / KNOW YOUR BEST FRIEND? 
Put Sts in pairs and give them two minutes to decide how to 
make the questions.
Check answers and then get Sts to ask you. Make sure they 
use the present perfect tense and not the present simple 
(NOT How long are you a teacher?). 
1	 How long have you been a teacher?
2	 How long have you worked at this school?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 34@@
34
2B
I	 And can you tell me about some of the children, some individual 
cases?
J	 Hmm, let me think. I know a good example. John Muzzei. He’s a 
boy, an orphan, who was at the primary school when the lorry 
broke down. He was very bright, and when he finished primary in 
the new school he got very good grades and we sponsored him 
to go to secondary school. He worked very hard there as well and 
did very well, and now he’s in the last year of nursing at a good 
nursing college. And I also have to tell you about Baby Rose. She 
was brought to our children’s home with her brother. They were 
living alone in a hut with their mother, who was dying of AIDS. 
When they arrived, Rose was a year old. She was suffering from 
malnutrition and weighed only five kilos. Her little legs were 
so thin that we thought she’d never walk. And she never, ever 
smiled. Now, one year later, she’s running around, laughing and 
smiling. Since she came here, she’s changed completely into a 
healthy, happy child.
I	 So Adelante Africa has really changed their lives?
J	 Yes, it’s changed their lives, but it’s also changed the lives of the 
people who work for Adelante Africa. Most of us feel it’s the most 
satisfying thing we’ve ever done. Have a look at the photos and 
videos on our website – it’s www.adelanteafrica.org. Maybe it will 
change your life, too.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again, 
and this time they need to correct any mistakes in 
sentences 1–9.
	 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–9.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
1	 There are 57 children living in the children’s home.
2	 People in Uganda don’t eat (a lot of) vegetables / eat very 
few vegetables.
3	 They are building tanks to collect rainwater.
4	 In the factory, they make sunflower oil.
5	 In the FAL groups, adults learn to read and write.
6	 They have just built a secondary school.
7	 Most of the volunteers are from Uganda.
8	 John Muzzei is now studying to be a nurse.
9	 When Rose first arrived at the children’s home, she never smiled.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.126, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
2	GRAMMAR  present perfect + for / since,  
	 present perfect continuous
a	 Focus on the task and get Sts to complete 2–6 with a verb 
from the list. Point out that the first one (working) has 
been done for them.
b	 e 2.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2  doing    ​3  running    ​4  building    ​5  started    ​6  changed    ​
e 2.15
1	 Jane, how long have you been working with Adelante Africa?
2	 Tell us what Adelante Africa has been doing since two thousand 
and ten.
3	 The children’s home has been running since two thousand and 
twelve.
4	 We’ve also been building water tanks to collect rainwater.
5	 Since then, we’ve started eleven more FAL groups.
6	 Since she came here, she’s changed completely.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.126, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
b	 e 2.14  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Part 2, 
which is an interview with Jane Cadwallader, the secretary 
of Adelante Africa. Focus on the Glossary and go through 
it with the class. 
	 Explain that Sts need to number the photos in the order 
in which Jane mentions them. Point out that the first one 
(B) has been done for them. You may want to explain that 
photo E shows a tank collecting water.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2  A    ​3  E    ​4  D    ​5  H    ​6  F    ​7  C    ​8  G
e 2.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Part 2
I = interviewer, J = Jane
I	 I’m with Jane Cadwallader, the secretary of Adelante Africa. 
J	 Hello. 
I	 Hi Jane, how long have you been working with Adelante Africa?
J	 Well, for over ten years now. Since the beginning. I was the 
teacher who sang songs with the children back in two thousand 
and eight, when the lorry broke down.
I	 Jane, tell us what Adelante Africa has been doing since two 
thousand and ten, since the primary school was finished.
J	 Well, we’ve done a lot. Our next major project was to build a 
children’s home for the orphans who don’t have anybody in their 
extended family who can look after them. The children’s home 
has been running since two thousand and twelve, and now we 
have fifty-seven children there. But we also realized that if we 
wanted to help the local children, we really needed to help their 
parents, too. Our primary school was beautiful, but many of 
the children were sick, they had malaria or malnutrition. So we 
started several small community projects, for example we tried to 
help people to improve their diet by giving them seeds to plant a 
variety of vegetables. Most people in rural Uganda, you see, erm, 
don’t eat fruit and vegetables, except what they can find growing 
wild. We’ve also been building water tanks to collect rainwater, so 
that they have cleaner water to drink, and they don’t have to walk 
the long distances to the nearest river. And we’ve started a small 
factory to make sunflower oil, which has helped local farmers, 
and also given some jobs to local people. Sunflower oil is much 
healthier than the palm oil that most people were using before, 
so really we’ve helped the whole community with this.
I	 And are any of your new projects related to education?
J	 Absolutely. In two thousand and eleven we started a FAL group 
in Igayaza – FAL stands for Functional Adult Literacy, so these 
are classes to teach adults – mainly women – to read and write, 
and to speak English, which is the official language in Uganda. 
Since then, we’ve started eleven more FAL groups in other 
nearby villages. And our other big project is that we’ve just built 
a secondary school so that children from our primary school and 
the other local children can get a good secondary education. 
We’re very proud of it – it’s not quite finished yet, though. We 
need to raise more money in order to finish all the buildings.
I	 And are all the volunteers – the people who work with you – from 
Britain and Spain?
J	 No, not at all. There are a few of us from Europe who visit 
regularly, but the people who make it all possible are the 
Ugandan volunteers. Without them, we couldn’t do anything! In 
the future, we hope that all the projects will be run by them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 35@@
35
2B
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the live and work box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 She’s been studying English for three years.
2	 How long have they been watching TV?
3	 It’s been raining since lunchtime.
4	 I haven’t been living here for very long.
5	 How long have you been learning to drive?
b
1  for    ​2  haven’t seen    ​3  have you known    ​4  f    ​ 
5  I’ve been cleaning 
c
1	 We’ve known each other since we were children.
2	 The children have been playing computer games for 
two hours.
3	 Has your sister had that hairstyle for a long time?
4	 I’ve loved her since the first day we met.
5	 My internet connection hasn’t been working since yesterday.
6	 How long have you been waiting?
7	 I’ve been a teacher for three years.
8	 It’s been snowing since 5.00 this morning.
9	 Sam hasn’t been studying enough recently.
10	 Have you been living in London for a long time?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that the words which are stressed more 
strongly in a sentence are the ones which carry the 
important information, e.g. I’ve lived in the city centre for ten 
years. These are the words which you hear more clearly 
when somebody speaks to you and are typically verbs, 
nouns, adjectives, and adverbs. 
The other ‘non-information’ words are pronounced less 
strongly, and these words often get shortened when we 
speak, e.g. for becomes /fə/. Sts need plenty of practice 
with sentence rhythm, especially with longer structures, 
e.g. present perfect continuous sentences and questions, 
conditional sentences, etc.
a	 e 2.18  Tell Sts that they are going to hear two present 
perfect continuous questions and answers. The first time 
they listen, they should try to write down the stressed 
words in the pink boxes. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each line to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  learning, French    ​
2  learning, French, three, years
3  How, long, raining    ​
4  raining, lunchtime
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to answer questions 1 
and 2 by referring to the highlighted phrases in a. 
	 Check answers.
1	 b
2	 1–4 are present perfect continuous (have / has + been + -ing 
form).
	
5 and 6 are present perfect simple (have / has + past 
participle).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do questions 1 and 2 as a whole-class 
activity.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.135. 
Grammar notes
Present perfect (How long…? and for / since)
This use of the present perfect was presented in English 
File Pre-intermediate and should be revision for most Sts. 
Sts may need reminding that the present simple tense 
cannot be used here (NOT How long do you live in this 
town?).
Remind them how for and since are used and the different 
words or phrases which can be used after them, e.g. for 
two months, three years, a long time, ages; since October,  
I was born, last summer, I was a child, etc.
Present perfect continuous (with How long…? and 
for / since)
For many Sts, including those who used English File 
Pre‑intermediate, this will be the first time they have seen 
the present perfect continuous.
Point out to Sts that in the same way that there is a ‘simple’ 
and ‘continuous’ form of the present and the past, there 
are also two forms of the present perfect (simple and 
continuous).
The most important difference between the two forms for 
Sts at this point is that with How long…? and for / since, 
we normally use the continuous form with action verbs 
(e.g. learn, go, play, do, wait, etc.), and the simple form is 
used with non-action verbs (e.g. be, have, know). 
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 getting the form wrong, e.g. (forgetting to include been) 
How long have you learning English?
•	 depending on their L1, using the present tense instead 
of the present perfect continuous, e.g. I am learning 
English for a long time.
•	 using the continuous form of the present perfect with 
non-action verbs, e.g. I’ve been knowing my best friend for 
15 years.
•	 confusing for and since
Present perfect continuous (for continuous or 
repeated recent actions)
We also use the present perfect continuous to talk about 
recent continuous actions which have either just stopped 
or are still continuing, e.g. A You look tired. B Yes, I’ve been 
cleaning the house all afternoon (= I’ve just finished). 
A You look tired. B Yes, I haven’t been sleeping well recently 
(= I still have problems sleeping at night).
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 2.16 
and e 2.17 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 36@@
36
2B
b	 Focus on the instructions. Highlight that with an action 
verb, e.g. use, play, etc., Sts should ask the questions in the 
present perfect continuous. With non-action verbs, e.g. 
be, know, etc., you can’t use the continuous form, and the 
present perfect simple must be used, e.g. How long have 
you known your best friend? NOT How long have you been 
knowing…?
	 Remind Sts that with the verb live, you can use either of 
the present perfect forms.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Go through the squares before you start, 
and elicit whether the verbs are action or non-action and 
the question that Sts should ask in each case. You could 
demonstrate the activity yourself by copying a couple of 
squares on the board (one with an action verb, the other 
with a non-action verb) and writing something true in 
them. Then the class could ask you three questions about 
each one.
	 Put Sts in pairs. Focus on the speech bubbles. Sts now 
compare their information and take it in turns to choose 
one of their partner’s squares and ask him / her about 
the information in it. Remind them that the first question 
must be How long…?
	 Monitor and help.
	 If there’s time, get feedback from various pairs about an 
interesting piece of information about their partner.
5	WRITING  an informal email
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An informal email on p.116.
a	 Focus on the photo and see if Sts can guess who they are 
(they are the people from Writing 1 – Kasia with Angela’s 
children).
	 Now focus on the instructions and give Sts time to match 
the sentences to paragraphs A–F in the email. Tell them 
not to worry about the gaps in the email.
	 Check answers.
A	 She apologizes for not writing before.
B	 She thanks Angela for her stay.
C	 She talks about the nice things they did together when she 
was with them.
D	 She talks about what she’s been doing recently.
E	 She thanks them again and invites them to stay.
F	 She sends greetings to another member of the family.
b	 Focus on the Informal emails box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now tell Sts to read the email again and complete gaps 
2–8. Point out that the first one (Hi) has been done 
for them.
	 Check answers.
2  Thanks    ​3  time    ​4  miss    ​5  spending    ​6  hope    ​7  wishes  ​
8  attach
c	 Tell Sts to imagine that they have some British friends in 
the UK, and that they stayed with them for a week last 
month. Now they need to write an email to say thank 
you. Tell Sts to use the sentences in a in the correct order 
as their plan, and to use expressions from the Informal 
emails box.
e 2.18
1	 How long have you been learning French?
2	 I’ve been learning French for three years.
3	 How long has it been raining?
4	 It’s been raining since lunchtime.
b	 Now tell Sts to look at the words they have written and try 
to remember what the complete question or sentence is. 
	 Tell Sts to listen to the audio again and complete any gaps 
they have. Play the audio again.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
1	 How long have you been learning French?
2	 I’ve been learning French for three years.
3	 How long has it been raining?
4	 It’s been raining since lunchtime.
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each question and 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm. 
Encourage them to pronounce the stressed words (in 
the pink boxes) more strongly and not to stress the 
other words. Remind Sts that unstressed words are often 
contracted, e.g. been becomes /bɪn/ and for becomes /fə/.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the sentences.
d	 e 2.19  Focus on the instructions and example.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and form the question.
e 2.19
1	 It’s snowing. (pause) How long has it been snowing?
2	 I’m learning Russian. (pause) How long have you been learning 
Russian?
3	 Susan is working in Italy. (pause) How long has Susan been 
working in Italy?
4	 John is looking for a job. (pause) How long has John been looking 
for a job?
5	 They’re living with Mary’s parents. (pause) How long have they 
been living with Mary’s parents?
6	 I’m going to salsa classes. (pause) How long have you been going 
to salsa classes?
7	 It’s raining. (pause) How long has it been raining?
8	 John is going out with Emily. (pause) How long has John been 
going out with Emily?
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts make the questions, write the 
following on the board:
HOW LONG HAS 
 BEEN + -ing…?
HOW LONG HAVE 
 BEEN + -ing…?
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting the questions from 
individual Sts.
4	SPEAKING
	 In this speaking activity, Sts practise using both the 
present perfect simple and continuous.
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to write true 
information in as many of the squares as they can (e.g. 
WWF in the first square). Go round the class, making sure 
they have completed at least six of the squares.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 37@@
37
2B
having to wear the same clothes every day  I  (I’m not going 
to get clean clothes again for three weeks!)
travelling quickly for the first time  E  (we set off…and 
straight away we were travelling fast.)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other about an 
adventure sport they’ve done or an exciting experience 
they’ve had.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could also tell 
the class if you have done any adventure sports.
7	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  strong 
adjectives
Vocabulary notes
Many strong adjectives are used in a non-literal sense,  
e.g. starving and boiling are often used to mean very 
hungry or very hot, although people are not dying of 
hunger and the temperature is not 100 degrees Celsius.
Some of them can also be used as -ed or -ing adjectives, 
e.g. fascinating / fascinated. Sts should be aware of this, 
but there is also a focus on -ed / -ing adjectives later.
You may want to point out that amazed = very surprised, 
but amazing can mean either very surprising or very 
good, e.g. It was an amazing film.
You could also point out that delighted can also mean very 
happy.
a	 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–3 and complete each 
with an adjective. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  exhausted (= very tired)    ​2  freezing (= very cold)    ​ 
3  filthy (= very dirty)
	 Elicit / Explain that these are strong adjectives, i.e. that 
they mean very tired, very cold, etc. 
	 Then focus on the Strong adjectives box and go through 
it with the class.
b	 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–12, which all contain 
a strong adjective. From the context or their previous 
knowledge, Sts should be able to write synonyms for 
each one by writing the normal adjective. Sts could work 
in pairs or individually and then compare answers when 
they finish. Point out that the first one (angry) has been 
done for them.
c	 e 2.20  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers, making sure Sts are clear what all the 
adjectives mean. 
2  small    ​3  afraid    ​4  interesting    ​5  hungry    ​6  big    ​7  hot    ​
8  dirty    ​9  pleased    10  funny    ​11  sure    ​12  surprised
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. Get them to write the email 
according to the model. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their email, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
d	 Sts should check their email for mistakes before giving 
it in.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
6	READING  understanding the order of events
a	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand the 
phrases to raise money for a good cause and to take part in 
a charity event.
	 Sts could discuss the questions in pairs or you could do it 
as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback from various 
pairs.
b	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts know what 
a blog is (= a website where a person writes regularly 
about recent events or topics that interest them, usually 
with photos and links to other websites that they find 
interesting). Give Sts time to read the introduction and to 
answer the two questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the blog the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 She’s run an ultra marathon in Namibia and she’s kayaked 
down the Amazon.
2	 A polar challenge – a 500-mile journey to the South Pole. It’s 
different because the cold, rather than the heat, might be a 
problem.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the blog, ask them some 
comprehension questions, e.g. Where is Helen going on this 
challenge? (To the South Pole), How is Helen going to get 
there? (By skiing, kite-skiing, and cycling), etc.
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Point out that the first one (B) has 
been done for them.
	 Now give Sts time to number the entries 2–9.
	 Check answers.
2  D    ​3  I    ​4  C    ​5  E    ​6  H    ​7  F    ​8  A    ​9  G
d	 Now tell Sts to read all the blog entries again and decide 
in which one Helen mentions the items in the list.
	 Give Sts time to complete the task.
	 Check answers. 
feeling very emotional  G  (I cried)
how beautiful Antarctica is  B  (the scenery was incredible)
looking forward to a wash  H  (lots of hot water so I can have 
a good wash)
looking like a science fiction character  A  (I may look like 
Darth Vader)
not being able to go outside  D  (we’ve had to stay in the tent)
stopping cycling because she was very tired  C  (we had to 
stop because I was completely exhausted)
stopping using one method of transport  F  (we’ve only 
been using bikes and cross-country skis, not kite-skis)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 38@@
38
2B
8	r VIDEO LISTENING
	 This is the first of five Video Listenings, which are 
incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable to 
show the video in class, remind Sts that they can find the 
video on Online Practice and ask them to watch the video 
and do the activities for homework.
a	 Focus on the poster and the photos of the five cakes. Tell 
Sts that they are going to watch a video about an event at 
Oxford University Press – a sale of home-made cakes and 
biscuits to raise money for charity. 
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
EXTRA IDEA   Pause the video before the winner is 
announced (after the narrator says And then to choose the 
winner at 05:27) and get Sts to predict which one it is.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer. Ask Sts if they think that the winning cake looks 
the best.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.  
You could teach the group of baking-related words, e.g. 
buttercream (a mixture of butter and sugar), a sponge cake, 
blueberries, cookies, a loaf cake (= a cake that has the same 
shape as a loaf of bread), and icing.
The winning cake is number 2, the Neapolitan cake. 
The Great OUP Bake Sale
N = narrator, E = Emma, J = James, D = Daisy, L = Laura
N	 People do many different things to raise money for charity. These 
runners are doing  the New York Marathon. Every year, the race 
raises about forty million dollars. 
And these people are doing a sponsored skydive. There are also 
ways to raise money without taking exercise or jumping out of an 
aeroplane. 
These people are bringing cakes to a charity bake sale. The 
popularity of bake sales in the UK has increased dramatically over 
the last decade, thanks in part at least to the popularity of The 
Great British Bake Off. This programme, which began in 2010, has 
encouraged people of all abilities to bake, especially when it’s for 
charity. 
Today’s sale – at Oxford University Press – will raise money for two 
charities: Macmillan Cancer Support and Adelante Africa, a charity 
that supports education and other projects in a rural area of 
Uganda. But this bake sale is different – it’s also a competition and 
will be judged by Daisy Watt and Emma Collen, who are chefs and 
professional bakers. And from the moment the posters appeared, 
people have tried to persuade their colleagues to join in. Emma 
is going to make Viennese Whirls – biscuits with buttercream and 
jam.
E	 I bake quite often, probably once or twice a month. It’s one of 
my main hobbies that I enjoy – um, kind of a stress-reliever for 
me, just being in the kitchen by myself, with some music on, just 
enjoying baking. Erm, and it’s just an added bonus to do it for 
charity as well, combining one of my hobbies with raising some 
money for some really great causes. It’s not the first time I’ve 
taken part in a bake sale. I’ve done several different kinds of bake 
sales for work and other things.
N	 James is going to make a sponge cake with blueberries.
J	 I bake not that often, maybe about, I don’t know, once month 
or something I might bake. Erm, when I, when I do, it’s usually 
baking with my kids, I suppose, so, um, you know, we make 
something really easy like cookies or something like that. The 
cake that I’ve baked today – I have baked that one in the past 
before. And so I’m quite confident, that it’s going to be OK at 
least, but, you know, I couldn’t say that it’s actually a speciality. I 
don’t bake often enough to have a speciality to be honest. I mean 
e 2.20
1	 A	 Was Lisa’s father angry about the car accident?
	
B	 Yes, he was furious!
2	 A	 Is Oliver’s flat small?
	
B	 Yes, it’s really tiny – just a bedroom and a sitting room.
3	 A	 Are you afraid of flying?
	
B	 Yes, I’m terrified! I never fly anywhere.
4	 A	 There was an interesting documentary about whales on TV last 
night.
	
B	 Yes, I thought it was fascinating.
5	 A	 Are you very hungry?
	
B	 I’m starving! I haven’t eaten all day.
6	 A	 Is your parents’ house big?
	
B	 It’s huge. It’s enormous. It has seven bedrooms.
7	 A	 Was it hot in Dubai?
	
B	 It was boiling! Forty-five degrees.
8	 A	 Was Jack’s kitchen dirty?
	
B	 It was filthy. It took us three hours to clean it.
9	 A	 Are your parents pleased about the wedding?
	
B	 They’re delighted. In fact, they want to pay for everything!
10	 A	Was the film funny?
	
B	 It was hilarious. We laughed the whole way through.
11	 A	Are you sure you locked the door?
	
B	 I’m positive. I remember turning the key.
12	 A	Were you surprised to hear that Ted and Sonia have broken up?
	
B	 I was absolutely amazed! I never thought it would happen.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each exchange 
for Sts to listen and repeat the questions and responses. 
Model and drill pronunciation of the adjectives where 
necessary. Encourage Sts to copy the strong stress on the 
strong adjectives.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the conversations.
	 Get some pairs to perform in front of the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you want to give more practice, you 
could ask the class more questions using a normal adjective 
and get them to respond with a strong one, e.g. Is the water 
cold? Is an elephant big? Was the book good? Was the weather 
bad? Are you frightened of snakes?, etc.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Are you hungry?, A on p.106, B on 
p.111.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully, and then 
demonstrate the activity with a B student (you take the 
part of student A).
	 Point out that when a pair has finished the activity, they 
should repeat it, this time trying to respond as quickly as 
possible and trying to stress the strong adjective strongly.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. Tell 
them to give as much information as possible and to use 
strong adjectives.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Choose one of the questions and tell Sts 
what you think, giving as much information as possible.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 39@@
39
2B
1	 The New York Marathon is an example of one of the ways 
that people raise money for charity. It raises about $40 million 
every year.
2	 The Great British Bake Off is a television programme which has 
made baking and bake sales very popular.
3	 Macmillan Cancer Support and Adelante Africa are the two 
charities that the OUP bake sale is raising money for.
4	 Daisy Watt is a chef and is one of the judges of the baking 
competition
5	 Viennese Whirls are the biscuits that Emma is making.
6	 Emma says that baking is a stress-reliever for her – she enjoys 
baking and listening to music in the kitchen.
7	 James is making a sponge cake with blueberries.
8	 James says that when he bakes it’s usually with his kids, and 
they make something easy.
9	 The decoration is one of the things that Daisy is looking for – 
she wants to see that the bakers have made a real effort with 
the decoration of their cakes..
10	 The OUP bake sale raised over £270 for the two charities.
	 Finally, ask Sts some questions, e.g. Is there a similar 
programme to ‘The Great British Bake Off’ in your country? 
Do you like baking? What kind of things do you make? Do 
people do Bake Sales for charity in your country?, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get the class to do a Bake Sale to 
raise money for a local charity.
I’m baking now, because it’s for a charity, right, so, so I wouldn’t 
say I have a speciality.
N	 The finalists in this competition bake sale are a Baklava Cake, 
a Neapolitan Cake, Emma’s Viennese Whirls, a loaf cake and a 
chocolate cake. Although this isn’t The Great British Bake Off, Daisy 
is looking for certain criteria in the cakes.
D	 There are a few things I was looking for – refinement. It sounds 
harsh, but there were good cakes out there, so it was really 
important to choose the cakes that looked like someone had put 
real effort into the decoration and you can see the ones that put 
the effort in.
N	 And it’s now time to judge the five finalists.
D	 That’s fantastic! Very clever and you’ve even done the different-
coloured icing in between – a labour of love. Really good sponge. 
The chocolate sponge is delicious. It’s not over chocolatey, it's 
just…
N	 And then to choose the winner.
D	 So I’ve conferred enough, because it is really close, but there is 
one winner, who has obviously put so much effort, not just in the 
decoration, but also her sponge is technically brilliant. So, are you 
going to come up here? Congratulations!
N	 And now the only thing left to do is to eat the cake – and give 
money to the two charities.
L	 Obviously really happy that my cake was chosen and it’s really 
nice to bake for such a great cause as well.
E	 They were really complimentary about my bake, which was 
great. But a biscuit, I don’t think, is going to stand up to those 
beautifully-iced cakes that we had, so the standard was really 
high.
J	 I mean I’m not the best baker in the world. I know that, but you 
know, as I say, it came out really well and it raised loads of money 
for the charities, so no, I’m really pleased I did it, yeah.
N	 The cake sale raised over two hundred and seventy pounds for 
Macmillan Cancer Support and Adelante Africa.
b	 Give Sts time to read 1–10 which are mentioned in the 
video and make sure that they understand them, e.g. 
Viennese Whirls (= a kind of biscuit).
	 Play the video again, pausing for Sts to decide why the 
items are mentioned.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Pause the video after each thing to give Sts 
time to write.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First, put Sts in pairs and tell them to try 
to remember why 1–10 are mentioned. Then play the video 
again.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 40@@
40
Revise and Check
	1&2	Revise and Check
PRONUNCIATION
c	 1  chicken /ɪ/    ​2  charge /ɑː/    ​3  inherit /h/    ​4  salary /æ/    ​
5  steamed /iː/
d	 1  sensible    ​2  terrified    ​3  unselfish    ​4  mortgage    ​ 
	
5  exhausted
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	 is now doing 
b	 1  giving    ​2  proud    ​3  benefit    ​4  might    ​5  wasted    ​ 
	
6  improvement    ​7  closing
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  b    ​4  c    ​5  b
e 2.21
1
I = interviewer, P = Philomena
I	 What do you eat to cheer yourself up when you’re feeling sad?
P	 I love roast potatoes, baked potatoes. They’re warm, buttery, nice 
olive oil. They make me feel good.
I	 Does it make you feel better?
P	 Yeah, usually it does. I think they’re quite refreshing, warm. When 
you’re feeling down, I think they’re the perfect remedy.
2
I = interviewer, M = Mark
I	 How often do you eat out?
M	 Well, my wife would probably like me to eat out a little bit less, 
but probably about two to three times a week.
I	 What kind of places do you go to?
M	 You know, it always kind of depends. I think people like to eat in 
three or four different restaurants in their town no matter what, 
and it’s usually one of those three or four, usually pizza, Mexican, 
or Asian.
I	 Why do you like these kinds of restaurants?
M	 I guess part of it is it’s the type of food that you can’t normally 
prepare at home, so it’s something a little bit different. Otherwise 
it’s just tasty.
3
I = interviewer, R = Ross
I	 Do you have brothers and sisters?
R	 I have step brothers and sisters – two stepsisters and one 
stepbrother.
I	 Do you get on with them well?
R	 Yes, we didn’t grow up together, but we’re now all adults and we 
get on really well.
4
I = interviewer, C = Coleen 
I	 Have you ever won any money, for example in a lottery?
C	 I won, many years ago, a thousand pounds, which was amazing.
I	 What did you do with it?
C	 We went on an unplanned long weekend break in the Malverns in 
England, which was absolutely gorgeous
5
I = interviewer, R = Richard
I	 Have you ever taken part in a charity event?
R	 I have, yes. I ran the London Marathon, I think about eight years 
ago now. For Cancer Research.
I	 How much money did you raise?
S	 About six and a half thousand pounds.
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, 
in class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and 
the class time available.
The first page revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 50 
(grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), so 
you can use the first page as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. 
The pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank on 
pp.166–167. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the video showing the mouth position for each sound. If you 
don’t want to use this in class, tell Sts to look at it at home 
and to practise making the sounds and saying the words.
The second page presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a 
slightly higher level than those in the File, but which revises 
grammar and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The 
listening is some unscripted street interviews, where people 
are asked questions related to the topics in the Files. Sts can 
either watch the interviews on video or listen to them on 
audio. You can find these on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, Class DVD, and Class Audio CDs 
(audio only). Alternatively, you could set this section / activity 
as homework. Sts can find the video on Online Practice. 
Finally, there is a speaking challenge which assesses Sts’ 
ability to use the language of the Files orally. You could get 
Sts to do these activities in pairs, or Sts can tick the boxes if 
they feel confident that they can do them.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Video  Can you understand these people? 1&2 
Quick Test 2 
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  c    ​6  c    ​7  a    ​8  c    ​9  a    ​10  b    ​
11  a    ​12  b    ​13  a    ​14  c    ​15  b
VOCABULARY
a
1	 duck (the others are seafood)
2	 crab (the others are meat)
3	 beetroot (the others are fruits)
4	 raspberry (the others are vegetables)
5	 chicken (the others are ways of cooking) 
b	 1  dishonest    ​2  unfriendly    ​3  irresponsible    ​4  immature   
	
5  insensitive
c	 1  waste    ​2  inherit    ​3  earn    ​4  borrow    ​5  save
d	 1  exhausted    ​2  starving    ​3  freezing    ​4  filthy    ​5  furious
e	 1  out    ​2  out    ​3  on    ​4  back    ​5  out
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 41@@
41
3A
1	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  transport
a	 e 3.1  Books open. Tell Sts they are going to hear eight 
forms of transport and they must number them in order.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know each form of 
transport. Model and drill pronunciation.
e 3.1
(Sound effects for the following forms of transport)
1	 train
2	 car
3	 bike
4	 motorbike
5	 lorry
6	 the Underground
7	 scooter
8	 bus
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Transport on p.155. 
Vocabulary notes
Public transport and vehicles
Make sure Sts are clear about the difference between a 
bus (= usually a vehicle used in a town or city) and a coach 
(= an intercity bus).
You may want to point out that the London Underground 
is often called the Tube.
On the road
Sts may need reminding that compound nouns are two 
nouns together, where the first one describes the second.
	 Focus on 1 Public transport and vehicles and make 
sure Sts know the meaning of vehicle (= something that is 
used for transporting people or things from one place to 
another). Model and drill its pronunciation /ˈviːəkl/.  
Then get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 3.2
Transport
1	 Public transport and vehicles
2	 coach
8	 ferry
3	 lorry
9	 motorbike
6	 motorway
4	 scooter
5	 tram
7	 the Underground
1	 van
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the words and look at the 
photos to see if they can remember them.
 G   choosing between comparatives and superlatives
 V   transport
 P   /ʃ/, /dʒ/, and /tʃ/, linking
Lesson plan
The context for this lesson is an episode of the well-known 
BBC series about cars and driving, Top Gear, in which 
previous presenter Jeremy Clarkson and his colleagues 
organize a race across London using four different modes of 
transport.
The lesson begins with vocabulary, and Sts learn words and 
phrases connected to transport, focusing particularly on 
road travel. This is followed by a pronunciation focus where 
the consonant sounds /ʃ/, /dʒ/, and /tʃ/ are contrasted. Sts 
then read about three of the participants in the race, who 
travelled by bike, car, and boat, and finally they listen to 
find out how the fourth participant, who was using public 
transport, fared. The first half ends with Sts discussing what 
the result of the race would be if it were held in their nearest 
big city.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts begin by revising 
what they know about comparatives and superlatives, 
before going to the Grammar Bank, where this knowledge 
is extended. This leads into a listening activity about the 
causes of car accidents, based on detailed research from the 
USA. There is another pronunciation focus on linking in fast 
speech, which will help Sts to understand the listening. Sts 
then discuss some statements to do with road transport.  
The lesson ends with a writing focus where Sts write an 
article about transport in their town or city.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  choosing between comparatives and 
superlatives p.153 
Communicative  Questionnaire p.182 (instructions p.170) 
Vocabulary  Transport p.207 (instructions p.200)
For students
Workbook  3A
Online Practice  3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Play Hangman (see Elementary Teacher’s Book p.24) with the 
phrase PUBLIC TRANSPORT. 
Drill the pronunciation. Then get a show of hands to find out 
how many of the class regularly use public transport to get 
to work / school.
	3A	 Survive the drive
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 42@@
42
3A
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication I’m a tourist – can you help me?,  
A on p.106, B on p.111.
	 Focus on the instructions and set the scene. Sts A, who 
are foreign tourists wanting to use public transport in the 
town, should ask Sts B, who live in the town, their five 
questions.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles. Now Sts B, who are foreign 
tourists wanting to use a hired car in the town, should ask 
Sts A, who live in the town, their five questions.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Get some feedback from the class on some of the 
information given by Sts B and then by Sts A.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
2	PRONUNCIATION  /ʃ/, /dʒ/, and /tʃ/
Pronunciation notes
These three consonant sounds are often confused by Sts. 
•	 sh is always pronounced /ʃ/ (e.g. shower, ship), as is -tion 
(e.g. station, pronunciation).
•	 j is always pronounced /dʒ/.
•	 ch is usually pronounced /tʃ/, but can also be 
pronounced /ʃ/ in some words, mainly of French origin, 
e.g. chef, machine. It is also sometimes pronounced /k/ 
in words like chemist’s, technology, etc.
a	 e 3.5  Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the words 
and sounds: shower /ʃ/, jazz /dʒ/, and chess /tʃ/.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 3.5
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.26
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each word and 
sound for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 Get Sts to look at the list of words and put them in 
the correct column in a. Remind them that this kind 
of exercise is easier if they say the words aloud to 
themselves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 3.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.6
shower /ʃ/  crash, rush, station
jazz /dʒ/  bridge, journey, traffic jam
chess /tʃ/  adventure, catch, coach
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
d	 e 3.7  Focus on the pairs of words, and make sure Sts 
know what they mean.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen. Ask if they can hear the difference.
e 3.7
See words in Student’s Book on p.26
	 Now look at 2 On the road and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Point out to Sts that roadworks is one 
word and that it is always used in the plural.
e 3.3
2 On the road
1	 car crash
2	 cycle lane
3	 parking fine
4	 pedestrian zone
5	 petrol station
6	 roadworks
7	 rush hour
8	 seat belt
9	 speed camera
10	 speed limit
11	 taxi rank
12	 traffic lights
13	 traffic jam
14	 zebra crossing
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Remind Sts 
that the strong stress falls on the first word in compound 
nouns, e.g. seat belt. Give further practice of any words 
your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the compound 
nouns and look at the photos. Can they remember the 
compound nouns?
	 Now focus on 3 How long does it take? and go 
through the information box with the class. If you have a 
monolingual class, you could ask Sts what verb they use in 
their L1 to talk about how long things take.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the two 
questions. 
	 Then get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   With a show of hands, you could see who has 
the shortest / longest trip to work / school. 
	 Finally, focus on 4 Phrasal verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 3.4
4 Phrasal verbs
1	 We set off at seven in the morning to try to avoid the traffic. 
2	 I arrive at eight fifteen. Do you think you could pick me up at the 
station? 
3	 Always check the address you put in your satnav or you may end 
up in the wrong place.
4	 We’re going to run out of petrol soon. Let’s stop at the next petrol 
station. 
5	 Look out! You’re going to crash!
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 43@@
43
3A
They go from Kew Bridge, in the south-west of London, to the 
check-in desk at London City Airport, in the east.
A bike, a car, a motorboat, and public transport
b	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss questions 1 
and 2. 
	 Elicit Sts’ opinions. You could write their predictions on the 
board. 
c	 Now give Sts time to read the three paragraphs and to see 
if they want to change their predictions in b.
	 When they have finished reading, they should tell another 
student what they think. 
	 Find out if anyone has changed their prediction.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted verb phrases in e.
d	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to read about the 
three journeys again and to answer questions 1–7.
	 Set the three-minute time limit, and when the time is up, 
get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Check answers.
1  Ja    2  Je    3  R    4  Ja    5  R    6  Je    7  Je
e	 Focus on the task and get Sts to work with a partner to 
say what the words and phrases mean. Encourage them 
to go back and look at the words in context if they can’t 
remember their meaning.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
turned round /tɜːnd raʊnd/ = changed direction
was ahead of /wəz əˈhed əv/ = was in front of sb
crash into /kræʃ ˈɪntə/ = hit an object or another vehicle
turned red /tɜːnd red/ = changed to red
get stuck /get stʌk/ = be unable to move
getting worse /getɪŋ wɜːs/ = becoming more and more busy
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
f	 e 3.10  Focus on the instructions and the map, and ask 
Sts how The Stig is going to travel (By public transport). 
Give them time to look at the map carefully.
	 Before playing the audio, make sure Sts understand 
warning (= telling sb that sth bad may happen in the 
future, so that they can try to avoid it).
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and mark The Stig’s route on the map and answer 
the question. Play again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting what public transport he took 
(bus, Tube, and train). When eliciting the information or 
warning you hear on the Tube, check Sts understand 
the word gap. You could also elicit that on the Tube, the 
stations are announced before you arrive, and you are also 
told what lines you can change to at each station.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each pair for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
e	 e 3.8  Now tell Sts that this time they will only hear one 
of the words in each pair and they must circle the one 
they hear.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  b  jeep    2  a  chain    3  b  joke    4  b  chip    5  a  shoes    
6  b  watch 
e 3.8
1	 jeep
2	 chain
3	 joke
4	 chip
5	 shoes
6	 watch
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
f	 e 3.9  Tell Sts they are going to hear five short sentences 
or questions and they need to write them down.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 3.9
1	 Do you like chips?
2	 I’m going to wash it.
3	 You choose.
4	 Don’t joke about it.
5	 Is it cheap?
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence or 
question to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See script 3.9 
3	READING & LISTENING  confirming 
predictions
a	 Focus on the photos and ask Sts if they know the TV 
programme Top Gear. If they do, ask them what they think 
of it. If they don’t, tell them that it is a British TV show 
about cars and that the presenters do funny, adventurous, 
and sometimes dangerous things.
	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand race (= a competition between people, etc. 
to see which one is faster or the fastest). Point out the 
Glossary and go through it with the class.
	 Get Sts to read the introduction and answer the three 
questions.
	 Check answers. 
!   When you check the answer to where they are going 
from and to, focus on the map so that Sts can see the places 
mentioned. Point out that it is part of the Underground map, 
and that the distances and positions of the river, buildings, 
etc. are approximate.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 44@@
44
3A
4	GRAMMAR  choosing between comparatives and 
superlatives
a	 Focus on the task and get Sts to do this in pairs or 
individually.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner if they worked 
individually, and then check answers. Make sure Sts 
explain why the g phrases are wrong.
1	 g  the quickest way
2	 f
3	 g  as fast as
4	 f
5	 g  as many trains as
6	 g  the most exciting journey
7	 f
8	 g  more carefully than
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.136. 
Grammar notes
Sts will almost certainly have been taught the basic 
rules regarding comparative and superlative forms of 
adjectives and adverbs, so this grammar focus should 
be mainly revision and consolidation. Sts may still mix 
up comparative and superlative forms (This is the older 
building in the town) and make mistakes with the rules for 
forming comparatives and superlatives.
Some other typical mistakes include: 
•	 confusing as and than, e.g. The train isn’t as cheap than 
the bus.
•	 omitting the definite article, e.g. He’s best player in 
the team.
•	 confusing adjectives and adverbs, e.g. You drive more 
quick than me.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 3.12, 
e 3.13 and e 3.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the two information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 I think skiing is easier than horse-riding.
2	 This is the hottest train I’ve ever been on.
3	 A motorbike is more powerful than a scooter.
4	 I drive more slowly than my partner.
5	 The worst time to travel is on holiday weekends.
6	 The furthest / The farthest I’ve ever driven is from London 
to Edinburgh.
7	 The London Underground is older than the subway in New 
York.
8	 I think that travelling by train is the most relaxing form of 
transport.
9	 Of all my family, my mum is the best driver.
b
1  as    ​2  the    ​3  than    ​4  ever    ​5  him    ​6  most    ​7  as    ​
8  more    ​9  as    ​10  in
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
He took a bus from Kew Bridge to Acton Town. Then he took 
the Underground (District line) from Acton Town to Monument. 
Then at Monument, he changed onto the Docklands Light 
Railway, which he took to London City Airport.
The train now approaching is…; Please mind the gap between 
the train and the platform; The next station is Monument. 
Change here for…
e 3.10
N = narrator, T = Tube announcer
N	 The Stig was using public transport for the first time in his life! He saw 
a big, red thing coming towards him. A bus! He got on it, and used his 
Oyster card to pay. Ten minutes later, he got off and got the Tube at 
Acton Town, to take the District line to Monument. Eighteen stops!
T	 The train now approaching is a District line train to West Ham. 
Please mind the gap between the train and the platform.
N	 The Stig noticed that everyone was reading a newspaper, so he 
picked up a free one that was on a seat and started reading. 
T	 The next station is Monument. Change here for the Central line 
and the Docklands Light Railway.
N	 He got off the Tube and ran to the platform for the Docklands Light 
Railway. After a few minutes, a train arrived. Now it was just ten stops 
and he would be there!
g	 e 3.11  Write the four presenters’ names and modes of 
transport on the board: JEREMY – BOAT, JAMES – CAR,  
RICHARD – BIKE, THE STIG – PUBLIC TRANSPORT.
	 Now tell Sts to number them in the order in which they 
think they arrive at the final destination (you may still have 
Sts’ predictions from earlier in the lesson).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Now focus Sts’ attention on the two questions, making 
sure they understand annoyed (= slightly angry), and tell 
them to listen to what happened.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
e 3.11
Jeremy Clarkson, who had travelled in the boat, ran into London City 
airport and ran straight to the check-in desk.
The man at the check-in desk said, ‘Unfortunately, a gentleman on a 
bike has checked in already.’ Jeremy couldn’t believe it! He looked at 
Richard Hammond, who was standing nearby laughing.
They waited for the other two to arrive. They needed public 
transport to come last. Top Gear, after all, is a programme about cars.
A few minutes later came The Stig. He was third.
And fifteen minutes later, James, who had come by car, arrived at the 
airport. Disaster! Public transport had beaten the car!
	 First, elicit the order in which everyone arrived.
1  Richard (bike)    2  Jeremy (boat)    
3  The Stig (public transport)    4  James (car)
	 With a show of hands, find out how many Sts had guessed 
correctly.
	 Then elicit why Jeremy Clarkson was annoyed.
Because Top Gear is a car programme, and the car came last.
h	 If Sts all come from the same city / town, elicit the modes 
of transport available in their city / town and ask them 
which one would win in a similar competition.
	 If Sts come from different cities / towns, put them in pairs 
or small groups, and get them to do the activity.
	 Get some feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 45@@
45
3A
1  most dangerous    2  bad decisions    
3  look at an accident    4  cause of accidents on   
5  twice as, have an accident    6  What did, most interesting
7  keep your eyes on
e 3.15
1	 What’s the most dangerous thing you can do while you’re 
driving?
2	 …you’ll probably make bad decisions…
3	 …people slow down to look at an accident…
4	 …this is a really common cause of accidents on motorways…
5	 This makes you twice as likely to have an accident. 
6	 What did you find most interesting?
7	 …always keep your eyes on the road!
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 You could then get individual Sts to say the sentences.
c	 e 3.16  Focus on the likely box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now tell Sts they’re going to listen to the full interview 
with the traffic safety expert. They must listen and number 
the eight actions or feelings listed in the text in a from  
1 (= the most dangerous) to 8 (= the least dangerous).
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
1	 feeling emotional
2	 reaching for something in the car
3	 looking at something by the road
4	 adjusting the satnav
5	 feeling tired
6	 adjusting the radio or music system
7	 eating or drinking
8	 talking to a passenger
e 3.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
H = TV host, T = Tom 
H	 Hello and welcome. On today’s programme, we’re talking about 
how to drive safely. A new book called Survive the Drive has just 
been published, and we asked Tom, our transport and travel 
correspondent, to take a look. Welcome, Tom.
T	 Thank you.
H	 So, tell us – what’s the most dangerous thing you can do while 
you’re driving? Obviously, we’re not talking about drinking 
alcohol, taking drugs, or using a handheld phone to make calls or 
text, which everyone knows you must never do.
T	 Well, this is really surprising: top of the list is driving when you’re 
feeling emotional. The researchers found that you’re nearly ten 
times more likely to have an accident if you’re feeling very sad or 
angry or stressed. If you’re emotional, then you can’t concentrate 
on the road, and you’ll probably make bad decisions if you find 
yourself in a dangerous situation. In fact, if you’re feeling very 
emotional, it’d be better not to drive at all!
H	 Wow, OK. I’ll try to remember that next time I have a bad day at 
work! What’s the second most dangerous thing?
T	 This one’s less surprising – it’s reaching for something in your 
car. It might be your phone, or a map, or some sweets. If you’re 
reaching down, or trying to get something from the back seat, 
then you aren’t looking at the road, and you’re nine times more 
likely to have an accident.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the task. Point out the example, explaining that 
first, Sts have to make a superlative sentence using the 
given adjective, i.e. Cycling is the most dangerous. Then 
they must compare the other two remaining, i.e. Riding a 
motorbike is more dangerous than driving.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to complete the task.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get pairs to compare with another pair, 
to see if they agree. Get them to defend their choices.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs, asking them to give 
reasons where possible.
5	LISTENING & PRONUNCIATION  linking
a	 Tell Sts they are going to read a text about some American 
research looking at the causes of road accidents. You 
might want to pre-teach / elicit the meaning of distracting 
(= taking your attention away from what you are trying 
to do). 
	 Give Sts time to read the text.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts some comprehension questions, 
e.g. How did the scientists do their research? (They put video 
cameras and other gadgets into more than 3,500 cars.),  
How old were the drivers? (Between 16 and 98), How long did 
the research take? (Three years), etc.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss questions 
1–3, making sure they understand the lexis, e.g. reliable. 
You might also want to check Sts understand the 
meaning of the eight things in the list (they may not know 
adjust and reach).
	 Elicit some opinions from various pairs, but don’t tell them 
if they are correct.
	 Tell Sts they will find out the answers later in the lesson.
Pronunciation notes
The focus here is on understanding English rather than on 
production. One of the things that can make fast spoken 
English difficult for Sts to understand is linking. This makes 
words sound as if they’re running into each other, and 
Sts can find it hard to identify individual words – and 
they may get lost altogether and not understand overall 
meaning. Here we focus on identifying and understanding 
linking, without trying to push Sts into producing it 
themselves. This is an important first step which will 
improve Sts’ comprehension. There are many different 
kinds of linking in English, and here the focus is on three 
common types, examples of which frequently occur in 
superlative sentences.
b	 e 3.15  Focus on the Linking box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now tell Sts they’re going to listen to some extracts from 
an interview with a traffic safety expert and they must 
complete the seven sentences with words which are 
linked. 
	 Give Sts time to read 1–7.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through, pausing after 
each sentence to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 46@@
46
3A
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the statements and go through them with Sts.
	 Give Sts time to decide if they agree or disagree with 
them and to think of their reasons.
b	 Focus on the Giving your opinion box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Sts should take 
turns to read out the statements, give their own opinion 
and reasons, and then invite opinions and reasons from 
the other Sts in the group. 
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use the expressions 
in the box.
	 Get feedback to find out if there was a general consensus 
of agreement or disagreement on each statement.
7	WRITING  an article for a website
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An article for a website on 
p.117.
a	 Focus on the instructions and questions.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to discuss 
the questions. 
	 Get some feedback from the class.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article to check their answers to a and 
then answer 1–3. Tell them not to worry about the gaps in 
the article.
	 Check answers. 
the most expensive: black cab / taxi
the healthiest: cycling
the best for sightseeing: (double-decker) bus
the safest late at night: taxi / minicab
1	 To travel on the Underground and on buses
2	 £2 a day for short journeys up to 30 minutes, more for longer 
journeys (£2 for each additional 30 minutes).
3	 A black cab is more expensive, but the drivers know London 
very well. A minicab is a normal car which works for a 
company; you have to book it, but it’s much cheaper than a 
black cab.
c	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and to complete the 
gaps with prepositions from the list.
	 Check answers.
2  on    3  off    4  on    5  with    6  in    7  at
d	 Focus on the Transport in your town box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to write a similar article about 
public transport in their (nearest) town / city. Tell them 
to use headings as in the article, language from the 
information box, and the Vocabulary Bank Transport.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their article, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
e	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
H	 And number three?
T	 Number three is looking at something interesting or something 
that’s happening by the road. A really common example of this 
is when people slow down to look at an accident – they don’t 
realize that by looking at the accident and not at the road, the 
chance of having an accident themselves goes up over seven 
times. In fact, this is a really common cause of accidents on 
motorways.
H	 So the message is: don’t be distracted.
T	 Yes, exactly. If you’re driving fast, you can travel over one hundred 
metres in less than three seconds. And a lot can happen in three 
seconds.
H	 So that’s the top three – what about other things to avoid?
T	 Well, at number four is adjusting your satnav, which can be very 
distracting, and makes you nearly five times more likely to have 
an accident. At number five is driving when you’re tired. Sixty per 
cent of drivers say they’ve driven when tired in the last year, so it’s 
a big problem – and you can lose control of your car completely. 
And at number six is adjusting your radio or music system. This 
makes you twice as likely to have an accident. Again, it’s the 
distraction from the road that’s the problem, and only having one 
hand on the wheel.
H	 And the last two?
T	 The seventh is eating or drinking, because again, you normally 
take one hand off the wheel, and the eighth is talking to a 
passenger, which can be distracting because the driver often 
turns to look at the passenger.
H	 So how would you summarize the research? What did you find 
most interesting?
T	 I think for me, the most interesting thing is that some of these 
things don’t seem very dangerous, and good drivers often do 
them – but the research shows that they are. So next time you get 
in your car to drive somewhere, think about what you’re doing, 
and always, always keep your eyes on the road!
	 Find out, with a show of hands, if anyone guessed the top 
three correctly; then find out if the class agree with the 
expert’s top three.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again and 
this time they must write down any numbers or facts 
related to the eight actions or feelings. Point out that the 
first one has been done for them.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
2	 reaching for something in the car – nine times more likely 
to have an accident 
3	 looking at something by the road – seven times more likely 
to have an accident
4	 adjusting the satnav – five times more likely to have an 
accident
5	 feeling tired – 60 per cent of drivers have driven when tired 
in the last year 
6	 adjusting the radio or music system – twice as likely to 
have an accident 
7	 eating or drinking – you normally take one hand off the 
wheel
8	 talking to a passenger – the driver often turns to look at the 
passenger
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.126, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 47@@
	1A	
47
3B
	3B	 Men, women, and children
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then either check 
answers or play the audio again.
	 Check answers. Point out that the highlighted expressions 
are useful for when you are talking in general.
1  speaking    2  on, tend    3  general, usually
e 3.17
1	 Generally speaking, I think it’s true that women worry more about 
their appearance than men. They spend longer choosing what to 
wear, doing their hair, and things like that. 
2	 I don’t think it’s true that men are more interested in sport than 
women. However, on the whole, I think women tend to have 
fewer opportunities to actively participate in sport. 
3	 I think that in general, men worry about their health more than 
women. Hypochondriacs are usually men, not women.
	 Now give Sts a few minutes to read the comments 
again and decide if they agree or disagree with what the 
people said.
	 Elicit some opinions.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the ten statements under 
Do you think it’s true?, making sure Sts understand them.
	 Then put Sts in groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss each statement.
	 Monitor and check, correcting any misuse of articles and 
encouraging Sts to use the expressions for generalizing.
	 Get quick feedback from a different group for each topic. 
Tell Sts if you agree or not, and why.
c	 Focus on the task and, if you didn’t do the Optional  
lead-in, make sure Sts know what a stereotype 
/ˈsteriətaɪp/ is (= a fixed idea or image that many people 
have of a particular type of person or thing, which is often 
not true in reality).
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete it with five 
headings from the statements in b.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted verbs, which are focused on in e.
1	 Men are better at navigating than women.
2	 Women talk more than men.
3	 Women are more caring than men.
4	 Women can multitask better than men.
5	 Men are better at telling jokes than women.
d	 Focus on the question and the three options. 
	 Tell Sts to now read the article again and match the 
stereotypes to the research.
	 Check answers.
a  2    b  3    c  1, 4, 5
e	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the task. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
 G   articles: a / an, the, no article
 V   collocation: verbs / adjectives + prepositions
 P   /ə/, two pronunciations of the
Lesson plan
This lesson examines common stereotypes about men and 
women, based on recent research. It begins with a speaking 
activity on stereotypes, with a special focus on generalizing. 
This leads to an article about whether certain common 
stereotypes are true or not. Next is the grammar focus on 
articles: when (and when not) to use an article, and which 
article to use. This is followed by a pronunciation focus on 
the schwa in unstressed syllables and words, and on the two 
pronunciations of the. 
In the second half of the lesson, Sts listen to a psychologist 
talking about children and stereotypes. This is followed by 
a speaking activity on toys Sts played with as a child and 
clothes they wore. The lesson ends with a vocabulary focus 
on verbs and adjectives with dependent prepositions. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  articles: a / an, the, no article p.154 
Communicative  Generally speaking p.183  
(instructions p.171) 
Vocabulary  Dependent prepositions p.208  
(instructions p.200)
For students
Workbook  3B
Online Practice  3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following definition on the board: 
A FIXED IDEA OR IMAGE THAT MANY PEOPLE HAVE OF A PARTICULAR 
TYPE OF PERSON OR THING, WHICH IS OFTEN NOT TRUE IN REALITY 
Then ask Sts if they know what word is being defined. Elicit 
ideas, but if they don’t get it, write: 
ST _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ to help them to get stereotype. 
Drill the pronunciation, and then ask Sts what kind of 
things can be stereotypes, e.g. fixed ideas about certain 
nationalities or about men and women.
1	SPEAKING & READING  understanding the 	
	 main point in a paragraph
a	 e 3.17  Books open. Focus on the instructions and 
give Sts time to read the Generalizing box. Encourage 
them to guess what the missing words might be. You 
might want to check Sts know what a hypochondriac 
/haɪpəˈkɒndriːæk/ is (= somebody who worries about 
their health and believes that they are ill when there is 
nothing wrong with them). Model and drill pronunciation.
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts 
time to complete the gaps.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 48@@
48
3B
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  a nurse, The hospital    ​2  a horrible day, the car    ​ 
3  love stories, war films    ​4  the theatre, once a month    ​
5  dinner, next Friday    ​6  a chef, the best cook    ​ 
7  the windows, home    ​8  dogs, the dogs    ​9  school, last week  
10  happiness, money
b	
1	 A  How often do you go to the gym? 
B  About three times a week. But I never go on – Fridays.    ​
2	 A  What time does the train leave? 
B  In 40 minutes. Can you drop me off at the station on your 
way to – work?   
3	 A  What an amazing dress! 
B  Thanks. I bought it in the sales – last month.
4	 A  What’s the most interesting place to visit in your town? 
B  Probably the castle. It’s the oldest building.
5	 A  What shall we do – next weekend? 
B  Let’s invite Toni for – lunch. We could eat in the garden.
​6	 A  Do you like – cats? 
B  Not really. I prefer – dogs. I think they’re the best pets.​
7	 A  Is your mum a housewife? 
B  No, she’s a teacher. She’s always tired when she finishes – 
work.  ​
8	 A  Have you ever had a problem in your relationship? 
B  Yes, but we solved the problem and we got married.
​9	 A  When is the meeting? 
B  They’ve changed the date. It’s on – Tuesday now.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  /ə/, two pronunciations of the
Pronunciation notes
/ə/ is the most common sound in English.
/ə/ can be spelled by any vowel. It always occurs in 
unstressed syllables, or unstressed words, e.g. articles and 
prepositions.
You may want to give Sts some simple rules, e.g. that:
•	 -er at the end of a word is always pronounced /ə/, e.g. 
teacher, better, etc.
•	 -tion is always pronounced /ʃən/.
a	 e 3.22  Elicit the sound and picture word: /ə/ computer, 
and highlight that both the o and the er are 
pronounced /ə/.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 3.22
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.31
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 3.23  Focus on the instructions and the phrases in the 
list. Demonstrate clearly the two different pronunciations 
of the, /ðiː/ and /ðə/.
	 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and underline the five 
phrases where the is pronounced /ðiː/.
	 Check answers.
1  show    2  discover    3  argue    4  turn out
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
f	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the first 
sentence. Do this question as a whole-class activity.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to think of more 
stereotypes about men and women and discuss whether 
they think they are true or not. 
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	GRAMMAR  articles: a / an, the, no article
a	 Focus on the four jokes, and tell Sts to complete the gaps 
with a, an, the, or no article at all.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
b	 e 3.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. Don’t give any grammar explanations at 
the moment, as this will come later.
1  –    ​2  –    ​3  A    ​4  a    ​5  a    ​6  an    ​7  the    ​8  the    ​ 
9  –    ​10  a      ​11  –
e 3.18
1
Girl  Daddy, did you know that girls are cleverer than boys?
Father  No, I didn’t know that. 
Girl  You see!
2
A man goes to see a lawyer:
Man  Excuse me. What do you charge?
Lawyer  One thousand dollars for three questions.
Man  Wow! Isn’t that a bit expensive?
Lawyer  Yes. What’s your third question?
3
Doctor  Hello, did you come to see me with an eye problem?
Patient  Yes! How did you know?
Doctor  Because you came in through the window instead of the 
door.
4
Mother  What did you do at school today, Patrick?
Boy  It was a great day! We made explosives!
Mother  And what are you going to do at school tomorrow?
Boy  What school?
	 Now ask the class if they think any of the jokes are funny.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.137. 
Grammar notes
Sts have learned rules for using articles before, but here 
the main ones are brought together. Most nationalities 
will have some problems using articles correctly, but 
especially those who don’t have articles in their language.
In this lesson the basic rules are covered. Other more 
specific uses, e.g. with geographical names, are 
introduced in English File Upper-intermediate. 
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 omitting the article, e.g. I saw old man with dog.
•	 the incorrect use of the definite article when 
generalizing, e.g. The men usually love the football.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio 
e 3.19, e 3.20 and e 3.21 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 49@@
49
3B
happened only after World War Two. The idea of women being 
equal to men emerged and, as a result, people started dressing 
little girls in pink. Soon, advertisers got hold of the idea, and 
made blue the colour for boys. Since then, the pink and blue 
stereotype has never gone away. And it’s not only clothes, but all 
sorts of other things as well. Girls’ rooms and furniture are painted 
pink, girls’ accessories are made in pink, girls’ toys are packaged 
in pink. South Korean photographer JeongMee Yoon was so 
struck by this that she created a series of photographs called The 
Pink and Blue Project, where children were photographed in their 
rooms with all the things they possessed in either pink or blue.
	
But is this something we really need to worry about? Alison Carr, 
from the Institute of Engineering and Technology, says yes. 
A	 When we’re choosing between one toy or another to buy as a 
present for a child, we’re influenced by stereotypes, and if the 
child is a girl, we’ll probably choose something pink. And this is a 
problem, because not only are eighty-nine per cent of girls’ toys 
pink, but also only a very few of them are connected with science 
or maths. Most girls’ toys are still based on dolls and dressing 
up, while boys’ toys are more likely to be related to building and 
cars. And the problem is that the toys we play with influence our 
interests, and even the jobs that we end up getting. If girls don’t 
have access to as many construction toys, or mechanical and 
scientific toys as boys, they’ll think that science and technology 
is ‘not for them,’ so they’ll be less likely to choose to study it at 
school and later at university. I think that if they were allowed to 
choose for themselves, girls and boys would choose the same sort 
of toys, and that parents need to forget about the stereotypes, 
about pink and blue. Toys should be the same colour for all 
children – red, yellow, green, whatever.
P	 However, Natasha Crookes, from the British Toy & Hobby 
Association doesn’t agree.
N	 I think that instead of abandoning the pink and blue thing, we 
should use it. If we want girls to get interested in maths and 
science, we should package science and engineering toys in a 
pink box. Then maybe girls – or their parents – will start  
buying them.
P	 And now we’re moving on to...
d	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen again and this time 
they must choose the correct options to complete 1–5.
	 Give Sts time to read the sentences and options.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  a    5  c
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss questions 1–3. 
	 Get feedback from various pairs. You could also tell Sts 
your answers to one or two of the questions. 
EXTRA IDEA   If any of your Sts have young children, you 
could ask them what kind of toys they play with and what 
kind of clothes they wear.
1  the office    ​2  the Underground    ​3  the internet    ​ 
4  the accident    ​5  the evening
e 3.23
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.31
	 Now ask Sts why the is pronounced differently in those 
five phrases.
Because the noun starts with a vowel (a, e, i, o, u).
	 Now ask Sts which phrase in the list is an exception.
The universe is the exception because it starts with the /juː/ 
sound (not /ʌ/).
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat the 
phrases.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
phrases. You may want to point out that It’s not the end of 
the world is used idiomatically to mean that something 
isn’t a complete disaster.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model and drill each phrase first.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 points of view
a	 Focus on the list of toys and make sure Sts know what 
they all are. Model and drill pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss which toys fall into 
which of the three categories in the instructions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Focus on the two photos and ask Sts what they think 
the artist is saying. Elicit as many opinions as possible. 
There are many more ‘pink and blue’ photographs on her 
website.
c	 e 3.24  Tell Sts they are going to listen to a programme 
about children and stereotypes. They must listen and 
answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
In the past, boys were dressed in pink and girls in blue.
No, they don’t.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 3.24
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
P = presenter, A = Alison Carr, N = Natasha Crookes
P	 ‘Pink is for girls; blue is for boys.’ How many times have we heard 
that? And if you walk down the aisles of children’s clothes shops, 
you’ll see rows and rows of clothes in these two colours. But 
where does this rule come from, exactly? Are little girls genetically 
attracted to pink, and little boys to blue? 
	
It seems not. You may be surprised to hear that a hundred years 
ago, it was the exact opposite. In a popular magazine of the time, 
an article said, ‘The generally accepted rule is pink for boys and 
blue for girls. The reason is that pink, being a stronger colour, 
is more suitable for a boy, while blue, which is more delicate, is 
prettier for a girl.’ The change to pink for girls and blue for boys 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 50@@
50
3B
6	 Krakow is famous for its main square.
7	 I’m fed up with sitting in this traffic jam.
8	 I’m very fond of my little nephew. He’s adorable.
9	 I’ve never been good at sport.
10	 Eat your vegetables. They’re good for you.
11	 My sister is very interested in astrology.
12	 She’s very keen on cycling. She does about fifty kilometres every 
weekend.
13	 I don’t like people who aren’t kind to animals.
14	 She used to be married to a pop star.
15	 I’m really pleased with my new scooter.
16	 My dad was very proud of learning to ski.
17	 Why are you always rude to waiters and shop assistants?
18	 Rachel is worried about losing her job.
19	 I’m tired of walking. Let’s stop and have a rest.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could play the audio again, pausing 
after each sentence for Sts to listen and repeat, to give them 
extra practice with sentence rhythm.
	 Focus on the Gerunds after prepositions box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the 
Preposition column on the right and say the sentences 
with the correct preposition.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts to complete questions 1–12 with a preposition.
d	 e 3.27  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand the questions.
1  about    ​2  at    ​3  to    ​4  to    ​5  on    ​6  of    ​7  for    ​8  in    ​ 
9  of    ​10  with, about    ​11  with    ​12  on
e 3.27
1	 When you’re with friends of the same sex, what do you usually 
talk about?
2	 Are there any sports or games that you’re good at?
3	 Is there anything you’re really looking forward to?
4	 Who in your family are you closest to?
5	 What kind of films are you keen on?
6	 Are there any animals or insects that you’re afraid of?
7	 What’s your town or region famous for?
8	 Are there any superstitions that you believe in?
9	 Is there a story in the news at the moment that you’re really 
tired of?
10	 Who’s the last person you were really angry with? What about?
11	 Have you bought anything recently that you’re very pleased with?
12	 What do you think success in an exam depends on?
	 Tell Sts that the preposition is normally unstressed, but 
that at the end of a question, both parts of the phrase are 
stressed (e.g. …tired of – here of isn’t weak /əv/).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again for Sts to listen and 
repeat the questions, making sure they stress the final 
preposition.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to choose a few questions to ask 
you first.
5	VOCABULARY  collocation: verbs / adjectives + 
prepositions
a	 Focus on the instructions and remind Sts that they have 
to remember which prepositions to use after certain verbs 
and adjectives, e.g. you talk to somebody about something. 
	 Get Sts to complete 1–3, and then check answers. 
1  about    2  between    3  in
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Dependent 
prepositions on p.156. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to point out that some adjectives can be 
used with more than one preposition, depending on the 
meaning, e.g. we use good at for something you are an 
expert at, but good for when something is beneficial.
Some people say fed up of (sth) in informal British English, 
but this is not considered correct in standard English.
	 Focus on 1 After verbs and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs. Remind them to write the prepositions in the 
column on the right, not in the sentence. 
	 e 3.25  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 3.25
Dependent prepositions
1 After verbs
1	 He apologized to the police officer for driving fast.
2	 I never argue with my husband about money.
3	 We’re arriving in Milan on Sunday.
4	 We’re arriving at Malpensa airport at three forty-five.
5	 Could you ask the waiter for the bill?
6	 Do you believe in stereotypes?
7	 Who does this book belong to?
8	 I can’t choose between these two bags.
9	 We might go out. It depends on the weather.
10	 I dreamed about my childhood last night.
11	 Don’t laugh at me! I’m doing my best!
12	 I’m really looking forward to the party.
13	 If I pay for the meal, can you get the drinks?
14	 This music reminds me of our honeymoon in Italy.
15	 I don’t spend a lot of money on clothes.
16	 We need to talk to Anita about her school report.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could play the audio again, pausing 
after each sentence for Sts to listen and repeat, to give them 
extra practice with sentence rhythm. 
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the Preposition 
column on the right and say the sentences with the 
correct preposition.
	 Now focus on 2 After adjectives and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.26  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 3.26
2 After adjectives
1	 My brother is afraid of bats.
2	 She’s really angry with her boyfriend about last night.
3	 I’m very close to my elder sister. 
4	 This exercise isn’t very different from the last one.
5	 We’re really excited about going to Brazil.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 51@@
51
PE2
	 2	
Practical English  A difficult celebrity
She is happy to talk about her new album and what she’s been 
doing recently, but not about what happened with the band or 
her private life.
e 3.28
K = Kerri, R = Rob, J = Jenny, D = Don
K	 (singing) You work hard, but your money’s all spent.
	
Haven’t got enough to pay the rent.
	
You know it’s not right and it makes no sense
	
To go chasing, chasing those dollars and cents,
	
Chasing, chasing those dollars and cents.
R	 That was great, Kerri.
K	 Thanks.
R	 Kerri, you used to be in a band; now you play solo. Why did you 
change?
K	 What happened with the band is private. I’ve already said I don’t 
want to talk about it in interviews. All I’ll say is that I have a lot 
more freedom this way. I can play – and say – what I want.
R	 Did your relationship with the band’s lead guitarist affect the 
break-up?
K	 No comment. I never talk about my private life.
R	 Your dad was in a famous punk band and your mum’s a classical 
pianist. Have they influenced your music?
K	 Of course they have – what do you think? Isn’t everyone 
influenced by their parents?
R	 When did you start playing?
K	 I started playing the guitar when I was about four.
R	 Four? That’s pretty young.
K	 Yeah, the guitar was nearly as big as me!
R	 I think that your new album is your best yet. It’s a lot quieter and 
more experimental than your earlier albums.
K	 Thank you! I think it is my best work.
R	 So what have you been doing recently?
K	 Well, I’ve been writing and recording some new songs. And I’ve 
played at some of the summer festivals in the UK. 
K	 And what are you doing while you’re in the States?
K	 I’m going to play at some clubs here in New York, then I’m doing 
some small gigs in other places. I just want to get to know the 
country and the people. It’s all very new to me.
***
J	 Good job, Rob. She isn’t the easiest person to interview.
R	 She’s OK. And this video clip will work great online.
***
D	 Well, thank you for coming in today, Kerri. Now I suggest we have 
some lunch. Rob, could you call a taxi?
R	 Er, sure.
b	 Now focus on sentences 1–8. Go through them with Sts 
and make sure they understand them.
	 Play the video / audio again the whole way through, and 
get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind 
them to correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 F (The song is about money.)
2	 F (She used to play in a band, but she now plays solo.)
3	 T
4	 F (Her father was in a band and her mother is a pianist.)
5	 F (She started playing the guitar when she was about four.)
6	 T
7	 T
8	 F (She is going to play at some clubs in New York.)
Function    giving opinions, agreeing / disagreeing / 
responses
Language  To be honest…, I don’t think that’s right., etc.
Lesson plan
In this lesson the functional focus is on learning more ways 
of expressing opinions and agreeing and disagreeing with 
other people’s opinions.
In the first scene, Rob interviews Kerri, a British singer who 
is visiting New York. Then in the second scene, Don, the 
new boss, Jenny and Rob take Kerri out to lunch. During 
the lunch, Kerri is critical of what she considers the ‘fake 
friendliness’ of people in New York, and compares New York 
unfavourably to London. Don strongly disagrees; however, 
Rob sides with Kerri. In the final scene, Kerri has to eat her 
words, as a genuinely friendly taxi driver comes to the 
restaurant to bring her her phone, which she had left in 
the cab. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 2 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 2 
                     Can you remember? 1–3
Online Practice  Practical English 2 
                              Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 2, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 1. Ask Who’s Harry? What does he think of Rob? 
Where did Rob and Jenny go in the last episode?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 1.
1	r ROB’S INTERVIEW
a	 e 3.28  Books open. Focus on the photo and ask Sts to 
guess who the woman is.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to  
pre-teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 52@@
52
PE2
1	 a  The waiters in New York never leave the customer alone. 
London waiters are friendly, but not too friendly. They don’t 
bother you.
	
b  The people in New York are less easy-going.
2	 Rob agrees. Don and Jenny disagree. Don thinks New York is 
the greatest city in the world, and Jenny thinks New Yorkers 
are very friendly.
3	 The taxi driver phones Rob about a (cell) phone left in his taxi.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 3.30  Give Sts a minute to read through the extracts 
from the conversation and to think about what the 
missing words might be. 
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Personally, opinion, agree, honest, think   
2	 agree, ask, right, sure
e 3.30
1
K	 Personally, I think people in London are a lot more easy-going. 
London’s just not as hectic as New York.
D	 Sure, we all like peace and quiet. But in my opinion, New York 
is possibly…well, no, is definitely the greatest city in the world. 
Don’t you agree?
K	 To be honest, I definitely prefer London.
D	 Come on, Rob. You’ve lived in both. What do you think?
2
D	 OK, I agree. London has its own peculiar charm. But if you ask me, 
nothing compares with a city like New York. The whole world is 
here!
K	 But that’s the problem. It’s too big. There are too many people. 
Everybody’s so stressed out. And nobody has any time for you.
J	 I don’t think that’s right, Kerri. New Yorkers are very friendly.
K	 Oh sure, they can sound friendly with all that ‘Have a nice day’ 
stuff.
d	 e 3.31  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in 
the extracts. They should listen and repeat the phrases, 
copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to watch or listen 
and repeat.
e 3.31
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on p.35
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversations in c.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
f	 Focus on the instructions and the four statements. Give 
Sts a few minutes to think about ideas for each statement.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r GIVING OPINIONS
a	 e 3.29  Focus on the photos and ask Sts Who are the 
people? (Don and Kerri), Where are they? (At a restaurant).
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the next page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
They disagree about which city is better, New York or London.
e 3.29
D = Don, K = Kerri, W = waitress, R = Rob, J = Jenny
D	 So when will you be coming back to New York, Kerri?
K	 Oh, I don’t know…
W	 Hi guys, is everything OK? 
D	 Yes, it’s delicious, thank you.
W	 That’s great!
K	 New York waiters never leave you alone! I really don’t like all this 
‘Hi guys! Is everything OK?’ stuff. 
D	 What? You mean waiters aren’t friendly in London?
R	 Oh, they’re very friendly!
K	 Yes, they’re friendly, but not too friendly. They don’t bother you all 
the time.
W	 Can I get you anything else? More drinks, maybe? 
D	 No, thanks. We’re fine. 
W	 Fantastic.
K	 See what I mean? Personally, I think people in London are a lot 
more easy-going. London’s just not as hectic as New York.
D	 Sure, we all like peace and quiet. But in my opinion, New York 
is possibly…well, no, is definitely the greatest city in the world. 
Don’t you agree?
K	 To be honest, I definitely prefer London.
D	 Come on, Rob. You’ve lived in both. What do you think? 
R	 Erm, well, I have to say London’s very special. It’s more relaxed, it’s 
got great parks, and you can cycle everywhere. It’s dangerous to 
cycle in New York!
D	 Why would you cycle when you can drive a car?
K	 You can’t be serious.
D	 OK, I agree, London has its own peculiar charm. But if you ask me, 
nothing compares with a city like New York. The whole world is 
here!
K	 But that’s the problem. It’s too big. There are too many people. 
Everybody’s so stressed out. And nobody has any time for you.
J	 I don’t think that’s right, Kerri. New Yorkers are very friendly…
K	 Oh sure, they can sound friendly with all that ‘Have a nice day’ 
stuff. But I always think it’s a little bit…fake. 
D	 You’ve got to be kidding me!
R	 I’m sorry. I’ll just have to take this…Hello?…Yes…You’re who?…
The taxi driver?…What did she leave?…Her cell phone…right. 
OK. Yes, we’re still at the restaurant. See you in about five minutes.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–3. 
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 53@@
53
PE2
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  mean    2  just    3  hang    4  back    5  kind
e 3.33
1	 Did you mean what you said in the restaurant, Rob?
2	 It’s just that you seemed so homesick in there.
3	 Oh, hang on a minute.
4	 Our taxi’s come back.
5	 That was so kind of him!
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  2    C  5    D  4    E  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
	 Now put Sts in small groups of four and ask them to 
discuss each statement in turn.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
3	r A SURPRISE FOR KERRI 
a	 e 3.32  Focus on the photo and the question.
	 Before playing the video / audio, focus on the British and 
American English box and go through it with the class.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
Kerri is surprised because the taxi driver returned to the 
restaurant to give her back her phone, which she had left in 
the taxi.
e 3.32
K = Kerri, D = Don, W = waitress, J = Jenny, R = Rob, T = taxi driver
K	 Thank you for a nice lunch, Don.
D	 You’re welcome.
W	 Thanks for coming, guys! Have a nice day.
D	 See? Nice, friendly service.
K	 Maybe. But I think she saw the big tip you left on the table!
***
J	 Did you mean what you said in the restaurant, Rob?
R	 Did I mean what?
J	 About missing London.
R	 Sure, I miss it, Jenny.
J	 Really?
R	 But hey, not that much! It’s just that moving to a new place is 
always difficult.
J	 But you don’t regret coming here, do you?
R	 No…no…not at all.
J	 It’s just that…you seemed so homesick in there. For the parks, the 
cycling…
R	 Well, there are some things I miss, but – Oh, hang on a minute. 
Look over there. Our taxi’s come back.
***
T	 Excuse me, Ma’am.
K	 Who, me? What is it?
T	 I believe this is your cell phone. You left it in my cab.
K	 What?…Oh, wow…thank you!
T	 Have a nice day!
K	 That was so kind of him! 
D	 See? New Yorkers are really friendly people.
b	 Focus on sentences 1–3 and give Sts time to read them.
	 Now play the video / audio again, so Sts can listen a 
second time and complete the sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  left a big tip.    2  misses London.    3  kind.   
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 3.33  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 54@@
54
4A
	4A	 Bad manners?
1	VOCABULARY  phone language
Vocabulary notes
As with all technology-related vocabulary, things change 
rapidly and you may find that there are more verbs / 
expressions that have come into use recently and that you 
would like to teach. 
You may want to point out that although people no 
longer physically ‘hang up’ their phones at the end of a 
conversation, the expression continues to be used for 
putting an end to a phone conversation. 
a	 e 4.1  Books open. Focus on the instructions and 
sentences A–K. Give Sts time to go through them in pairs 
and say what they think the bold words and phrases 
mean. Clarify the meaning of any words or phrases they 
don’t know.
	 Now play the audio, pausing after the first one, and elicit 
that what Sts heard was someone saying goodbye and 
ending the call, so the answer is C.
	 Continue playing the audio to the end, pausing after each 
item to give Sts time to number the correct one.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Alternatively, you could pause the audio 
after each item and let Sts, in pairs, choose the correct 
sentence.
	 Give Sts time to compare answers, and then play again if 
necessary.
e 4.1
1	 ‘Thanks very much. OK. Goodbye.’ Hangs up. 
2	 people having meeting discussion, phone starts ringing
3	 engaged tone
4	 Recorded voice saying, ‘All our lines are busy at the moment. Please 
hold, and someone will be with you shortly.’
5	 Jack  Please leave a message after the tone.  
Sandra  Hi, Jack, it’s Sandra. I was just calling to confirm that 
meeting.
6	 several different ringtones
7	 dialling tone and ringtone
8	 Man  Hi, love. I’m on the six twenty-five, so I should get in at eight 
twenty-two.
	
Woman  Great. Do you want me to…?
	
Man  Hello Jane? Jane, can you hear me?
9	 Man  Hello?
	
James  Oh, hi. It’s James. I phoned half an hour ago, but Ann 
wasn’t in. Is she there now? 
10	 someone texting
11	 Woman 1  Here, have a look…Yeah, the next one…
	
Woman 2  Oh, you look lovely. Where’s this one taken?
b	 e 4.2  Tell Sts they are now going to hear the answers 
with the audio from a. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You might like to tell Sts that She’s texting a 
friend is the same as She’s sending a text to a friend.
 G   obligation and prohibition: have to, must, should
 V   phone language
 P   silent consonants
Lesson plan
The main topic of this lesson is manners in today’s world – 
how people should behave in a variety of common 
situations.
In the first half of the lesson, the focus is on phone etiquette. 
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on words and 
phrases related to phones. A short article about a conductor 
asking a member of the audience to leave after their phone 
rings during a concert provides the context for Sts to 
practise common ways of expressing obligation using must, 
have to, and should. Sts will have met these verbs separately, 
but will probably not have contrasted them before.  
In Pronunciation, Sts work on silent letters in, for example, 
should and mustn’t. Then they put the new grammar into 
practice in a speaking activity about annoying things people 
do with their phones. 
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read an article extracted 
from Debrett’s Handbook about modern manners. In 
Listening, the focus is on people’s problems with rude 
relatives. This leads into an extended speaking activity where 
Sts discuss ‘modern manners’ and their relative importance in 
different situations. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  obligation and prohibition: have to, must, 
should p.155 
Communicative  Me and my opinions p.184  
(instructions p.171)
For students
Workbook  4A
Online Practice  4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write these questions on the board and get Sts to talk about 
them in small groups:
WHAT MAKE IS YOUR PHONE?
HOW LONG HAVE YOU HAD IT?
WOULD YOU LIKE TO GET A NEW ONE? WHY (NOT)?
WHAT RINGTONE DO YOU HAVE?
WHAT DO YOU USE YOUR PHONE FOR (APART FROM TALKING)?
WHERE AND WHEN DO YOU NORMALLY SWITCH OFF YOUR PHONE?
Get some feedback from various groups.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 55@@
55
4A
A  6    B  4    C  2, 3    D  5    E  1
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.138. 
Grammar notes
Obligation and necessity: have to and must
Have to / must and should / shouldn’t were taught 
separately in English File Pre-intermediate.
In this lesson they are revised and contrasted in more 
detail. 
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 saying must to, e.g. I must to be on time tomorrow.
•	 confusing mustn’t (prohibition) and don’t have to (not 
necessary / not obligatory)
•	 using must (not had to) in the past tense, e.g. I must 
study last night.
Advice or opinions: should / shouldn’t
The important point to emphasize here is that should 
isn’t as strong as have to / must, and it is normally used to 
express a personal opinion or give advice.
Compare:
•	 You should talk to your teacher about the problem.  
(= I think it’s a good idea.)
•	 You must talk to your teacher about the problem. 
(= I think it’s very important you do this.)
Highlight that ought to means the same as should, but is 
less common.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 4.4,  
e 4.5, e 4.6 and e 4.7 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
EXTRA IDEA   In a monolingual class, if you know your Sts’ L1, 
you could get Sts to translate the example sentences and 
compare the forms / verbs they would use in their L1.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  f    2  mustn’t    3  f (has to would be more common because 
it’s an external obligation)    4  f    5  f    6  don’t have to    
7  had to    8  shouldn’t
b
1	 Did you have to do a lot of homework when you were at 
school?
2	 Must I take my tablet out of my bag at Security?
3	 My sister is a nurse, so some weeks she has to work nights. 
4	 Have you ever had to have an operation?
5	 I love not having to get up early.
6	 I don’t think we should wear boots inside their house.
7	 The exhibition was free, so I didn’t have to pay.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
e 4.2
7	 A (audio from 4.1) He’s dialling a number.
10	 B (audio from 4.1) She’s texting a friend.
1	 C (audio from 4.1) He’s just hung up.
6	 D (audio from 4.1) She’s choosing a new ringtone.
9	 E (audio from 4.1) He’s calling back.
5	 F (audio from 4.1) She’s left a message on his voicemail.
3	 G (audio from 4.1) The line’s engaged.
11	 H (audio from 4.1) She’s swiping through photos.
2	 I (audio from 4.1) His phone went off in the middle of a meeting.
4	 J (audio from 4.1) She needs to talk to a helpline, but they’ve put 
her on hold.
8	 K (audio from 4.1) He was cut off in the middle of a conversation.
	 Get Sts to close their books and play the audio again. 
Pause after each item and get the class (or individual Sts) 
to say the sentence.
c	 Focus on questions 1–7 and go through them with Sts. 
Make sure they understand all the phrases in bold.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to ask you some of the questions first.
2	GRAMMAR  obligation and prohibition
a	 e 4.3  Focus on the task. Point to the picture of the viola 
and explain that it is larger than a violin. Model and drill its 
pronunciation /viˈəʊlə/.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
A phone went off while he was playing. He stopped playing, and 
then played the ringtone on his viola.
e 4.3
(Audio to illustrate the following)
Lukáš Kmit is playing the viola at a recital in Prešov, Slovakia. A phone 
rings in the audience, and Kmit stops playing and then improvises 
around the Nokia ringtone instead.
b	 Tell Sts they are going to read an article about another 
incident during a concert. Elicit / Explain the meaning of  
a conductor /kənˈdʌktə/ (= a person who stands in front 
of an orchestra and directs their performance).
	 Give Sts time to complete the task.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read the introduction together and ask Sts 
some comprehension questions, e.g. What happened during 
a performance of Messiah at the National Music Auditorium in 
Madrid? (A phone rang / went off.), Where was the person with 
the phone sitting? (Near the stage / the front), What did the 
conductor do? (He pointed and shouted at the owner of the 
phone.), etc.  
Tell Sts to then read the comments and decide which they 
agree with.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit 
opinions.
c	 Tell Sts to read the comments again and match the six 
highlighted phrases to their meaning. You could point out 
that two phrases have the same meaning.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 56@@
56
4A
b	 First, focus on the title, telling Sts they will find out what 
Debrett’s is, and make sure Sts know the meaning of a 
dilemma /dɪˈlemə/ (= a situation in which you have to 
make a difficult choice). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Then focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
the article to see if their ideas from a are there. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted phrases in c.
1	 At work or when meeting someone socially for the first time
2	 You shouldn’t eat smelly food or put on make-up.
3	 Not on short flights
4	 When you see that a person is pregnant, old, or in need. 
5	 Only if you have permission
c	 Focus on the task and get Sts to work with a partner to say 
what the highlighted phrases mean. Encourage them to 
go back and look at the words in context if they can’t work 
out the meaning.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
Possible answers
kissing is not appropriate in many professional situations = 
You shouldn’t kiss people if you meet them at work.
It’s inconsiderate to eat smelly food in a closed environment 
= It isn’t very nice for other people if you eat smelly food in 
places like offices, trains, etc.
don’t monopolize the armrest = Share the armrest – don’t use 
it all yourself.
it is also rude to aggressively decline the offer of a seat = If 
sby offers you a seat and you don’t want it, say no politely.
unless the host or hostess (or in a restaurant, the other 
diners) gives their permission for people to start = Only 
start eating if the people who invited you, or the other people 
with you in a restaurant, tell you that it’s OK.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
e	 Focus on questions 1–6 and give Sts time, in pairs, to 
discuss them.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could discuss 
question 6 as a class.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts, in pairs, to write a question about 
manners like the questions in a. Then they pass their question 
to another pair, who write a Debrett’s-style reply giving advice 
on how to behave. Get pairs to read out their questions and 
advice, and discuss which advice Sts think is the best.
6	LISTENING  understanding problems and advice
a	 e 4.9  Tell Sts they are going to listen to a radio 
programme in which people call in to talk about a 
problem with a relative. Make sure Sts understand the 
phrase rude relatives.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through, pausing 
after each story to give Sts time to make notes. Play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
3	PRONUNCIATION  silent consonants
Pronunciation notes
Silent consonants are a feature of English. Sts will be 
aware of some of these, but probably not all of them. 
Sometimes Sts may have been pronouncing, for example, 
the l in calm, since they learned the word without 
realizing that it is a silent consonant (even though they 
don’t perhaps pronounce the l in half or walk).
a	 In pairs, Sts look at the words in the list and decide which 
consonant (or consonants) is silent in each one.
b	 e 4.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board and 
crossing out the silent consonants (they are marked in 
green in the key).
calm    design    dishonest    doubt    foreign    half  
hour    island    knowledge    listen    mustn’t    ought    
rhythm    should    talk    walk    whole    wrong
e 4.8
See words in Student’s Book on p.37
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could elicit the silent consonants in 
other words (in bold here), e.g. thumb, castle, science, knee, 
answer, sign, climb, scissors, exhausted, etc.
c	 Focus on the sentences and put Sts in pairs to practise 
saying them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model and drill the sentences before 
putting Sts in pairs.
	 Then get individual Sts to say the sentences.
4	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts can 
remember the meaning of annoy. 
	 Now go through the 13 annoying things people do with 
their phones and make sure Sts understand all the lexis, 
e.g. selfie, tweet, swipe, etc.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss each item in the list by answering questions 1–3.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. 
5	READING  assessing a point of view
a	 Focus on questions 1–5 and make sure Sts understand 
them. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. If your Sts come 
from different countries, you could find out if there are any 
cultural differences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the whole article to check 
their answers to a, read the introduction together and 
then elicit / explain the meaning of some of the lexis (e.g. 
manners, etiquette, etc.), or ask Sts some comprehension 
questions, e.g. What information does the Debrett’s book give? 
(Information on modern manners), Who is the book for?  
(The British public), Is the book popular? How do you know? 
(Yes, because they receive more than 10,000 enquiries every 
year.), etc. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 57@@
57
4A
e 4.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
P = presenter, B = Belinda, S = Sarah, D = Damien, M = Miranda
P	 Good afternoon to all. In today’s modern manners programme, 
the subject is family, and what to do with rude relatives. Our 
etiquette expert Sarah is here to take your calls, so if you have a 
family member who behaves badly and you don’t know what to 
do about it, just call us here on oh two oh seven nine four six oh 
six seven one.
	
And our first caller is Belinda from Salisbury. Hi, Belinda. Tell us 
about your rude relatives.
B	 Well, I hate to say it because it’s such a cliché, but it’s my mother-
in-law. She’s a nice woman, don't get me wrong, and on the 
whole, we get on well, but one thing she does which I think is 
really rude is that whenever she comes for a meal, she criticizes 
my cooking. I’m not a professional, obviously, but I think I’m a 
pretty good cook, and it really annoys me, especially after I’ve 
spent hours making something really nice.
P	 OK, so Sarah, over to you. How should Belinda deal with her 
mother-in-law?
S	 Hi, Belinda. I know this won’t be easy, but when she does this, 
I think you ought to be the one who behaves well. Stay calm, 
thank her as politely as possible for her advice, and change the 
subject. You shouldn’t argue with her, because she won’t change 
her opinion – and it won’t make you feel better, either. Instead, 
encourage your husband or another relative to say how great 
your cooking is in front of your mother-in-law. When she sees that 
her criticisms aren’t having any effect, and that everybody else 
loves your food, she’ll either stop criticizing or she’ll start paying 
compliments herself.
P	 Thanks very much for that, Sarah. And our next caller is Damien, 
from Sheffield. Hi, Damien. I think you’re going to tell us about a 
problem with your brother – is that right?
D	 Yes, that’s right.
P	 So what’s the issue?
D	 Well, he lives in London and he likes coming up to stay from 
time to time, which is great. But he’s just phoned me saying he’s 
coming next month and he’s bringing his new dog. I know he’s 
just got this dog and he’s very keen on it, and doesn’t like leaving 
it alone, but it’s still a puppy, and my girlfriend and I aren’t very 
into dogs. Also, we’ve just redecorated our house, and we’ve done 
a lot of work on the garden, and I’m pretty sure the dog’s going to 
destroy them both.
P	 Sarah, what do you think Damien should do with his brother and 
his dog? Do you think it’s rude to arrive at someone’s house  
with a dog?
S	 Yes, I have to say I do. It’s bad manners for a guest to bring an 
uninvited pet, even to a relative’s home. This is true even if you 
have one of your own and your house is already animal-friendly. 
I think you should politely but directly say how you feel. You can 
add a reason like, as you say, you’ve just redecorated, but to be 
honest, you don’t really have to give a reason.  
P	 Well, that’s very clear advice. Thanks, Sarah. And finally, Miranda 
from Stirling. Hi, Miranda. Tell us about your problem.
M	 Hi there. My problem’s with my nephew, my sister’s son. He’s eight 
years old and his parents don’t give him any rules. So he’s really 
wild, and whenever they come to our house, he just shouts all 
the time, jumps on the furniture, makes a mess in the kitchen. 
He even writes on the walls! It’s really exhausting, but my sister’s 
very sensitive about me criticizing her son, so generally I don’t say 
anything. But I’ve reached the point where I’d almost prefer it if 
they didn’t come round.
P	 Sarah, what should Miranda do with her nightmare nephew?
S	 You must speak to his parents before their next visit, or at least 
to your sister. But instead of being critical, say how great it is that 
their son has so much energy, and how much you love him, but 
then explain that he has to calm down a bit when he’s visiting. 
And at the beginning of his next visit, welcome him, but give him 
some rules for your house. Say, ‘Hi. It’s great to see you again! But 
just a couple of house rules: no jumping on the furniture, and if 
you want to draw, please use a piece of paper – you mustn’t write 
on the walls.’ He won’t mind, and in the long run, your sister will 
be grateful.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Belinda’s mother-in-law criticizes Belinda’s cooking.
2	 Damien’s brother brings his dog when he comes to stay, but 
Damien and his girlfriend don’t like dogs.
3	 Miranda’s young nephew behaves very badly when he comes 
to visit Miranda with his parents.
e 4.9
1	 Belinda    She’s a nice woman, don't get me wrong, and on the 
whole, we get on well, but one thing she does which I think is 
really rude is that whenever she comes for a meal, she criticizes 
my cooking. I’m not a professional, obviously, but I think I’m a 
pretty good cook, and it really annoys me, especially after I’ve 
spent hours making something really nice.
2	 Damien    Well, he lives in London and he likes coming up to stay 
from time to time, which is great. But he’s just phoned me saying 
he’s coming next month and he’s bringing his new dog. I know 
he’s just got this dog and he’s very keen on it, and doesn’t like 
leaving it alone, but it’s still a puppy, and my girlfriend and I aren’t 
very into dogs. Also, we’ve just redecorated our house, and we’ve 
done a lot of work on the garden, and I’m pretty sure the dog’s 
going to destroy them both.
3	 Miranda    He’s eight years old and his parents don’t give him any 
rules. So he’s really wild, and whenever they come to our house, 
he just shouts all the time, jumps on the furniture, makes a mess 
in the kitchen. He even writes on the walls! It’s really exhausting, 
but my sister’s very sensitive about me criticizing her son, so 
generally I don’t say anything. But I’ve reached the point where I’d 
almost prefer it if they didn’t come round.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to think of some advice for 
each caller.
	 Elicit some ideas for each caller.
c	 e 4.10  Tell Sts they are going to hear some extracts from 
an etiquette expert, Sarah, giving advice for each caller. 
They must listen and complete the missing words.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each piece of advice to give 
Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  who behaves well    2  argue with her    3  say how you feel    
4  give a reason    5  speak to his parents    6  calm down    
7  write on the walls
e 4.10
Belinda
1	 I think you ought to be the one who behaves well.
2	 You shouldn’t argue with her, because she won’t change her 
opinion.
Damien
3	 I think you should politely but directly say how you feel.
4	 To be honest, you don’t really have to give a reason.
Miranda
5	 You must speak to his parents before their next visit.
6	 Explain that he has to calm down a bit when he’s visiting.
7	 ‘You mustn’t write on the walls.’
d	 e 4.11  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the whole 
programme, so they will hear the presenter, the caller, and 
Sarah giving advice.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Elicit from the class what each piece of advice is and 
whether they agree with it or not. If not, ask why.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 58@@
58
4A
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the questionnaire and make sure Sts understand 
all the statements.
	 Give Sts time to mark each statement GM (good manners), 
BM (bad manners), or NI (not important) according to their 
opinion.
b	 Divide Sts into small groups of three or four. 
	 Then focus on the Saying what you think is right box 
and go through it with the class. 
	 Give Sts time to talk about each item in the questionnaire. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read the first situation in the questionnaire 
and elicit opinions from the whole class, encouraging Sts to 
use I think people should…, I don’t think people should…,  
I don’t think it’s…, etc.
	 If there’s time, get some feedback from various groups to 
see if Sts agree with each other.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 59@@
59
4B
	4B	 Yes, I can!
1	GRAMMAR  ability and possibility
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions, and elicit / explain 
the meaning of skill (= the ability to do something well). 
Now focus on the list of skills, making sure Sts know what 
they mean.
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to name two of the activities for each of 
the four categories.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by telling Sts 
about yourself first.
b	 e 4.12  Tell Sts to look at the photos, and elicit what they 
can see.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through and tell 
Sts to complete the gaps in the conversations.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  can, be able to    2  could, been able to
e 4.12
1	 A	 I can speak Italian quite well.
	
B	 Lucky you! I’d love to be able to speak Italian.
2	 C	 When I was a child, I could draw really well.
	
D	 Really? I’ve never been able to draw!
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
1  can    2  can
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.139. 
Grammar notes
Sts should all be perfectly familiar with the verb can for 
ability and possibility (or permission). Can / can’t is a 
modal verb, which has a past and conditional structure 
(could / couldn’t), but has no present perfect or past 
perfect forms, nor does it have an infinitive or -ing form. In 
these situations, be able to must be used. 
 !   For the future, you can often use can or will be able to, 
e.g. I can’t go to the meeting tomorrow / I won’t be able to go 
to the meeting tomorrow.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 trying to use can where they should use be able to, e.g.  
I want to can speak English well. / I won’t can come to your 
party on Saturday.
•	 leaving out to, e.g. I won’t be able help you, or using it 
after can, e.g. I could to play the piano well.
 !   There is a very small difference between could and 
was able to. In a + past simple sentence, if we want to 
refer to something that someone succeeded in doing – 
something difficult on a specific occasion – we use be able 
to (or managed to), e.g. Although the space was very small, 
he was able to (or managed to) park there. In this context it 
is not possible to use could. With a strong class you may 
want to point this out.
 G   ability and possibility: can, could, be able to
 V   -ed / -ing adjectives
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
The grammatical focus of this lesson is how to use be able 
to in the tenses / forms where can / can’t cannot be used. 
The main context is how to learn a new skill, and the new 
grammar is presented through two conversations about 
people’s abilities. This is followed by a pronunciation focus 
on sentence stress in sentences with can / could / be able to. 
Sts then listen to a journalist who tried to learn to play the 
trumpet in 20 hours. Then the new language is put into 
practice in Speaking, where Sts talk about how well they 
think they would be able to do certain things after 20 hours. 
In the second half of the lesson, there is a vocabulary focus 
on adjectives which have both -ed and -ing forms, e.g. 
disappointed / disappointing. Sts then read a forum with 
some tips on how to practise your English outside the 
classroom. This leads into a short grammar spot on the use 
of reflexive pronouns and a speaking activity where Sts talk 
about learning English. Finally, Sts watch a video about Alex 
Rawlings, a British language teacher with a talent for learning 
foreign languages (he can speak 11).
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  ability and possibility: can, could, be able to  
p.156 
Communicative  Tell us about… p.185 (instructions p.171)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  An interview with Alex Rawlings
For students
Workbook  4B
Online Practice  4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board:
YES, WE CAN!
Ask the class which politician had this as his slogan, and 
when (Barack Obama during his US presidential campaign  
in 2007). 
Ask Sts why they think he chose it (because it was a very 
positive message which showed that the people had 
power).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 60@@
60
4B
2	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
If necessary, remind Sts about sentence stress in English 
(see Pronunciation notes in Lesson 2B on p.35).
a	 e 4.15  Tell Sts that they are going to hear four sentences 
using a form of be able to. The first time they listen, they 
should try to write in the pink boxes the stressed words 
they hear. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each line to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 never, able, dance
2	 won’t, able, come
3	 love, able, ski
4	 hates, able, drive
e 4.15
1	 He’s never been able to dance.
2	 We won’t be able to come.
3	 I’d love to be able to ski.
4	 She hates not being able to drive.
b	 Now tell Sts to look at the words they have written and try 
to remember what the complete sentence is. 
	 Tell Sts to listen to the audio again and try to complete 
any gaps they have. Play the audio again.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
1	 He’s never been able to dance.
2	 We won’t be able to come.
3	 I’d love to be able to ski.
4	 She hates not being able to drive.
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm. Encourage them 
to pronounce the stressed words (in the pink boxes) more 
strongly and not to stress the other words.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the sentences.
d	 e 4.16  Go through the instructions. Focus on the two 
examples and explain that Sts will first hear an example 
sentence, e.g. I’d love to be able to ski. Then they will hear 
a verb or verb phrase (e.g. ride a horse). Sts then have to 
make a new sentence using that verb / verb phrase, i.e.  
I’d love to be able to ride a horse. At the same time, they 
should try to copy the rhythm of the original sentence.
	 When Sts are clear what they have to do, play the audio 
and get the whole class to respond. 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 4.13 
and e 4.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
EXTRA IDEA   In a monolingual class, you could get Sts to 
translate the example sentences and compare the forms / 
verbs they would use in their L1.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  f    2  be able to    3  been able to    4  being able to    
5  be able to    6  f    7  f    8  be able to    9  been able to   
10  f
b
1	 Her mobile has been switched off all morning, so I haven’t 
been able to talk to her yet.
2	 I like being able to / to be able to have a conversation 
without shouting.
3	 I will / ’ll be able to leave home when I get a job.
4	 Will you be able to come?
5	 You need to be able to swim before you can go in a canoe.
6	 I hate not being able to communicate with people in their 
own language.
7	 Fortunately, firefighters were able to rescue everybody from 
the burning house.
8	 I’m very sorry, but we won’t be able to come to your 
wedding next month.
9	 Have you been able to contact the doctor yet?
10	 The manager isn’t able to see you right now because she’s in 
a meeting.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the instructions and on the things which Sts 
have to talk about, making sure they understand them all. 
You could demonstrate by choosing one of the topics and 
telling Sts about your experience. 
	 Give Sts time to think about what they are going to say for 
two or three of the topics.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to tell each other 
about each of the things they chose in e. Encourage them 
to ask each other for more information and to give as 
much detail as possible. If there is an odd number of Sts in 
the class, you can take part yourself, or have one group of 
three. Monitor and correct any misuse of can / could / be 
able to.
	 Get some feedback to find out how many people, for 
example, have learned to do something after a lot of 
effort, etc., or if anyone had the same or a similar answer 
to their partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 61@@
61
4B
d	 e 4.18  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Matt 
talking about learning to play the trumpet. They must 
listen and choose the best summary.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2	 He learned something, but not enough.
e 4.18
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
I haven’t played a musical instrument for years. Five years ago, I 
got a trumpet for my birthday, and I tried to learn it, but I gave up 
after seven minutes, and it ended up in the garage. So here I am, a 
beginner again.
ONE HOUR
I have everything I need: a trumpet, YouTube trumpet lessons, and 
a book called Trumpet for Beginners. I plan to practise for twenty 
minutes a day, three times a week. I want to be able to play the 
trumpet, and I want to do it fast!
TWO HOURS
Well, that was optimistic. Playing the trumpet is more difficult than 
it looks! I can only play for ten minutes before I start seeing stars and 
my mouth hurts. I can get from C to G, but I can’t get any higher. It’s 
depressing.
FIVE HOURS
I’m now practising for ten minutes at a time. I can play a whole 
octave, from C to C. I’ve watched a lot of trumpet lessons on 
YouTube. The teacher has a beard and wears very colourful shirts. 
He’s beginning to annoy me, so I’m going to stop watching videos 
and use books instead.
NINE HOURS
I still can’t play high notes. I can play some very simple tunes, but 
nothing I actually want to play. It's not Rimsky-Korsakov.
FOURTEEN HOURS
I’ve been practising three times a week, but I’m not getting any 
better. I’ve put the trumpet in the wardrobe.
FIFTEEN HOURS
One evening I’m at a school concert and I meet Matilda Lloyd, one of 
Britain’s best trumpet players – she was a winner in the BBC Young 
Musician competition in two thousand and fourteen. I ask her for 
help, and the following week she gives me a trumpet lesson. I’m 
doing everything wrong. I need to forget everything I learned from 
the man with the beard and the colourful shirts. I need to start again.
SEVENTEEN HOURS
I’m getting better! My trumpet is starting to sound more like a 
musical instrument. I’m practising for half an hour every day. I’m 
enjoying myself. And the neighbour’s dogs have stopped barking.
TWENTY HOURS
I was planning to finish my twenty hours of practice by busking in 
the Underground for an afternoon, but I can’t do it. Twenty hours is 
too little. But give me one hundred hours, and you’ll see me playing 
the trumpet on a street near you…
e	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read all the 
stages.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each stage to give Sts 
time to circle the correct word or phrase.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   For each stage, get Sts to also make a 
note of Matt’s reasons (See the answers in brackets in the 
answer key below).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
e 4.16
1	 I’d love to be able to ski. Ride a horse (pause) I’d love to be able to 
ride a horse. 
2	 We won’t be able to come. Park (pause) We won’t be able to park. 
3	 I’ve never been able to dance. Speak French (pause) I’ve never 
been able to speak French. 
4	 She hates not being able to drive. Cook (pause) She hates not 
being able to cook.
5	 Will you be able to find it? Afford it (pause) Will you be able to 
afford it?
6	 He’d love to be able to snowboard. Windsurf (pause) He’d love to 
be able to windsurf.
7	 I love being able to understand everyone. Speak to everyone 
(pause) I love being able to speak to everyone.
8	 They haven’t been able to finish. Come (pause) They haven’t been 
able to come.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
3	LISTENING  making inferences
a	 Focus on the instructions and the title. Remind Sts of / 
Elicit the meaning of skill (= the ability to do something 
well). 
	 Then give Sts time to read the text and answer the 
question.
	 First, elicit what both Malcolm Gladwell and Josh Kaufman 
stated (Malcolm Gladwell: it takes 10,000 hours to master a 
new skill; Josh Kaufman: it takes 20 hours) and then elicit 
who Sts believe. You could find out with a show of hands 
how many Sts believe each person.
b	 Give Sts time to read the paragraph about Matt Rudd’s 
experience of learning to play the trumpet, and then elicit 
answers to the question. 
c	 e 4.17  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
read the music words and phrases in bold.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and match the sounds to the words and phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Make sure Sts understand all the words, 
explaining, for example, that an octave is the difference 
between the first and last notes in a series of eight notes. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
1  octave    2  busking    3  high note, low note    
4  musical instruments    5  notes    6  tune
e 4.17
(Sound effects of the following)
1	 an octave 
2	 someone busking 
3	 a high note and a low note
4	 a string trio playing (violin, viola, cello)
5	 five notes, from C to G
6	 a traditional English folk tune
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 62@@
62
4B
1  depressed    2  exciting    3  amazing    4  disappointed    
5  tiring    6  embarrassing    7  frightened    8  tired    9  boring    
10  frustrated
e 4.19
1	 What music do you listen to if you feel depressed?
2	 What do you think is the most exciting sport to watch?
3	 What’s the most amazing scenery you’ve ever seen?
4	 Have you ever been disappointed by a birthday present?
5	 Which do you find more tiring, clothes shopping or food 
shopping?
6	 What’s the most embarrassing thing that’s ever happened to you?
7	 Are you frightened of heights?
8	 Do you usually feel very tired in the morning?
9	 What’s the most boring film you’ve ever seen?
10	 Do you ever get frustrated by technology?
	 Remind Sts that amazing / amazed are strong adjectives 
(see the Student’s Book Lesson 2B, Vocabulary p.23). 
This means that you cannot use very with these words. 
Amazing can mean either very surprising or very good.
	 Now play the audio again and get Sts to underline the 
stressed syllable in the adjectives.
	 Check answers. 
1  depressed    2  exciting    3  amazing    4  disappointed    
5  tiring    6  embarrassing    7  frightened    8  tired    9  boring    
10  frustrated
	 Give Sts practice in pronouncing the adjectives, making 
sure they stress them on the correct syllable. You could 
play the audio again, pausing after each question and 
getting Sts to repeat just the adjective.
d	 Focus on the questions in b and get Sts to ask you a 
couple first. Make sure they ask for more information. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. Monitor and correct any mistakes with word 
stress.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs for each question.
6	READING & SPEAKING  understanding tips 
and examples
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity or put Sts in pairs. 
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback. Write any useful 
tips on the board.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
tips on the forum. 
	 Elicit whether Sts do any of the tips already, and if so, what 
they think of them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the forum the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Now tell Sts to read the forum again and match each item 
to one of the tips.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
5	 All you need is love, love. Love is all you need.
1	 Are you sure you want to shut down your computer now?
3	 Why don’t we stay in and watch a movie tonight, honey?
6	 I work for Samsung. I’m a computer programmer. I’ve been 
working there for three years.
4	 outgoing – shy  generous – mean  friendly – unfriendly
2	 Saxophonist Tim Garland will reunite with his former partner 
in Celtic jazz group Lammas.
1 hour  optimistic (Because he has everything he needs, and he 
has a plan.)
2 hours  unhappy (Because playing the trumpet is difficult – he 
can’t play for very long before getting tired, and he can’t play the 
high notes.)
5 hours  annoying (Because the online teacher wears colourful 
shirts and is probably cheerful.)
9 hours  He’s frustrated by how little he can play (Because he 
still can’t play high notes, and he can’t play any tunes he likes.)
14 hours  He’s depressed and wants to give up (Because he isn’t 
improving.)
15 hours  badly (Because he’s doing everything wrong.)
17 hours  optimistic again (Because he’s improving and 
enjoying himself.) 
20 hours  He thinks he’ll be able to improve (Because he says 
he’ll keep practising.) 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
4	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the instructions and on the skills which Sts have 
to talk about, making sure they understand them all. 
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and give them time 
to tell each other how well they think they would be able 
to do each skill after learning it for 20 hours.
	 Monitor and correct any misuse of be able to.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. You could find 
out if Sts thought they would all be able to do a certain 
skill after 20 hours, or if they all thought that 20 hours 
definitely wasn’t enough for a particular skill in the list.
5	VOCABULARY  -ed / -ing adjectives
Vocabulary notes
Many adjectives related to feelings have two forms, 
ending in -ed for the person who experiences the feeling 
or ending in -ing for the thing or person which produces 
the feeling.
Sts should be familiar with some of these adjectives, 
e.g. interested / interesting, and here they expand their 
knowledge.
You may want to point out that not all adjectives for 
feelings exist in both forms, e.g. stressed – stressful NOT 
stressing, scared – scary NOT scaring.
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Elicit / Explain / Translate 
the meaning of the two adjectives in each case.
1  annoying    2  annoyed
b	 Focus on the -ed and -ing adjectives box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Give Sts a couple of minutes to choose the correct 
adjective endings for 1–10.
c	 e 4.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know what the correct 
adjective means.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 63@@
63
4B
	 Check answers.
2  French    3  Hebrew    4  Italian    5  Dutch    6  Greek    
7  Spanish    8  Russian    9  German    10  English    11  Catalan  
An interview with Alex Rawlings
Part 1
P = presenter, A = Alex
P	 Alex Rawlings became ‘Britain’s most multilingual student’ in 
2012, when he won a national competition which tested his 
fluency in 11 different languages. At the time, he was studying 
German and Russian at Oxford University. Originally from London, 	
	Alex has lived in Germany, Russia, Hungary and Spain, and he has 
gone on to learn more languages since he graduated.
A	 Goeiemôre
A	 Bonjour
A	 Shalom ()שלום
A	 Buongiorno
A	 Goedemorgen
A	 Yassas (
)
A	 Hola
A	 Privet (ПРИВЕТ)
A	 Guten Tag
A	 Hi
A	 Bon dia
c	 Give Sts time to read items 1–6 which Alex mentions in 
the video. 
	 Play Part 2 of the video once the whole way through and 
tell Sts just to watch and try to follow as much as possible 
of what he says.
	 Then play the video again, pausing after Alex answers 
each question to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1	 Alex says that every new language that he learns is a 
completely new adventure for him.
2	 Greek and German are the two languages that he enjoys 
speaking the most.
3	 Chinese and Slovene are two languages that he would like to 
learn at the moment.
4	 Alex feels guilty that he’s never learned other British and Irish 
languages – Welsh, Irish, or Scottish Gaelic. On a recent trip to 
Wales he loved that everything was in two languages, Welsh 
and English.
5	 Russian was the most difficult language for him to learn, 
because he had to learn a new alphabet.
6	 YouTube has helped Alex to watch videos in other languages 
and immerse himself in other cultures. He says that there’s 
a lot of technology to help with learning vocabulary and 
grammar.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to translate 
the two reflexive pronouns. If you know your Sts’ L1, you 
could do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Focus on the Reflexive pronouns box and go through it 
with the class. Highlight that reflexive pronouns are made 
by adding -self (or -selves in the plural) to the possessive 
adjective (my, your, etc.). The exceptions are himself and 
themselves, where self / selves are added to the object 
pronouns him and them.
!   You may want to teach Sts the expression by + reflexive 
pronoun = alone, e.g. I like travelling by myself.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity or put Sts in pairs. 
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
they    she    we    you    he    it
f	 e 4.20  Go through the instructions. Focus on the 
example and explain that Sts will first hear an example 
sentence, e.g. She’s cut herself. Then they will hear a new 
subject, e.g. You. Sts then have to make a new sentence 
using that subject and a reflexive pronoun, i.e. You’ve cut 
yourself. At the same time, they should try to copy the 
rhythm of the original sentence.
	 When Sts are clear what they have to do, play the audio 
and get the whole class to respond. 
e 4.20
1	 She’s cut herself. You (pause) You’ve cut yourself.
2	 I’m teaching myself Spanish. He (pause) He’s teaching himself 
Spanish.
3	 We introduced ourselves. They (pause) They introduced 
themselves.
4	 He taught himself to play the guitar. She (pause) She taught 
herself to play the guitar.
5	 He often talks to himself. I (pause) I often talk to myself.
6	 I really enjoyed myself last night. We (pause) We really enjoyed 
ourselves last night.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
g	 Focus on the three bullet points and make sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. Elicit other things 
Sts do to improve their English outside class.
7	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you know someone 
yourself, tell Sts about him / her.
b	 Tell Sts that they are going to watch a video about 
Alex Rawlings, a young man who studies languages at 
university and who speaks 11 languages fluently. Before 
they watch, ask Sts to try to match the 11 greetings in the 
speech bubbles to the 11 languages. Point out that the 
first one (Afrikaans) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner. Then play Part 1 of the 
video once the whole way through for Sts to watch and 
check answers. Tell Sts they will hear a short introduction 
before Alex does the greetings.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 64@@
64
4B
1	 Because they don’t have enough time, they’re not doing it for 
the right reasons, or they expect it to be easier than it actually 
is.
2	 Because the grammar is very simple (there are almost no 
irregular verbs, and there are only three real tenses) and a lot 
of the vocabulary in Afrikaans is very similar to vocabulary in 
English.
3	 Because they don’t have much confidence and they never get 
a chance to practise other languages..
4	 You never finish learning a language.  
Try to spend 10–15 minutes a day on the language you are 
learning.
Part 3
P	 As well as learning languages himself, Alex has also taught 
intensive language courses. He also appears in the media and 
regularly attends events organized by institutions such as the 
European Council and the British Council to promote language 
learning and multilingualism. He has also written a book, How to 
speak any language fluently.
A	 Yeah, it’s a good question. So, put it, put it this way. I’ve never 
met anyone who couldn’t learn a language, you know, I mean, if 
they had the right motivation, the right time allocation, the right 
resources, and the right expectations, I’ve never met anyone 
who’s had all of those things in place and still failed. But many 
of us fail to learn languages because one of those things is not 
there. We don’t have enough time, we’re not doing it for the right 
reasons, or we expect it to be a lot easier than it actually is. 
Well, the easiest language for me to learn was definitely Afrikaans, 
because the grammar’s very, very simple, so there are almost no 
irregular verbs, there’s only three real tenses you have to worry 
about and a lot of the vocabulary in Afrikaans is very similar to 
vocabulary in English. So for example, there’s this sentence which 
is ‘My pen is in my hand and my hand is in warm water’, which 
in Afrikaans is ‘My pen is en my hand and my hand is in warm 
water’, which, you know is very, very easy for English-speakers to 
learn. So the easiest languages to learn are the languages which 
are most similar to the one you speak natively because you don’t 
have to learn so many new concepts and maybe you can already 
understand a lot of the vocabulary because it’s similar to what 
you already know. 
I think British and American people think that they’re not very 
good at languages. I think we don’t have much confidence. 
Because when we go abroad to other countries, we, we expect 
people to speak English, people expect us to speak English, so we 
never get a chance to practise the little bits of other languages 
that we might know…  
I think the most important thing for someone who wants to learn 
a new language to remember is that nothing happens overnight. 
Learning languages is a lifelong activity. And you basically, you 
never finish, you never get to that finishing line where you think, 
‘Right, what should I do next?’ When you learn a new language 
you need to accept the fact that there will always be more to 
learn, no matter how much you learn. And so the best approach 
is to just start doing it in little steps, just doing say ten to fifteen 
minutes a day, whenever you can find time around your routine. 
And then building that up over a year or two years before you 
really start to feel very confident using that language. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time you could get Sts to watch 
Part 3 again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
	 Finally, ask Sts if they think that anything Alex said could 
help them with learning English or other languages.
Part 2
I’ve learned so many languages because I’m hooked basically on 
learning languages. I think every new language to me is like a 
new world, it’s a completely new adventure and you meet totally 
different people, you have totally different experiences. I often say 
when, when you visit a country when you speak the language, 
you really get to know that country, you really get to explore it 
for yourself. But when you visit a country and you don’t speak the 
local language, you’re relying on other people to explain what’s 
happening to you. They’re kind of, they’re showing you their version 
of the country, but you can’t really see it for yourself. 
All of the languages that I speak are fun. I think that’s why I’ve stuck 
with them and enjoy speaking them. I think I have the, the deepest 
emotional connection with Greek because my grandmother was 
from Greece and so we use Greek in my family as well and I’ve heard 
it ever since I was a child. But I also really like speaking German.
There are so many languages that I would love to learn in the future. 
As I said, I’m hooked so… I’m, I’m very interested in Chinese at the 
moment. I work with someone from China, who’s teaching me little 
bits. And I think it’s really cool when I hear her speaking to her family 
or friends on the phone in Chinese and think, ‘Wow! Wouldn’t it be 
really awesome to speak that?’ I also, I organize an international 
conference for polyglots every year, which moves country, so last 
year it was in Iceland and this year it’s going to be in Slovenia. So 
I’d like to learn some Slovene as well before we go there for the 
weekend.
I always feel a little bit guilty that I’m from the UK, but I’ve never 
really learned any of our local languages here. So I’ve never learned 
Welsh, I’ve never learned Irish, I’ve never learned Scottish Gaelic. 
And I went to Wales recently and loved that we had everything in 
two languages. You walk into the supermarket and you see all these 
languages everywhere. And I thought, ‘I think it would be really cool 
to learn a language which is very close to where I live that I could 
use.’ So I’d love to learn Welsh one day, too. 
The biggest challenge for me with learning a new language was 
with Russian. There were a number of things that I wasn’t expecting 
to be hard that were. For example, there’s a whole new alphabet, 
which, it’s not too different to English – you get used to it – but 
when you’re trying to learn a word, it’s just an extra barrier to 
memorizing that word. First, having to read it and understand what 
all of the letters mean and then having to actually memorize it. So 
there’s that extra layer there. 
Technology has been an amazing resource for me, especially when 
I was growing up actually, with YouTube and things like that, I was 
able to sort of come home from school and immediately immerse 
myself in this world of another language. I could just watch videos in 
different languages all evening and it was like I was there, it was like 
I was living in the country. So the internet has brought all of those 
cultures much closer to me and made them much more accessible. 
And since then I think there’s now a lot of technology out there to 
help you learn vocabulary or to teach you grammar.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Give Sts time to read the four questions. 
	 Now play Part 3 of the video once the whole way 
through for Sts just to watch.
	 Then play it again, pausing after Alex answers each 
question to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 65@@
65
Revise and Check 
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Video  Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4  
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  c    2  a    3  c    4  b    5  a    6  a    7  b    8  b    9  a    10  c    
11  b    12  b    13  c    14  b    15  a
VOCABULARY
a
1  limit    2  belts    3  lanes    4  rush    5  rank
b
1  in    2  for    3  on    4  at    5  of
c	
1  traffic    2  van    3  ferry    4  set    5  take
d	
1  boring    2  frightening    3  excited    
4  disappointed    5  depressing
e	
1  leave    2  engaged    3  hung    4  swiped    5  ringtones
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  arrive /aɪ/    2  engaged /g/    3  message /dʒ/    
4  Underground /ə/    5  with /ð/
d	
1  motorway    2  disappointed    3  pedestrian    4  voicemail    
5  embarrassing
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
A  5    B  3    C  6    D  4    E  1    F  2
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    2  c    3  c    4  b    5  b
e 4.21
1
I = interviewer, N = Nick
I	 How do you get to work?
N	 I take the Tube.
I	 How long does it take?
N	 Forty-five minutes or so.
I	 What do you think is the best way to get around London?
N	 Um, the easiest way is to take the Tube, I think, but the nicest way 
is probably to go by Boris bike if you want to relax when you’re 
travelling, then it’s a nice way to see the city, but maybe not the 
quickest way to get around.
2
I = interviewer, B = Butterfly 
I	 Do you think women are better than men with young children, or 
do you think that’s just a stereotype?
B	 I think that, um, it is definitely a stereotype that women are just 
better with children than men are. I believe that both sexes 
provide children with valuable, equally valuable, experiences, um, 
so I definitely trust either sex to raise children and love children, 
you know, with the same styles and the same quality and, you 
know, respect and love.
3
I = interviewer, C = Coleen 
I	 Are there any stereotypes about men and women that you think 
are true?
C	 I think women do think differently to men, um, and I think 
conversations tend to be different as well. Women are much more 
into, um, ‘what did you say and what did he say, and what did you 
feel’ and all the rest of it, and men are far more pragmatic and, 
you know, just want to know the score, as it were.
4
I = interviewer, J = Jenny
I	 How many languages do you speak?
J	 I speak English and I also speak Afrikaans.
I	 Is there a language you’d like to be able to speak?
J	 I would very much like to be able to speak Spanish.
I	 Why Spanish?
J	 Because Spanish is spoken all over the world and I feel it’s, it 
would be, it’s important to be able to communicate with more 
people.
5
I = interviewer, L = Linwood
I	 Is there anything that people do with phones that really annoys 
you?
L	 I would say, from what I’ve experienced, they’re either texting 
or looking at their phones while walking and not looking where 
they’re going. Er, I would say, from what I’ve experienced so far in 
London, that would be the biggest for me.
	3&4	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 66@@
5A
66
e 5.1
1	 You can do the butterfly in swimming.
2	 There’s a shot called a slam dunk in basketball.
3	 The person who throws the ball in baseball is called the pitcher.
4	 There are two teams of fifteen people, and a ball that isn’t round, 
in rugby.
5	 You hit the ball over a net on a table in table tennis (or ping pong).
6	 Players walk about eight kilometres, and never run, during a 
game of golf.
7	 There are two teams of six, who play on ice, in ice hockey.
8	 There are four main tennis tournaments in the world: in 
Melbourne, Paris, London, and New York.
9	 You can do different activities, for example running, high jump or 
javelin, in athletics.
10	 Brazil have won more World Cups than any other country in 
football.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Sport on p.157. 
Vocabulary notes
People and places
Highlight that the coach is the non-playing person in 
charge of a sports team. He / She is in charge of training, 
tactics, and team selection. In British football, this person 
is called the manager.
Point out that you usually use both words (= a compound 
noun) to describe the place where you do a sport, e.g. 
tennis court, football pitch.
Verbs
You may want to highlight that we say nil for a zero 
score in football and most other sports (e.g. Inter Milan 
beat Chelsea three–nil), but we say love in tennis (e.g. 
fifteen–love).
	 Focus on 1 People and places and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.2
Sport
1 People and places, b
3	 captain
7	 coach
1	 fans
5	 players
2	 referee / umpire
9	 spectators / the crowd
6	 sports hall
8	 stadium
4	 team
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the words and look at the 
photos to see if they can remember the lexis.
	 Get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.3  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
 G   past tenses: simple, continuous, perfect
 V   sport
 P   /ɔː/ and /ɜː/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is sport. The lesson begins with a 
vocabulary focus on words and phrases connected with 
sport, and then a pronunciation focus on two vowel sounds 
which Sts often have problems with, /ɔː/ and /ɜː/. Sts then 
have a speaking activity about sport, which caters for both 
Sts who like and do sport, and those that do not. This is 
followed by a reading about the superstitions that many 
sportspeople have.
The angle in the second half of the lesson is sportsmanship. 
Sts listen to an interview with a football referee, and then 
the grammar, narrative tenses (past simple, past continuous, 
and past perfect), is presented through stories about people 
helping others in sports. Sts then practise telling anecdotes, 
and the lesson ends with a writing focus on stories. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past tenses: simple, continuous, perfect p.157 
Communicative  Marathon cheats p.186  
(instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  Sport p.209 (instructions p.200)
For students
Workbook  5A
Online Practice  5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board the names of the three most popular 
sports in your Sts’ country, and drill the pronunciation. 
Then get a show of hands to find out a) how many people 
in the class like watching these sports, and b) how many do 
these sports.
Then ask Sts if they think the class statistics are typical of 
their country as a whole. 
1	VOCABULARY  sport
a	 Books open. Focus on the quiz In which sport…?
	 Put Sts in small teams of three or four and tell them to 
answer the questions as fast as they can. 
	 Stop when the first team ‘crosses the finish line’.
b	 e 5.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to spell the names of the 
sports, and checking pronunciation. Find out if the first 
team to cross the finish line got the most questions 
correct. If not, the team with the most correct answers is 
the winner.
1  swimming    ​2  basketball    ​3  baseball    ​4  rugby    ​
5  table tennis / ping pong    ​6  golf    ​7  ice hockey    ​8  tennis    ​
9  athletics    ​10  football
	5A	 Sporting superstitions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 67@@
67
	 e 5.6  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
1  D    2  B    3  C    4  A
e 5.6
3 Phrasal verbs
1	 Warm up means do light exercise to get ready for a match, for 
example.
2	 Work out means do exercise, usually at a gym.
3	 Was sent off means was told to leave the pitch, court, etc.
4	 Was knocked out means was eliminated.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  /ɔː/ and /ɜː/
Pronunciation notes
Here the focus is on two long sounds which are often 
mispronounced because of the sometimes irregular 
relationship between sound and spelling. The biggest 
problem is -or, which is usually /ɔː/, but sometimes /ɜː/ 
after w, and the -ought / -aught endings, which are 
usually /ɔːt/.
a	 Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the words and 
sounds: horse /ɔː/ and bird /ɜː/.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to put the words in the correct 
row. Warn them to be careful with the -or words.
b	 e 5.7  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.7
horse /ɔː/  ball, caught, course, court, draw, fought, score, sport, 
warm up
bird /ɜː/  circuit, hurt, serve, shirt, work out, world, worse
	 Highlight that caught and court are pronounced exactly 
the same, although they have a different spelling, and that 
fought and caught share the same vowel sound.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 e 5.8  Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences and 
they must write them down. 
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts just to listen. 
e 5.8
1	 I hurt myself when I caught the ball.
2	 Her serve’s worse than the other girl’s.
3	 It was a draw – the score was four-all.
4	 It’s the worst sport in the world.
5	 We warmed up on the court.
6	 They wore red shirts and white shorts.
	 Then play it again, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write it down. Repeat if necessary.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.3
d
1	 tennis court / basketball court
2	 football pitch / rugby pitch / hockey pitch
3	 swimming pool / diving pool
4	 athletics track
5	 Formula 1 circuit / motorcycling circuit
6	 golf course
7	 ski slope
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to test 
each other. Make sure they swap roles.
	 Focus on 2 Verbs and go through the win and beat box 
with the class. 
	 Make sure Sts know the meaning of the verbs, and then 
get them to do a and b individually or in pairs. Highlight 
that in b, Sts should write the verbs in the Verb column, 
not in the shaded gaps in the sentences. By doing this, 
they can use the sentences to test their memory later.
	 e 5.4  Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check 
answers to a and b. 
	 Check answers. 
e 5.4
2 Verbs, a
a
beat, beat, beaten
win, won, won
lose, lost, lost
draw, drew, drawn
b
1	 Spain drew with Brazil two–two.
2	 Milan beat Chelsea three–nil.
3	 Milan won the match three–nil.
4	 The Chicago Bulls lost seventy-eight–ninety-one to the Boston 
Celtics.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
verbs in a, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Sts do d individually or in pairs. Remind them to write in 
the Verb column.
	 e 5.5  Now do e. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.5
e
1	 Professional sportspeople have to train every day.
2	 Don’t play tennis on a wet court. You might get injured.
3	 A footballer has to try to kick the ball into the goal.
4	 I’ve started going to the gym because I want to get fit.
5	 Our new striker is going to score a lot of goals.
6	 Would you like to go swimming this afternoon?
7	 My brothers do yoga and t’ai chi.
8	 In basketball, players throw the ball to each other.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the Verb columns in b and 
d to test themselves.
	 Finally, focus on 3 Phrasal verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
5A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 68@@
68
5A
	 Check answers.
1	 They’re examples of famous sportspeople’s superstitions.
2	 They were used in a study at the University of Cologne to 
show that people perform better when they have ‘lucky’ 
things.
3	 Adrenaline and other chemicals are produced as a result of 
sporting rituals, helping athletes to focus better.
4	 This is an example of how superstitions can cause problems 
– both players wanted to be the last person to leave the 
changing room.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. If you have any 
superstitions, you could tell the class.
5	LISTENING  understanding an interview
a	 Do this a whole-class activity, and elicit some opinions on 
referees in general.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts can’t give any reasons, you could 
ask them if referees are a) well paid, b) respected, or c) 
unpopular.
b	 e 5.9  Focus on the photo and the instructions. Give 
Sts a few minutes to read questions 1–5 and their three 
options, and make sure they understand them.
	 Then play the audio (Part 1 of the interview) once the 
whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  c    2  b    3  b    4  a    5  a
e 5.9
(script in Student’s Book on pp.127–128)
I = interviewer, JA = Juan Antonio
Part 1
I	 What made you want to become a referee?
JA	 My father was a referee, but that didn’t influence me – in fact, 
the opposite, because I saw all the problems that he had as a 
referee. But as a child, I was always attracted by the idea and at 
school I used to referee all kinds of sports – basketball, handball, 
volleyball, and of course football. I was invited to join the Referees’ 
Federation when I was only fourteen years old.
I	 Were you good at sport yourself?
JA	 Yes. I was a very good handball player. People often think that 
referees become referees because they’re frustrated sportsmen, 
but this is just not true in most cases, in my experience.
I	 What was the most exciting match you ever refereed?
JA	 It’s difficult to choose one match as the most exciting. I remember 
some of the Real Madrid–Barcelona matches, for example the 
first one I ever refereed. The atmosphere was incredible in the 
stadium. But really, it’s impossible to pick just one – there have 
been so many.
I	 What was the worst experience you ever had as a referee?
JA	 The worst? Well, that was something that happened very early 
in my career. I was only sixteen, and I was refereeing a match in 
a town in Spain, and the home team lost. After the match, I was 
attacked and injured by the players of the home team and by the 
spectators. After all these years, I can still remember a mother 
who had a little baby in her arms, who was trying to hit me. She 
was so angry with me that she nearly dropped her baby. That was 
my worst moment, and it nearly made me stop being a referee.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See script 5.8
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
3	SPEAKING
	 This topic-based speaking activity takes into account the 
fact that not all Sts are interested in sport!
	 Focus on the instructions and the flow chart, and point 
out the two alternative ‘routes’ and the last three questions 
for all Sts to discuss, whichever route they took. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to interview you with the first few 
questions from whichever group you belong to. Elicit extra 
questions to show possible follow-up questions.
	 Monitor while Sts interview each other. Correct any 
pronunciation errors with the vocabulary they have just 
learned, and help them with any new vocabulary they 
need. Make a note of any common mistakes, and have a 
correction spot at the end of the activity.
	 Get some feedback from a few individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do the last three questions as a 
whole-class activity.
4	READING  understanding how examples support	
	 main points
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, making sure Sts 
understand all the expressions. If Sts come from different 
countries, they could tell the class the equivalent things 
they say in their country, e.g. Italians say touch iron, 
not wood.
b	 Focus on the instructions and elicit / explain the meaning 
of superstition /suːpəˈstɪʃn/ (= the belief that particular 
events happen in a way that cannot be explained by 
reason or science). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Read the title of the article and explain / elicit the 
meaning of work here (= to have the result or effect that 
you want).
	 Now tell Sts to read the article and find the answer to 
the title.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary. 
Yes, because they increase confidence and control.
c	 Now focus on the instructions and phrases A–D. Make 
sure Sts understand the words physical and psychological. 
	 Tell Sts to read the article again quickly and match each 
topic to a paragraph.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  B    2  D    3  A    4  C
d	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them to read the article again and 
then discuss with their partner why the examples for 
paragraphs 1–4 are given.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 69@@
69
fact of playing a game or acting honestly, fairly, and 
according to the rules).
	 Encourage Sts to give reasons to justify what they say.
	 Get some feedback from various groups and find out if 
any Sts disagreed with each other on any of the topics.
6	GRAMMAR  past tenses
a	 Focus on the title of the article and the photo, and ask Sts 
what they think the article is about.
	 Now give Sts time to read the article about Alistair 
Brownlee and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
He helped his brother, and as a result, he didn’t win the race.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to read 
paragraph 2 again and find the verbs.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Past continuous: he was winning; His brother, Alistair, was 
running
Past perfect: he’d gone very fast; he hadn’t drunk enough; Jonny 
had stopped; who had been behind them
	 Now ask Sts why the different tenses are used.
The past continuous verbs show that these actions were in 
progress when the main events happened.
The past perfect verbs show that these things happened before 
the main events in the story.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.140. 
Grammar notes
In English File Pre-intermediate Sts learned the past 
simple, the past continuous, and the past perfect in 
separate lessons, so this will be the first time Sts have 
seen the three tenses together. 
Highlight that these three tenses are the ones that 
we normally use to tell a story / anecdote in the past. 
Most verbs tend to be in the past simple when we are 
describing consecutive actions (First,…, then…, etc.), 
but we often use the past simple in conjunction with 
either or both the past continuous and past perfect, 
e.g. I got home late and my wife had already finished her 
dinner and was watching the news on TV.
You may want to draw a timeline on the board to show 
Sts how the three tenses work together:
	
	
I got home late.
	
My wife had	
She was
	
finished her	
watching the
	
dinner.	
the news on TV.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 5.11, 
e 5.12, e 5.13 and e 5.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
I	 Do you think that there’s more cheating in football than in the 
past?
JA	 Yes, I think so.
I	 Why?
JA	 I think it’s because there’s so much money in football today that 
it’s become much more important to win. Also, football is much 
faster than it used to be, so it’s much more difficult for referees to 
detect cheating.
I	 How do footballers cheat?
JA	 Oh, there are many ways, but for me, the worst thing in football 
today is what we call simulation. Simulation is when a player 
pretends to have been fouled when in fact he hasn’t. For example, 
sometimes a player falls over in the penalty area when, in fact, 
nobody has touched him, and this can result in the referee giving 
a penalty when it wasn’t a penalty. In my opinion, when a player 
does this, he’s cheating not only the referee, not only the players 
of the other team, but also the spectators, because spectators pay 
money to see a fair contest.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the audio after the referee 
has answered each question to give Sts time to answer the 
questions.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to hear Part 2 of the interview, but 
before they listen, they must look at sentences 1–6 and 
see if they can predict what the referee is going to say.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
d	 e 5.10  Tell Sts to listen to Part 2 of the interview and 
check their answers.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Then play it 
again, pausing after each answer is given.
	 Check answers.
1  right decisions    ​2  fast    ​3  rules    ​4  exceptions    ​
5  with the ball    ​6  typical superstar
e 5.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
Part 2
I	 What’s the most difficult thing about being a referee?
JA	 The most difficult thing is to make the right decisions during a 
match. It’s difficult because you have to make decisions when 
everything’s happening so quickly – football today is very fast. You 
must remember that everything is happening at one hundred 
kilometres an hour. Also, important decisions often depend on 
the referee’s interpretation of the rules. Things aren’t black and 
white. And, of course, making decisions would be much easier if 
players didn’t cheat.
I	 Do you think that the idea of fair play doesn’t exist any more?
JA	 Not at all. On the contrary, I think fair play does exist – the players 
who cheat are the exceptions.
I	 Finally, who was the best player you ever saw in your career as a 
referee?
JA	 I have to say Leo Messi.
I	 Why is he special for you? 
JA	 Well, a study was done on him which showed that Messi could 
run faster with the ball than many footballers can do without the 
ball. But apart from his great ability, what I’ve always admired 
about him is that he isn’t a typical superstar footballer. In public 
and in his personal life, his behaviour has always been very 
normal. That’s unusual for such a famous player.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the two scripts on pp.127–128, so they can 
see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in small groups to discuss questions 1–4. Before 
they start, elicit / explain the meaning of fair play (= the 
5A
X
XXXX X
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 70@@
70
5A
	 Monitor and help Sts with their planning and with any 
specific vocabulary.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts that one anecdote should be true and 
the other invented. Sts A then tell both their anecdotes, one 
after the other, and Sts B must decide which one is true. 
They then swap roles. You could model the activity first by 
telling them two anecdotes of your own. Pause from time to 
time and encourage Sts to ask you questions. Then get Sts to 
guess which one is true.
b	 Focus on the Telling an anecdote box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A should start by telling their 
first anecdote, giving as much information as possible, 
and Sts B should ask questions. Sts B then tell their first 
anecdote.
	 Monitor while Sts are telling their anecdotes, but don’t 
correct too much, as the aim here is to encourage fluency, 
and Sts are unlikely to use all the tenses perfectly.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to look back at the language for reacting 
to what people say in Practical English Episode 1 on p.15. 
Encourage them to use this language when they listen to 
the anecdotes. 
	 If Sts are enjoying the activity (and you have time), you 
could get them to change partners and tell their stories 
again.
8	WRITING  telling a story
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Telling a story on p.118.
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
story and answer the questions. Tell them not to worry 
about the gaps in the story.
	 Check answers.
They got lost because her husband followed the instructions 
given by the satnav, which sent them in the wrong direction. 
They also left their dog under the table in the café on the 
motorway.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the connecting words or 
phrases in the list.
	 Give Sts time to read the story again and complete 
each gap.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  when    ​3  However    ​4  instead of    ​5  but    ​6  So    ​
7  because    ​8  as soon as    ​9  although
c	 Focus on the A bad journey box and go through it with 
the class. 
	 Now tell Sts they are going to write about a journey when 
they had a problem. If Sts can’t think of a journey, they can 
invent one. 
	 Focus on the plan and go through it with Sts. 
	 Sts should write three paragraphs, as in the model, and 
use the A bad journey box to help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their story, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
d	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
a
1  had trained    ​2  was cycling    ​3  wanted    ​
4  had already started    ​5  hadn’t scored    ​6  was playing    ​
7  stopped    ​8  hadn’t lost    ​9  was raining
b
1	 The accident happened when they were driving home.
2	 The crowd cheered when the referee blew the final whistle.
3	 I didn’t recognize Jane at first because she had changed so 
much.
4	 The police stopped my sister on the motorway because she 
wasn’t wearing a seat belt.
5	 Some of the players weren’t listening while the coach was 
talking to them.
6	 We couldn’t use the ski slope because it hadn’t snowed 
enough.
7	 They weren’t able to play tennis because they hadn’t 
booked a court.
8	 The player got a yellow card because he had taken off / 
took off his shirt after scoring a goal.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to read an article about a skier, 
Anton Gafarov. Tell Sts they must complete the gaps with 
the verbs in the correct form. Point out that the first one 
(was competing) has been done for them. 
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  was doing    ​3  fell    ​4  damaged    ​5  fell    ​6  had broken    ​
7  tried / was trying    ​8  ran    ​9  replaced    ​10  had brought    ​
11  finished
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Good sportsmanship, A on p.107,  
B on p.112.
	 Tell Sts A to read about Kenyan runner Abel Mutai, and  
Sts B to read about Canadian sailor Lawrence Lemieux.
	 When they have finished reading, Sts should underline all 
the verbs in the past continuous or past perfect.
	 Sts A then cover the story and tell it to their partner, using 
the prompts in the list.
	 Sts then swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity, making sure Sts know the 
meaning of heroic (= very brave). You could also tell Sts 
what you think.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what an anecdote is (= an informal true story about 
something that happened to you). Model and drill its 
pronunciation.
	 Give Sts time to choose which two topics they are going 
to talk about, and to plan the stories. Encourage them 
to think about the vocabulary they are going to need, 
especially verbs. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 71@@
71
5B
1	READING & LISTENING  predicting the end of	
	 a story
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and make sure Sts know 
what a partner is (= a husband / boyfriend, or wife / 
girlfriend). 
	 Get Sts to number phrases A–E in order according to how 
likely they think people are to meet friends and partners 
that way.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit 
opinions.
b	 Tell Sts they are going to read the beginning of two stories 
from an Instagram site called #thewaywemet and they 
must find out where the two women met their partners.
	 Give Sts time to read the stories and answer the question.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the stories the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Tiffany met her partner in a supermarket car park.
Kristina met her partner in an acupuncture clinic.
c	 Now tell Sts to read the stories again and decide who 
each statement refers to.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  T    2  T    3  K    4  K    5  K    6  T
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the question and elicit ideas for both stories.
	 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication The way we met, A on p.107, B on 
p.112.
	 Tell Sts A to read about Tiffany, and Sts B to read about 
Kristina.
	 When they have finished reading, Sts should close their 
books and tell their partner their story.
EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts tell their partner how the story ends, 
they should first elicit from their partner what they think 
happened.
	 In their pairs, Sts decide what coincidence there is in each 
story.
	 Check answers.
Tiffany and her partner own exactly the same car.
Kristina was studying Creative Writing and her partner’s surname 
is Tolstoy (like the great Russian novelist).
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
e	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think about 
how a couple they know met.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to share their stories.
	 Get some feedback, and if you know a couple who met in 
unusual circumstances, tell the class.
 G   past and present habits and states
 V   relationships
 P   the letter s, used to
Lesson plan
Different kinds of relationships provide the main theme 
for this lesson. It begins with two stories from Instagram 
#thewaywemet about two couples who met their partner 
in unusual circumstances. Sts then listen to another person 
talking about where he met his partner, and extracts from 
the listening provide a lead-in to the grammar, which revises 
and consolidates the use of used to for past habits and states, 
and contrasts it with the way we express present habits.  
The pronunciation focus is on the different ways the letter s 
can be pronounced, and the pronunciation of used to. This is 
followed by a controlled oral grammar practice stage.
The topic of the second half of the lesson is friendships. 
It begins with a vocabulary focus on words and phrases 
related to relationships. Sts then listen to a radio programme 
about friendships, and the lesson ends with a speaking 
activity where Sts present their opinion on a particular 
aspect of friendship.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past and present habits and states p.158 
Communicative  Past and present p.187  
(instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  Relationships p.210 (instructions p.200)
For students
Workbook  5B
Online Practice  5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following on the board:
1	 I MET MY BEST FRIEND AT PRIMARY SCHOOL.
2	 WHERE SHALL WE MEET? HOW ABOUT IN THE CAFÉ BY THE STATION? 
3	 WHEN I WAS OUT SHOPPING LAST WEEK, I MET AN OLD SCHOOL 
FRIEND WHO I HADN’T SEEN FOR YEARS. 
Now elicit from Sts the meanings of the verb meet in each 
sentence.
1	 To see somebody for the first time
2	 To go to a place and wait there for somebody to arrive
3	 To be in the same place as somebody by chance and talk 
to them
	5B	 #thewaywemet
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 72@@
72
5B
Grammar notes
Used to is a grammar point which was presented in English 
File Pre-intermediate and is revised and consolidated here. 
This is a ‘late assimilation’ structure, as Sts can express 
more or less the same idea by using the past tense + 
a time expression. Compare I used to go to that primary 
school and I went to that primary school (when I was a 
child). In that sense, used to is a sophisticated structure 
and its correct use shows that Sts have a higher level of 
English. In this lesson used to is contrasted with the use 
of the present simple with usually to talk about present 
habits. 
Sts may have problems with this structure, as their 
language may either use a tense which doesn’t exist in 
English for past habits, or may have a verb which can be 
used both for present and past habits – unlike used to, 
which can only be used in the past.
Emphasize the way we often don’t repeat the main verb, 
but just use the auxiliary verb with any more / any longer 
when we contrast the past and present habits, e.g. I used 
to like cartoons, but I don’t any more. 
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 using use to instead of usually for present habits and 
states, e.g. I use to go to bed about 11.00.
•	 making mistakes of spelling such as We didn’t used to 
wear a uniform at my school.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 5.16 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the information box and go through it with Sts.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  g didn’t use to like    ​2  f    ​3  g never used to want    ​
4  g did you use to keep in touch    ​5  g usually go    ​6  f    ​ 
7  g Did your parents meet    ​8  g used to work    ​9  g usually go
b
1	 We used to have a lot in common, but now we’re completely 
different.
2	 We usually go to bed early during the week because we 
have to get up at 6.00 a.m.
3	 I didn’t use to watch TV on my phone, but now I often do.
4	 Do you usually play football on Sunday mornings?
5	 They love sushi, so they usually eat out in Japanese 
restaurants.
6	 Where did your husband use to work before he got the job 
in the bank?
7	 My sister has lost a lot of weight. She never used to be so slim.
8	 Did you use to argue a lot with your parents when you were 
a teenager?
9	 Laura usually gets on really well with her flatmates, but they 
occasionally argue about housework.
10	 My ex-boyfriend didn’t use to speak to me, but now he calls 
me quite often.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	GRAMMAR  past and present habits and states
a	 e 5.15  Tell Sts they are going to listen to another story 
and they must answer the two questions. You could write 
the questions on the board and get Sts to close their 
books.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
They met in a school corridor, and it wasn’t romantic.
e 5.15
Well, I used to be a teacher, and I taught English to adults in 
Indonesia for a few years, and I met my wife there, um, in the school 
that I was working in. She was a student at the school – ah, not in my 
class, I should point out – just a student at the school, and one day 
in the corridor I was walking to class, and she was running through 
the corridor because she was late for her class – she didn’t use to 
be very punctual in those days. And she crashed into me, and I was 
on my way to class, so I was carrying a whole load of things and I 
dropped all my books, all my papers, all my pens…they went all 
over the floor. And did she help me to pick them up? Nope! She just 
ran off, laughing; she thought it was very funny. So…you could say 
it wasn’t love at first sight. But we became friends after that, and 
we sometimes used to have tea or a beer together. And after being 
friends for, I think, three years, we got together – became boyfriend 
and girlfriend – and then a few years later, we got engaged, then we 
got married – and now we’ve been married for twelve years.
b	 Now focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–8. 
Go through them with Sts and make sure they 
understand them.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through, and get Sts 
to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind them to 
correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (She was a student at the school, but not in his classes.)
3	 F (She wasn’t usually very punctual.)
4	 T
5	 T
6	 F (She ran off, laughing.)
7	 T
8	 F (They’ve been married for 12 years.)
c	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them to look at the three extracts from 
the listening and to answer questions 1 and 2.
	 Check answers.
1	 We use used to to talk about things that were true over a 
period of time in the past.  
We make questions with Did + person + use to + infinitive.
2	 No
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.141. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 73@@
73
e 5.19
1	 I’m sure you used to take sugar in your tea.
2	 She didn’t use to like classical music, but now she loves it.
3	 We used to stay with my parents’ friends in the summer holidays.
4	 Did you use to use your car more?
5	 The singer usually practises for six hours a day.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See script 5.19
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting the sentences from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to listen and repeat after 
the audio, and then practise in pairs.
e	 Focus on the task and give Sts a few minutes to choose 
their two topics and plan what they are going to say.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to start talking about 
their first topic, giving as much information as they can. 
Sts B can ask for more information, too.
	 Then Sts B tell Sts A about their first topic, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Choose one of the topics yourself and tell 
Sts a little about it. This way, you demonstrate what you 
want them to do and give Sts extra listening practice.
	 As Sts are talking, move round, monitoring and helping, 
and correcting any mistakes with used to.
	 Get some feedback.
4	VOCABULARY  relationships
a	 Give Sts time to match the words or phrases to the 
photos. 
	 Check answers, eliciting what each word or phrase means.
3	 colleagues (= people that you work with)
4	 friends (= people you know well and like)
6	 argue with somebody (= to speak angrily to sb because you 
disagree with them)
5	 discuss something with somebody (= to talk about sth with 
sb, especially in order to decide sth)
1	 meet somebody (= to see sb for the first time)
2	 know somebody (= you have met before)
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Relationships on 
p.158. 
Vocabulary notes
People
Highlight that mate can be added to other words, 
e.g. housemate (= someone you share a house with), 
schoolmate (= someone you are / were at school with), 
workmate (= somebody you work with).
Tell Sts that fiancé(e) is a word ‘borrowed’ from French, 
which explains the pronunciation, and why it has an 
accent. With one e, it refers to a man, and with two to a 
woman.
You might also want to point out that in American English 
co-worker is used instead of colleague.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  the letter s,	
	 used to
Pronunciation notes
Many learners of English tend to always pronounce the 
letter s as the unvoiced sound /s/, as in bus. In fact, s in the 
middle or at the end of a word is often pronounced /z/, 
e.g. music, jobs, and -se is very often pronounced /z/, 
e.g. lose, revise, etc. At the beginning of a word, s is 
almost always /s/, with the exceptions of sure and sugar, 
where the s is pronounced /ʃ/. Double s is always 
pronounced /s/.
Used can be pronounced both ways, with a /s/ or a /z/. 
When it is a main verb (e.g. I used Google maps to find the 
right way), it is pronounced /juːzd/, but when it is used to 
(e.g. I used to live in Seville), it is pronounced /juːst/.
a	 e 5.17  Focus on the task and elicit the four picture words 
(snake, zebra, shower, and television).
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen.
e 5.17
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.51
	 Then get Sts to write the words in the correct column.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio, pausing after each word for 
Sts to listen and write the words in the columns.
b	 e 5.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.18
snake /s/  used to, parents, practise, singer, sport, summer, 
supermarket
zebra /z/  use, busy, friends, holidays, lose, music
shower /ʃ/  sugar, sure
television /ʒ/  usually, decision, occasion, unusual
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer 1–3.
	 Check answers.
1	 At the beginning of a word, the letter s is usually pronounced 
/s/. The two exceptions are sure and sugar /ʃ/.
2	 At the end of a word, s can be pronounced /s/ or /z/.
3	 In vowel + -sion, the letter s is pronounced /ʒ/.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 e 5.19  Focus on the used to box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear five short sentences or 
questions and they need to write them down.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 74@@
74
5B
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts a couple of minutes to 
think about a close friend and how they will answer the 
questions.
	 Put Sts in pairs; they take turns to interview each other 
about their close friend. While they are doing this, go 
round monitoring and helping if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
d	 Either put Sts in pairs to think of the four letters that can 
be added after the words in the list to make an abstract 
noun, or do it as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check the answer. Make sure Sts 
know the meaning of all the words in the list with -ship 
added to them. 
-ship
e	 Give Sts time to complete sentences 1–5 with an abstract 
noun from d.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  relationship    ​2  membership    ​3  leadership    ​4  partnership  ​
5  friendship
5	LISTENING  understanding facts and supporting	
	 information
a	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs to guess the 
missing words in facts 1–5.
	 Elicit answers, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 e 5.22  Tell Sts to listen to the radio programme about 
friendship and check their answers to a.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers. Find out, with a show of hands, if any Sts 
got all the answers correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  Animals    ​2  social media    ​3  productive    ​4  Love    ​5  health
e 5.22
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
R = Rickie, J = Joanna, C = caller
R	 You’re listening to Radio Oxford, and I’m Rickie Hammond. 
J	 And I’m Joanna Keys.
R	 Now, I wonder how many of you know what today is. Well, it’s 
Friendship Day! All over the world today, people are celebrating 
those wonderful people called friends. We’ve been doing some 
research this morning about friends, and we’ve discovered 
five fascinating facts about friends for you. Just listen to these. 
Joanna?
J	 Friends fact number one: 
	
Animals have friends, too! Yes, apparently, we humans aren’t the 
only ones who have friends. There’s strong evidence that animals, 
like chimpanzees, horses, elephants, dolphins, and even bats, can 
form friendships for life. And they even make friends with animals 
that aren’t from their species! 
R	 Friends fact number two:
	
We have more real friends thanks to social media! You may find 
this hard to believe, but since the invention of the internet, and 
especially since social media came on the scene, we actually 
have more real-world friends than before. People always say 
we’re so busy with all our online friends that we don’t have time 
for our real friends. But in fact, the opposite is true. A doctor 
in Psychology at Sheffield Hallam University has done some 
research that shows that the internet actually helps us to keep up
	 Focus on 1 People and get Sts to do a individually or in 
pairs.
	 e 5.20  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.20
Relationships
1 People
1	 couple – two people who are married or in a romantic 
relationship
2	 partner – your husband, wife, boyfriend, or girlfriend
3	 fiancé(e) – the person that you are engaged to be married to
4	 flatmate – a person that you share a flat with
5	 colleague – a person that you work with
6	 ex – a person that you used to have a relationship with
7	 close friend – a very good friend that you can talk to about 
anything
8	 classmate – a person who is in the same class as you at school or 
college
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover the definitions, 
look at the words, and see if they can remember what 
they mean.
	 Now focus on 2 Verb phrases and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. Remind Sts to change the verb to 
the past simple.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the past tense of all the verbs first.
	 e 5.21  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.21
2 Verb phrases
1	 I met Mark when I was studying at York University. 
2	 We got to know each other quickly because we went to the same 
classes.
3	 We soon became friends, and we discovered that we had a lot in 
common. For example, we both liked art and music.
4	 We went out together in our second term and we fell in love.
5	 We were together for two years, but we argued a lot, and in our 
last term at university we broke up. 
6	 After we left university, we lost touch because I moved to London 
and he stayed in York.
7	 Five years later, we got in touch again on Facebook. We were 
both still single and Mark had moved to London, too.
8	 This time we got on better than before, maybe because we were 
older.
9	 After two months, Mark proposed and I accepted.
10	 We got married last summer. A lot of our old university friends 
came to the wedding!
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the verb phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any words and phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and tell Sts to look at the 
pictures and see if they can remember the story.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 75@@
75
5B
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and go through sentences A–G. 
	 Give Sts time to tick or cross each sentence according to 
their own opinions. Tell them to think about their reasons. 
They can write notes if they want to. 
b	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Tell them to each 
choose one topic (A–G) in a that they want to talk about.
	 Now focus on the plan and go through it with the class.
	 Tell Sts to prepare what they are going to say for their 
chosen topic, using the plan.
c	 Focus on the Presenting an opinion box and go through 
it with the class.
	 In their groups, Sts now discuss their topics in turn, giving 
their opinion. 
	 Get some feedback from the whole class.
	
friendships. And why is that? Because with social media, it’s easier 
to stay in touch. In the past we used to lose touch with friends 
because of distance or lack of time. So now you know…
J	 Friends fact number three:
	
Having friends at work makes you more productive. Now, you 
probably think that if you have lots of friends at work, you waste 
a lot of time gossiping with them. Well, listen to this. According 
to various studies, having friends at work makes you more 
productive and more creative. And I can believe that, because, 
you know, if you have friends at work, you’re going to be happier, 
which in turn probably makes you work better. Just one thing, 
though – don’t be friends with your boss! That might make your 
colleagues trust you less, and they might think you got your job 
because of your friendship.
R	 Friends fact number four:
	
Love can make you lose two friends. Yes, it’s a sad fact that you 
can lose two friends when you fall in love. According to the 
anthropologist Robin Dunbar, who’s studied the effect that love 
has on friendship, when a new person comes into your life, he 
– or she, of course – displaces two other people in your circle of 
friends. He says that when you’re in love, you spend less time with 
your friends, and this means that friendships deteriorate. And you 
know something, from my experience, that’s true.
J	 Friends fact number five:
	
So this is the last one, and it’s good news! Friendship is good 
for your health. It doesn’t matter if you’re a man or a woman. 
People who have a lot of friends are less stressed and live longer. 
Research shows that you are fifty per cent more likely to have a 
long life if you have a good social network.
	
So now we’re asking you to choose a song for a special friend. 
Call us on oh eight oh eight one five seven oh eight nine two. The 
lines are open now, and our first caller is Mandy from Didcot.
C	 Hi, Joanna! Can you play I’ll be there for you for my best friend? Her 
name’s Annie and I love her to bits…
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the programme again, 
and this time they must make notes on examples and 
reasons for the five facts.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each fact to give Sts 
time to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Chimpanzees, horses, elephants, dolphins, and bats can form 
friendships.
2	 Because with Facebook, it’s easier to stay in touch with 
friends.
3	 Because if you have friends at work, you’re happier, and that 
makes you work better; the exception is your boss (it’s better 
not to be friends with him / her).
4	 Because when you’re in love, you have less time to see your 
friends.
5	 Because you’re less stressed, and so you live longer; you are 50 
per cent more likely to have a long life.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 76@@
PE3
76
PE3
e 5.23
J = Jenny, M = Monica
J	 Monica!
M	 Jenny!
J	 Wow! How are you? You look great!
M	 Thanks, Jenny! You look really good, too.
J	 Hey, why don’t we get some coffee?
M	 I’d love to, but I’m on the way to meet…oh, come on. Five 
minutes!
***
J	 So, how is everything?
M	 Oh, great. Things couldn’t be better, actually. Scott and I…we’re 
getting married!
J	 You’re what? Congratulations!
M	 Thank you!
J	 When did you get engaged?
M	 Only a few days ago. I’m glad I saw you, actually. I was going to 
call you. We’ve only told family so far.
J	 I can’t believe it. Monica the wife! And to think you used to go 
clubbing every night!
M	 Well, that was a few years ago! All I want to do now is stay in and 
read wedding magazines.
J	 And how are the plans coming along? 
M	 I haven’t done anything yet. My mom and Scott’s mom want to 
organize the whole thing themselves!
J	 That’s what mothers are for!
M	 True. But what about you? You look fantastic.
J	 Well, I guess I’m kind of happy, too.
M	 Uh-huh. What’s his name?
J	 Rob.
M	 You’ve been keeping him very quiet! Is it serious?
J	 Erm, it’s kind of, you know…
M	 So it is!
J	 It’s still early. We haven’t been together for long. He only moved 
here a few months ago from London.
M	 What? He’s British? And you think you can persuade him to stay in 
New York? That won’t be easy! 
J	 I think he likes it here. You know how guys are – you never know 
what they’re thinking.
M	 When can I meet him?
J	 Er…that’s him now.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–7. 
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Monica’s fiancé / Monica’s future husband
2	 A few days ago
3	 Only family
4	 She used to go clubbing; now she stays in and reads wedding 
magazines.
5	 The two mothers want to organize the wedding.
6	 That they haven’t been together long.
7	 She thinks it will be hard for Jenny to persuade him to stay in 
New York. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function    asking for permission, making requests, greeting 
someone you haven’t seen for a long time
Language  Is it OK if I…?, Would you mind…?
Lesson plan
In this third Practical English lesson Sts learn some key 
phrases for asking for permission to do something, and 
asking other people to do something for you. 
In the first scene, Jenny meets Monica, an old friend, in the 
street, and they have a coffee together. Monica tells Jenny 
she is going to get married, and Jenny tells Monica about 
Rob. In the next scene, Rob arrives and joins them, but 
Monica has to leave. Rob then tells Jenny that an old friend 
of his, Paul, is coming to stay, and asks Jenny if she could pick 
him up at the airport, as he has to work late. Jenny agrees. In 
the third scene, Jenny brings Paul to Rob’s flat. She is tired, 
because she had to wait a long time, and the traffic was 
terrible, and she leaves Rob and Paul to have a night out 
together.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 3 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test 
Progress Test Files 1–5
For students
Workbook  Practical English 3 
Can you remember? 1–5
Online Practice  Practical English 3 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 3, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 2. Ask them Who are Kerri and Don? What 
did they disagree about? What did Jenny and Rob think? What 
happened in the end?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 2.
1	r JENNY HAS COFFEE WITH A FRIEND
a	 e 5.23  Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit what 
is happening.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
She has got engaged. / She and her boyfriend are getting 
married.
	 3	
Practical English  Old friends
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 77@@
77
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1	 F (He orders a large latte.)
2	 F (He says she hasn’t changed.)
3	 T
4	 F (She needs to meet someone.)
5	 F (She says most of their friends are getting married.)
6	 F (He is going to stay for a week.)
7	 F (He used to be a bit wild.)
8	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 5.25  Give Sts a minute to read through the extracts 
from the conversation and to think about what the 
missing words might be. 
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  mind, course    ​2  OK    ​3  Can, Sure    ​4  favour, meeting, Not    ​
5  could, problem
e 5.25
Asking permission
1	 R	 Do you mind if I join you?
	
M	 Of course not. Come on, sit down.
2	 R	 Is it OK if we change our plans a bit this week?
	
J	 Er…sure.
Requests: asking someone to do something
3	 R	 Can you pass the sugar?
	
J	 Sure.
4	 R	 Could you do me a big favour? I have to work late this evening, 
so…would you mind meeting him at the airport?
	
J	 Not at all. I’d like to meet him.
5	 R	 And do you think you could take him to my flat? I’ll give you 
the keys.
	
J	 No problem, Rob.
d	 Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in c and 
answer questions 1 and 2.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Of course not. / Not at all. 
2	 Could you…? / Would you mind…?
e	 e 5.26  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in 
the extracts. They should listen and repeat the phrases, 
copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to watch or listen 
and repeat.
e 5.26
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on p.54
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversations in c.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure they swap roles.
2	r PERMISSION AND REQUESTS
a	 e 5.24  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where is Rob? Who is he talking to?, etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer.
He asks Jenny to meet his friend, Paul, at the airport and to take 
him back to his flat.
e 5.24
R = Rob, M = Monica, W = waiter, J = Jenny
R	 Do you mind if I join you?
M	 Of course not. Come on, sit down. 
R	 Thank you.
M	 I have to leave in a minute, anyway.
R	 Could I have a large latte, please?
W	 Of course.
J	 Rob, this is Monica.
M	 Nice to meet you, Rob.
R	 You too, Monica. You know, Jenny talks about you a lot. And 
I’ve seen college photos of you two together, at Jenny’s parents’ 
house.
J	 Of course you have – my dad’s photos.
R	 You’ve hardly changed at all.
M	 What a nice man! I can see why you like him, Jenny. The perfect 
English gentleman.
W	 Your latte.
R	 Oh, thanks. Can you pass the sugar?
J	 Sure.
M	 Sorry, guys, but I have to go. 
R	 You’re sure I haven’t interrupted anything?
M	 Not at all. It’s just that I have to meet someone. But let’s get 
together very soon.
J	 We will!
M	 Bye, Rob. Nice meeting you.
R	 Bye.
J	 Bye. Talk soon!
R	 She seems like a happy person.
J	 She is, especially right now – she’s getting married.
R	 That’s fantastic news!
J	 Yeah, it is. I guess we’re at that age now when most of our friends 
are settling down and getting married. 
R	 Yeah…Oh, speaking of friends, I want to ask you a favour. Is it OK 
if we change our plans a bit this week?
J	 Er…sure. What’s up?
R	 I’ve just had a call from an old friend of mine, Paul. I haven’t seen 
him since we were at university, and he’s travelling around the 
States at the moment. Anyway, he’s arriving in New York this 
evening and, er…I’ve invited him to stay for the week.
J	 Cool! It’ll be fun to meet one of your old friends! What’s he like? 
R	 Oh, Paul’s a laugh. He used to be a bit wild, but that was a long 
time ago. He’s probably changed completely.
J	 Well, I’m looking forward to meeting him.
R	 Just one other thing. Could you do me a big favour? I have to 
work late this evening, so…would you mind meeting him at the 
airport? 
J	 Not at all. I’d like to meet him.
R	 And do you think you could take him to my flat? I’ll give you the 
keys.
J	 No problem, Rob.
R	 Thanks so much, Jenny. You’re a real star. 
b	 Focus on sentences 1–8. Go through them with Sts and 
make sure they understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Remind them to correct the false ones.
PE3
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 78@@
78
PE3
d	 e 5.28  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  mate    ​2  come    ​3  way    ​4  mind    ​5  days    ​6  about 
e 5.28
1	 It’s great to see you, mate.
2	 How come you’re so late?
3	 No way, man!
4	 Rob, I think I’ll go home if you don’t mind.
5	 Just like the old days!
6	 Rob, we’ve got a lot to talk about! 
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  4    ​B  2    ​C  6    ​D  1    ​E  5    ​F  3
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
g	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Could you do me a 
favour? on p.107. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Monitor and help.
	 When they have finished, get feedback. Who got the most 
people to help them?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 3.
3	r PAUL ARRIVES
a	 e 5.27  Focus on the photos and elicit what is 
happening.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen, and then check answers. 
Rob is delighted to see him. Jenny seems tired and not very 
enthusiastic.
e 5.27
P = Paul, R = Rob, J = Jenny
P	 Hey, man!
R	 Paul!
P	 It’s great to see you, mate.
R	 You too, Paul. It’s been years. You haven’t changed at all.
P	 Just got better looking! 
R	 How come you’re so late?
J	 Paul’s flight from LA was delayed. And then the traffic coming 
back was just awful.
P	 But that gave us time to get to know each other.
J	 Yeah. Paul told me all about his travels. Every detail.
P	 And look at this. Your own New York flat. How cool is that?
R	 It’s good. Really good. But – do you want something to eat? I got 
some things on my way home.
P	 Stay in? It’s my first night in the Big Apple! Let’s go out and have a 
pizza or something.
R	 I thought you’d be tired after the flight.
P	 No way, man! I’m ready for action.
R	 Great! I’ll get my jacket.
J	 Rob, I think I’ll go home if you don’t mind. I, uh, I’m exhausted.
R	 Oh, OK, then.
P	 So it’s a boys’ night out!
R	 Just like the old days! 
P	 And after the pizza, we can go on somewhere else. Rob, we’ve got 
a lot to talk about!
b	 Focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–6. Give Sts 
time to read them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through 
and get Sts to circle the correct answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  hasn’t changed much    ​2  late    ​3  talked a lot about himself    ​
4  eating in    ​5  full of energy    ​6  doesn’t feel like 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 79@@
6A
79
 G   passive (all tenses)
 V   cinema
 P   regular and irregular past participles
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is the cinema. The lesson begins 
with a reading text about working as an extra in a film. 
This provides the context for revision and extension of the 
passive forms, and past participles are then focused on in 
Pronunciation. 
In the second half of the lesson, cinema vocabulary is 
presented, and then Sts listen to the true story of a young 
Polish student who, by chance (and because of her excellent 
English), got to work for a world-famous film director. 
Film language is then put into practice in a questionnaire 
where Sts talk about their own cinema preferences and 
experiences. Finally, in Writing, Sts write a description of a 
film they would recommend.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  passive (all tenses) p.159 
Communicative  Film quiz p.188 (instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  Cinema p.211 (instructions p.200)
For students
Workbook  6A
Online Practice  6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following questions on the board: 
WHEN WAS THE LAST TIME YOU WENT TO THE CINEMA?
WHAT DO YOU THINK ARE THE ADVANTAGES OF SEEING A FILM IN THE 
CINEMA RATHER THAN ON A DEVICE OR A TV?
DO YOU THINK CINEMAS WILL STILL EXIST IN TEN YEARS’ TIME?
Get Sts to ask and answer the questions in pairs.
Get some feedback from various pairs.
1	READING  understanding the main point in a	
	 paragraph
a	 Books open. Focus on the definition and photos as a class, 
making sure Sts understand what an extra is.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to think of three 
negative things about being an extra.
	 Elicit some ideas and write them on the board.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article and find out if their ideas from a 
are mentioned.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Days can be very long, and extras spend a lot of time waiting.
They have to repeat scenes many times.
They have to work in all kinds of weather, often in unsuitable 
clothes.
They can’t use phones on set.
They aren’t well paid.
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and complete the 
headings with words from the list. Make sure they 
understand all the lexis in the list before they start.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  patient    ​2  miming    ​3  weather    ​4  secrets    ​5  expensive    ​
6  real    ​7  ordinary
d	 Tell Sts to cover the article. Go through questions 1–7, 
making sure they understand all the lexis.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer the questions 
together from memory.
	 When they have finished, they should check their answers 
in the article.
	 Check answers.
1	 They read or play cards.
2	 They had to pretend to clap and cheer, but in silence.
3	 The snow is real if you can see the breath coming out of 
people’s mouths.
4	 She took a photo of the set and posted it online. She’s never 
been employed as an extra again.
5	 Because extras are paid less than in Britain.
6	 Because they look more real than digital extras, and can be 
stored and reused.
7	 They look at the extras to see who’s doing things right or 
wrong.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
	 Then, with a show of hands, find out how many Sts would 
like to be an extra. Ask a few Sts why, and then find out 
from others why they wouldn’t want to be an extra.
	6A	 Behind the scenes
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 80@@
6A
3	PRONUNCIATION  regular and irregular past	
	 participles
Pronunciation notes
Regular participles
You could remind Sts that the pronunciation of regular 
past participles is the same as the regular past simple. 
There are three pronunciations of -ed:
1	 -ed is pronounced /t/ after verbs ending in unvoiced 
sounds, e.g. /k/ looked, /p/ hoped, /f/ laughed
2	 -ed is pronounced /d/ after verbs ending in voiced 
sounds, e.g. /v/ arrived, /dʒ/ changed, /l/ failed
3	 -ed is pronounced /ɪd/ after verbs ending in /t/ hated or 
/d/ decided
The most important of these three sounds for Sts to get 
correct is the third. If Sts mix up the first two sounds, it’s 
unlikely to cause problems with understanding, but you 
may want to focus on accurate pronunciation with your 
Sts. If you do, it will be helpful to explain the difference 
between voiced and unvoiced sounds. Voiced sounds are 
made in the throat by vibrating the vocal chords. You can 
demonstrate this by getting Sts to hold their hand against 
their throat – they should feel a vibration when making a 
voiced sound. Unvoiced sounds have no vibration.
Irregular participles
The pronunciation of irregular past participles can 
be difficult for Sts because they show many of the 
irregularities associated with sound–spelling relationships 
in English. Encourage Sts to be sure they know how to 
pronounce irregular participles when they learn them – 
this is especially important, as many of the most common 
verbs in English are irregular.
a	 Focus on the instructions and elicit all nine words and 
sounds: dog /d/, tie /t/, horse /ɔː/, etc.
	 Point out to Sts that all the words in the nine groups are 
past participles. They must find the groups in which all the 
pink letters are the same sound and circle the words with 
different sounds. Remind Sts that this kind of exercise is 
easier if they say the words aloud to themselves.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
b	 e 6.2  Play the audio, pausing after each group of words, 
for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers by asking Sts if all the sounds in a group 
are the same, and if not, which word they circled.
1  recorded    ​2  directed    ​3  f    ​4  done    ​ 5  forgotten    ​6  f    ​
7  fallen    ​8  put    ​9  f
e 6.2
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.57
	 Now ask Sts what the sounds are in the past participles 
that they circled.
1  recorded = /ɪd/    ​2  directed = /ɪd/    ​4  done = /ʌ/    ​
5  forgotten = /ɒ/    ​7  fallen = /ɔː/    ​8  put = /ʊ/
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
group of words, and elicit the sound of the circled past 
participle.
2	GRAMMAR  passive (all tenses)
a	 Either put Sts in pairs or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers. 
1  present simple    ​2  past continuous    ​3  past simple    ​
4  present continuous    ​5  infinitive    ​6  present perfect
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.142. 
Grammar notes
If your Sts previously used English File Pre-intermediate, 
they will already have had an introduction to the passive, 
although only in the present and past tenses.
The form of the passive (be + participle) is quite 
straightforward, and the easiest way to approach this 
grammar point is to emphasize that there are two ways 
of saying the same thing (active and passive), but with a 
different emphasis or focus. 
Depending on your Sts’ L1, it may be worth pointing out 
that we often use the passive in sentences like These cars 
are made in Korea, Rice is grown in this area, where some 
languages use an impersonal subject. Some contrasting 
with their L1 may help Sts to see when to use the passive.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 using the active instead of the passive, e.g. The tickets 
sell at a newsagent’s. 
•	 problems of form, e.g. leaving out the verb be or not 
using the participle correctly
•	 thinking they always have to use by (somebody) when 
they make a passive sentence
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 6.1 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  are being made    ​2  inspired    ​3  hasn’t been inhabited    ​ 
4  is set    ​5  will be shot    ​6  aren’t recording    ​7  wasn’t being 
used    ​8  has transformed    ​9  hadn’t owned    ​10  was taken
b
1	 A lot of foreign films are subtitled.
2	 Love in the Time of Cholera was written by García Márquez  
in 1985.
3	 My laptop is being repaired at the moment.
4	 The DVD of the film hasn’t been released yet.
5	 The film won’t be finished until the spring.
6	 The tickets have to be collected from the box office.
7	 The actor hadn’t been told about the changes in the script.
8	 La La Land was directed by Damien Chazelle.
9	 The soundtrack has already been recorded.
10	 The director was being interviewed about the film.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
80
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 81@@
6A
81
e 6.4
Cinema
1 Kinds of film
5	 an action film 
3	 an animation 
12	 a comedy 
1	 a drama 
11	 a historical film 
6	 a horror film 
2	 a musical
10	 a rom-com
9	 a science fiction film
7	 a thriller
4	 a war film
8	 a western
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts, in pairs, to name a 
film for each kind of film in a.
	 Elicit answers from the class, making sure Sts pronounce 
the film types correctly.
	 Now ask a few Sts what kinds of film they like and dislike, 
and why.
EXTRA IDEA   Write these adjectives on the board:
EXCITING    FUNNY    MOVING    SCARY    VIOLENT
First, check Sts know the meaning of the adjectives. Then 
model and drill their pronunciation. 
Put Sts in pairs and get them to match the kinds of film in a 
to the adjectives. 
Elicit some answers.
exciting: a science fiction film, an action film, a horror film, a 
thriller, a war film, a western
funny: an animation, a comedy, a musical
moving: a drama, a historical film, a war film
scary: an action film, a horror film, a thriller
violent: an action film, a historical film, a horror film, a thriller, a 
war film, a western
	 Now focus on 2 People and things and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
	 e 6.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 6.5
2 People and things
1	 cast – all the people who act in a film
2	 star – the most important actor in a film
3	 soundtrack – the music of a film
4	 plot – the story of a film
5	 scene – a part of a film which happens in one place
6	 audience – the people who watch a film in a cinema
7	 sequel – a film which continues the story of an earlier film
8	 special effects – images often created by a computer
9	 trailer – a series of short scenes from a film, shown in advance to 
advertise it
10	 script – the words of a film
11	 extra – a person who is employed to play a very small part in a 
film, usually as a member of a crowd
12	 subtitles – the translation of the dialogue of a film on screen
13	 review – an article which gives an opinion about a new film
14	 set – the place where a film is being shot; the scenery used for a 
film or play
15	 critic – a person who writes film reviews for the press
	 Finally, play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
c	 e 6.3  Focus on the instructions and the example. Make 
sure Sts understand that they must keep the same tense, 
but change the sentence to the passive tense.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and form the passive.
e 6.3
1	 They shot the film in Poland. The film (pause) The film was shot in 
Poland.
2	 They speak English here. English (pause) English is spoken here.
3	 They didn’t employ me. I (pause) I wasn’t employed.
4	 He wrote his first book when he was twenty. His first book (pause) 
His first book was written when he was twenty.
5	 They do the work by hand. The work (pause) The work is done by 
hand.
6	 He drew this picture in the fifteenth century. This picture (pause) 
This picture was drawn in the fifteenth century.
7	 They record the music in a studio. The music (pause) The music is 
recorded in a studio. 
8	 They don’t use this office any more. This office (pause) This office 
isn’t used any more.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting the passives from 
individual Sts.
4	VOCABULARY  cinema
a	 Focus on the task and answer the question as a whole 
class.
1	 a scene = part of a film in which the action happens in one 
place
2	 on set = in the place where a film is being made / filmed
3	 shot = filmed
4	 epic = a long film that contains a lot of action, usually with a 
historical setting
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Cinema on p.159. 
Vocabulary notes
You could tell Sts that film and movie mean the same 
thing, but movie is more common in American English.
Kinds of film
You might want to tell Sts that nowadays a lot of people 
simply say a sci-fi (film) instead of science fiction film.
Remind Sts also of an epic (just taught in a).
People and things
You may also want to teach a prequel (a film set before 
another film, e.g. The Force Awakens is a prequel to the 
main Star Wars films). 
Verbs and verb phrases
Elicit / Explain the meaning of the phrase be on (= being 
shown on TV or at the cinema), e.g. What’s on TV tonight? 
What’s on at the cinema at the moment?
	 Focus on 1 Kinds of film and get Sts to do a individually, 
in pairs, or in small groups. 
	 e 6.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 82@@
6A
82
5	LISTENING  listening for content words
a	 Focus on the instructions. You could do this as a whole-
class activity, or get Sts to read about the film and then, in 
pairs, Sts answer the questions. 
	 Find out, with a show of hands, how many Sts have seen 
Schindler’s List. Then ask individual Sts if they liked it. Now 
ask some of the Sts who haven’t seen the film if they 
would like to see it.
	 Finally, ask the class if they have seen any other Spielberg 
films and what they thought of them.
Possible answers
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Jurassic Park, Saving Private Ryan, Minority 
Report, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, War 
Horse, Lincoln, Bridge of Spies, The BFG, The Post, Ready Player One 
b	 e 6.7  Focus Sts’ attention on the photos and the task. 
Get Sts to quickly discuss the questions in pairs. 
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct at this 
stage.
	 This interview is with a Polish woman, Dagmara, who 
became Steven Spielberg’s interpreter when he was 
making the film Schindler’s List. 
	 Play Part 1 of the interview for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You could tell Sts that the music 
they heard at the beginning of the audio is from the 
soundtrack of the film Schindler’s List.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
They were on the set of Schindler’s List. Dagmara was interpreting 
for Spielberg.
e 6.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
I = interviewer, D = Dagmara
Part 1
I	 So tell me, how did you get involved in the film, Dagmara?
D	 Well, as you probably know, Schindler’s List was shot in Krakow, 
in Poland, which is where I live. I was a university student at 
the time, studying English. And the film company set up their 
production office here three months before they started shooting 
the film, and I got a job there as a production assistant, preparing 
and translating documents and the script.
I	 But how did you get the job as Steven Spielberg’s interpreter?
D	 It was a complete coincidence. Just before the shooting started, 
there was a big party in one of the hotels in Krakow for all the 
actors and the film crew, and I was invited, too. When I arrived 
at the party, the Polish producer of the film came up to me and 
said, ‘The woman who was going to interpret for Steven Spielberg 
can’t come, so we need you to interpret his opening speech.’
I	 How did you feel about that?
D	 I couldn’t believe it! I was just a student – I had no experience of 
interpreting – and now I was going to speak in front of hundreds 
of people. I was so nervous that I drank a couple glasses of 
champagne to give myself courage. I must have done a pretty 
good job, though, because soon afterwards Spielberg came up 
to me to say thank you, and then he said, ‘I’d like you to be my 
interpreter for the whole film.’ I was so stunned I had to pinch 
myself to believe that this was happening to me.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the definitions and look at 
the words to see if they can remember the meanings.
	 Finally, focus on 3 Verbs and verb phrases and get Sts to 
do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 6.6  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 6.6
3 Verbs and verb phrases
1	 E is based on means ‘an adaptation of a true story’.
2	 A is set in means ‘is situated in that place, at that time’.
3	 B is directed by means ‘he is the director’.
4	 C plays the part of means ‘this is his role in the film’.
5	 F was shot on location means ‘was filmed outside the studio’.
6	 D is dubbed means ‘the words are spoken in a different language 
by foreign actors’.
	 Now, in Activation, tell Sts to cover sentences 1–6 and 
look at A–F to see if they can remember the verbs and 
verb phrases. They should try to think of another film for 
each sentence.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the difference 
between the pairs of words in 1–7.
	 Check answers.
1	 a plot = the story of a film
	
a script = the words of a film
2	 a horror film = a film that is designed to frighten people
	
a thriller = a film with an exciting story, especially one about 
crime
3	 a musical = a film in which part or all of the story is told using 
songs and often dancing
	
a soundtrack = the music from a film that people can buy
4	 the cast = all the people who act in a film
	
the stars = the most important actors in a film
5	 a dubbed film = a film where the actors’ voices have been 
replaced by foreign actors’ voices
	
a film with subtitles = a film where the actors’ words are 
translated into a different language and appear on the screen 
(the voices stay the same)
6	 the set of a film = the place where a film is being shot
	
the film was set in… = the story of the film was situated in 
that place and at that time 
7	 a critic = a person who writes about films, books, restaurants, 
etc. (for the press)
	
a review = an article which gives an opinion about a film, a 
book, a restaurant, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 83@@
6A
83
I	 So, was Spielberg difficult to work with?
D	 Not at all. I mean, he was very demanding – I had to do my best 
every day – but he was really nice to me. I felt he treated me like 
a daughter. For instance, he was always making sure that I wasn’t 
cold – it was freezing on the set most of the time – and he would 
make sure that I had a warm coat and gloves and things.
I	 Did you ever get to be an extra?
D	 Yes, twice! I was going to be in two party scenes, and I got to wear 
beautiful long dresses and high heels. Unfortunately, one scene 
didn’t make it to the final cut of the film, and before we started 
shooting the other one, I tripped walking down some stairs and 
twisted my ankle really badly. I was in so much pain that I couldn’t 
take part in the filming. And that was the end of my ‘acting career’. 
I still have the photos of me looking like a girl from the forties, 
though!
I	 Have you ever worked with Spielberg again?
D	 Yes. A year later he invited me to interpret for him again, this 
time during the premiere of Schindler’s List in Poland, which was 
broadcast live on national television! Before that, he had also 
asked me to come to work as a production assistant on his next 
movie in Hollywood. I was very tempted and thought really hard 
about it, but I hadn’t finished my studies yet, and all my family 
and friends were in Poland – so in the end, I decided not to go.
I	 Do you regret it?
D	 Not at all. I had my moment, and it was unforgettable, but that 
was it!
f	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the key words before Sts answer the 
questions in full in g. 
Possible key words
1	 16 times; think, my fault, nervous
2	 stressed; apologized; cried a little; all right again
3	 demanding; really nice, like a daughter; freezing on set; warm 
coat, gloves
4	 party scenes; one scene, didn’t make final cut; other scene, 
tripped, twisted ankle, in pain
5	 interpret, premiere, Schindler’s List, Poland
6	 work, production assistant, next movie, Hollywood; not at all
g	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to answer questions 
1–6 in e with full sentences, using their notes.
	 Check answers.
1	 Some scenes were repeated 16 times. It made Dagmara think 
it was her fault and it made her nervous.
2	 He was stressed. He apologized; she cried a little; all was right 
again.
3	 He was demanding; he was really nice, he treated her like 
a daughter; it was freezing on set; he made sure she had a 
warm coat and gloves.
4	 Two party scenes; one scene didn’t make the final cut, and 
before the other scene, she tripped, twisted her ankle, and 
was in pain.
5	 Yes, she interpreted at the premiere of Schindler’s List in 
Poland.
6	 He offered her work as his production assistant for his next 
movie in Hollywood. No, not at all
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
h	 Finally, do the questions as a whole-class activity. 
c	 Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the first part of the 
interview again and they must mark the sentences T (true) 
or F (false). Give them time to read 1–6. Remind them to 
correct the false ones.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 F (She was a student.)
2	 T
3	 F (It was a party for all the actors and the crew.)
4	 F (The interpreter couldn’t come.)
5	 F (She drank a couple of glasses.)
6	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to listen again with 
the script on p.128, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 e 6.8  Focus on the Making notes box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen to three extracts from 
Part 2 of the interview and they must complete the gaps.
	 Give Sts time to read 1–3.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers. 
e 6.8
1	 I had to go to the film set every day and translate Spielberg’s 
instructions to the Polish actors, and also to the extras.
2	 It was really exciting, and I often felt as if I was a director myself.
3	 The worst thing was when we had to shoot a scene again and 
again because Spielberg thought it wasn’t exactly right.
e	 e 6.9  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the whole 
of Part 2 of the interview. They need to listen and make 
notes for questions 1–6.
	 Give Sts time to read the six questions, and make sure 
they understand them. Remind them that they need to 
write key words and not full sentences.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. 
e 6.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
Part 2
I	 So what exactly did you have to do?
D	 I had to go to the film set every day and translate Spielberg’s 
instructions to the Polish actors, and also to the extras. I had to 
make them understand what he wanted them to do. It was really 
exciting, and I often felt as if I was a director myself.
I	 So was it a difficult job?
D	 Sometimes it was really hard. The worst thing was when we had 
to shoot a scene again and again because Spielberg thought 
it wasn’t exactly right. Some scenes were repeated as many as 
sixteen times – and then sometimes I would think that maybe it 
was my fault – that I hadn’t translated properly what he wanted, 
so I’d get really nervous. I remember one scene with lots of actors 
in it which we just couldn’t get right, and Spielberg started 
shouting at me because he was stressed. Eventually we got it 
right, and then he apologized and I cried a little, because I was 
also very stressed – and after that, it was all right again.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 84@@
6A
84
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the cinema interview and quickly go through 
the questions.
	 Give Sts time to think about what they are going to say.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to take turns to interview 
each other to find out if they have similar tastes. 
Emphasize that they should give and ask for as much 
information as they can.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   If there’s time, you could get the class to 
interview you.
7	WRITING  a film review
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A film review on p.119.
a	 Focus on the film title and, with a show of hands, find out 
how many Sts have seen it. Don’t ask any questions about 
the film or Sts’ opinions, as they will be doing this later. 
	 Then elicit / explain the meaning of classic in the title  
(= something that is accepted as being of very high 
quality and one of the best of its kind).
	 Now tell Sts to read the film description and complete the 
gaps with the words in the list.
	 Check answers.
1  directed    ​2  stars    ​3  nominated    ​4  set    ​5  filmed    ​
6  recommend    ​7  action    ​8  soundtrack    ​9  special effects
b	 Tell Sts to read the description again, paying particular 
attention to layout. They must number the paragraphs 
1–4 in the order in which they appear.
	 Check answers. 
Paragraph 1  the name of the film, the director, the stars, and any 
prizes it won
Paragraph 2  where and when it is set, where it was filmed
Paragraph 3  the plot
Paragraph 4  why you recommend the film
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
The present simple
d	 In pairs, get Sts to answer the questions.
	 Get some feedback. If possible, ask at least one student 
who has seen the film and another who hasn’t.
e	 Focus on the Describing a film box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to write a similar film 
description for a film they would recommend. They 
should write four paragraphs, as in the model, and use 
the language in the Describing a film box and the 
Vocabulary Bank Cinema to help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their description, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 85@@
85
6B
	6B	 Every picture tells a story
1	READING & SPEAKING  understanding	
	 humour
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions and make sure Sts 
understand them, especially profile photo. Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to answer the three questions.
	 Get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the photos, and elicit Sts’ 
opinions as to why the people have chosen these photos.
	 Focus on statements 1–3 and make sure Sts can 
remember the meaning of rude.
	 Now give Sts time to read the article and find out which 
two statements are true.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
2 and 3
c	 Tell Sts they are now going to read some positive reasons 
for choosing each type of profile photo. They must match 
reasons 1–8 to the photo types.
	 Give Sts time to read the headings again and complete 
the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  C    2  A    3  E    4  H    5  F    6  G    7  D    8  B
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions. 
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. If you have a profile 
photo, you could tell Sts which type you are and whether 
you agree with either of the interpretations.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to use their phones to look at the profile 
photos of family members or friends. This will help them to 
discuss the last question.
2	GRAMMAR  modals of deduction
a	 e 6.10  Focus on the instructions, and give Sts time to 
read the conversation and look at the photo.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  must    2  might    3  can’t    4  could
e 6.10
A	 I love your profile picture. How old are you in the photo?
B	 I must be about five or six. Definitely not more than that.
A	 Where are you?
B	 Do you know, I can’t remember. It might be the south of France. 
My grandmother had a house near Montpellier, so we sometimes 
spent the summer there.
A	 It can’t be the south of France – not in summer. You’re wearing 
boots and a sweater! And it doesn’t look like a Mediterranean 
beach. 
B	 No, you’re right. It could be Scotland, then. We sometimes went 
there.
 G   modals of deduction: might, can’t, must
 V   the body
 P   diphthongs
Lesson plan
The overall topic of this lesson is the image that people 
give of themselves to the world, both on social media and 
in person, and how we tend to judge people at first sight, 
according to their appearance.
The lesson begins with a light-hearted article about what 
people’s profile photos on social networking sites say about 
them. This is followed by a short speaking activity with Sts 
interpreting their own profile photo and those of friends and 
family. This leads to the grammar of modals of deduction, 
which is presented through a conversation about a photo.
In the second half of the lesson, Vocabulary focuses on the 
body and verbs related to parts of the body, like touch and 
point. Pronunciation looks at diphthongs (combinations of 
two vowel sounds). In Reading and Listening, Sts read an 
article about a journalist who met a charisma coach, and 
then they listen to what happened when the coach followed 
the journalist for a couple of days, and the tips he gave him. 
The lesson finishes with a video about a personal stylist.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  modals of deduction: might / may, can’t, must  
p.160 
Communicative  Who do you think they might be? p.189 
(instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  The body p.212 (instructions p.201)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  A day with a personal stylist
For students
Workbook  6B
Online Practice  6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise the difference between look and look like by asking 
Sts to complete these sentences with the correct form of 
either verb:
1	 DO YOU 
 YOUR MOTHER OR YOUR FATHER?
2	 YOU 
 VERY TIRED. ARE YOU OK?
3	 YOUR GRANDMOTHER 
 VERY YOUNG FOR HER AGE. 
SHE DOESN’T 
 70!
4	 JACK 
 A RUGBY PLAYER – HE’S ENORMOUS.
5	 ‘WHAT 
 MARK’S WIFE 
?’  
‘SHE’S QUITE TALL, WITH VERY LONG, DARK HAIR.’
1  look like    ​2  look    ​3  looks, look    ​4  looks like    ​ 
5  does…look like
Ask Sts if they can remember the grammatical difference 
between look and look like (look is followed by an adjective, 
and look like by a noun).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 86@@
86
6B
	 Elicit some deductions about each photo, but don’t tell 
Sts if they are correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Focus on the first photo and make the 
deductions as a whole-class activity.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Judging by 
appearances on p.107 to check their guesses.
	 Sts read the information and then, in pairs, tell each other 
what they think, e.g. whether they are surprised.
	 Get some feedback from the class. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
3	VOCABULARY  the body
a	 This exercise revises the basic language of physical 
appearance, which Sts learned in English File Pre-
intermediate. 
	 Tell Sts to focus on the three photos and answer the 
questions.
	 Check answers. You could remind Sts that thin and slim 
are both the opposite of fat, but slim means thin in an 
attractive way.
1  C    2  B    3  A    4  C    5  A    6  B
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The body on p.160. 
Vocabulary notes
Parts of the body
Highlight the difference between fingers and toes – in 
some languages, the same word is used for both.
Verbs related to the body
All the verbs are regular except for bite (bite /baɪt/,  
bit /bɪt/, bitten /ˈbɪtən/). You may want to point out that 
smell can be regular or irregular (smelled or smelt).
	 Focus on 1 Parts of the body and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.14  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 6.14
The body
1 Parts of the body
6	 arms
8	 back
21	 chin
16	 ears
13	 eyes
9	 face
7	 feet
14	 fingers
5	 hands
2	 head
19	 knees
17	 legs
20	 lips
1	 mouth
4	 neck
18	 nose
12	 shoulders
10	 stomach
11	 teeth
22	 thumb
3	 toes
15	 tongue
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the missing words in random order 
on the board, e.g. CAN’T, COULD, MIGHT, MUST.
b	 Focus on the task and point out that the first one (might) 
has been done for Sts. Get them to answer the questions 
either individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  could    2  must    3  can’t
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.143. 
Grammar notes
Sts are already familiar with these modal verbs in other 
contexts, e.g. may / might to express a possibility (e.g.  
I might go), must for obligation (e.g. You must wear a seat 
belt), and can’t for permission (e.g. You can’t take photos 
in the museum). Here the same modal verbs are used in a 
different way to speculate and make deductions.
Although these verbs are used with be in the presentation, 
they can be used with any verb, e.g. She must have a lot of 
money, as she wears very expensive clothes. 
The most typical mistakes include:
•	 using mustn’t instead of can’t for something that’s 
impossible, e.g. It mustn’t be true.
•	 using can instead of might / may for a possibility, e.g.  
I think he’s speaking Spanish, so he can be Spanish or 
South American. 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 6.11, 
e 6.12 and e 6.13 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  I    2  J    3  A    4  C    5  H    6  B    7  F    8  E    9  G
b
1	 Yes, my nephew. I don’t know his salary, but he must earn a 
fortune!
2	 I’m not sure. She might not like it. It’s a bit short for her.
3	 She must speak a lot of languages to work there.
4	 Poor Andy. He can’t be very happy about that.
5	 I’m not sure. I suppose they might be on holiday.
6	 She must be ill. She called to say that she was going to the 
doctor’s.
7	 You might not recognize her – she’s lost a lot of weight.
8	 She can’t be working very hard.
9	 I’m not sure, but she might have a new partner.
10	 I don’t know, but he can’t live near the office because he 
commutes every day by train.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and the photos, and make sure 
Sts understand what they have to do. Point out that they 
don’t have to use all the phrases in the list – they should 
just choose the ones they want, and they can use them 
more than once.
	 Give Sts time to make deductions orally or to write them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 87@@
87
6B
4	PRONUNCIATION  diphthongs
Pronunciation notes
Diphthongs consist of two short vowel sounds which are 
combined to make one longer sound. The most common 
problem for Sts is that they may not make the sound long 
enough, or may pronounce it as just one sound. 
a	 e 6.17  Focus on the Diphthongs box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the five 
words and sounds.
e 6.17
1	 bike /aɪ/
2	 train /eɪ/
3	 phone /əʊ/
4	 owl /aʊ/
5	 chair /eə/
EXTRA SUPPORT   First, play the audio for Sts just to listen to 
the five words and sounds. Then play it again, pausing for 
them to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
b	 In pairs or individually, Sts put the words in the list in the 
correct columns in a. This exercise recycles words from 
Vocabulary Bank The body which have diphthongs.
c	 e 6.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.18
1	 bike /aɪ/  bite, eyes, smile
2	 train /eɪ/  face, taste
3	 phone /əʊ/  nose, shoulders, throw, toes
4	 owl /aʊ/  mouth
5	 chair /eə/  hair, stare
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now focus on the six phrases and elicit / explain what a 
Roman nose is (= a nose with a bump at the top).
	 In pairs, Sts now practise saying the phrases.
	 Get individual Sts to say them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read each phrase first and get Sts to repeat 
after you. Then put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the phrases.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to do the quiz.
	 Then put two pairs together and get them to compare 
answers.
	 Check answers.
1	 You wear a ring on your fingers / thumb; you wear gloves on 
your hands; you wear socks on your feet; you wear a cap on 
your head.
2	 Ballet dancers stand on their toes.
3	 Footballers often injure their legs / feet / knees.
4	 Women put make-up on their face, neck, lips, and eyes.
5	 People brush their hair and teeth.
6	 People carry a rucksack on their back / shoulders.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
Highlight the irregular pronunciations of stomach 
/ˈstʌmək/ and tongue /tʌŋ/, and the silent k in knees.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photos, and test themselves or a partner.
	 Focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A 
point to a part of their body for Sts B to name. Make sure 
they swap roles.
	 Finally, focus on the Possessive pronouns with parts of 
the body box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on 2 Verbs related to the body and get Sts to 
do a individually or in pairs. Remind them to put the verb 
in the correct form. 
	 e 6.15  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 6.15
2 Verbs related to the body
1	 Don’t be frightened of the dog. He won’t bite.
2	 Jason kicked the ball too hard and it went over the wall into the 
next garden.
3	 Mmm! Something smells delicious! Are you making a cake?
4	 The stranger stared at me for a long time, but he didn’t say 
anything.
5	 Can you taste the sauce? I’m not sure if it needs more salt.
6	 My dog always comes back when I whistle.
7	 Don’t touch the oven door! It’s really hot.
8	 The audience clapped when I finished singing.
9	 The teacher suddenly pointed at me and said, ‘What’s the 
answer?’ I hadn’t even heard the question!
10	 He’s a very serious person – he never smiles.
11	 Everybody nodded in agreement when I explained my idea.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
Point out the silent t in whistle.
	 Now elicit which parts of the body you use for each verb.
bite: teeth    ​clap: hands    ​kick: feet    ​nod: head    ​ 
point: finger    ​smell: nose    ​smile: mouth / lips    ​stare: eyes    ​
taste: mouth / tongue    ​touch: hands    ​whistle: lips
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 6.16  Tell Sts they are going to hear some instructions 
and they must act out what they are told to do.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and follow the instructions.
e 6.16
Clap your hands.
Stare at the person next to you.
Point at the board.
Nod your head.
Whistle a tune.
Touch your chair.
Smile.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 88@@
88
6B
Body language is also important. We practise it together, including 
how to stand like a gorilla, with your feet apart and your arms wide – 
this shows that you’re an important person. Sheikh also tells me how 
to enter a room. You have to have your chin up and your shoulders 
back. He tells me to make eye contact with the people I’m talking 
to, but not for too long – maximum four seconds – it’s important 
not to stare. We also study hand gestures – you shouldn’t use them 
too much. 
Finally, conversation. I learn that it’s important not to speak too fast 
or too slowly. You need to vary your speed to keep your listener’s 
attention. But the most important thing of all is listening carefully. If 
you show interest in people, it makes them feel special. But if you’re 
not really listening, the person you’re talking to notices very quickly, 
so you need to make sure you really concentrate on what they’re 
saying.
At the end of the two days, I have a practical test…
f	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Colin again, and this 
time, they must answer questions 1–4.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1	 Talk about yourself enough, but not too much.
2	 Remembering a past success will help you to feel more 
confident.
3	 You have to have your chin up and your shoulders back.
4	 The person you’re talking to notices very quickly.
g	 e 6.20  Focus on the task and tell Sts to listen and 
complete 1–3. 
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Play the audio again if necessary, and then check answers.
1	 talk to strangers.
2	 giving him advice, e.g. make eye contact, don’t cross your 
arms, etc.
3	 understanding who you really are.
e 6.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
At the end of the two days, I have a practical test. I go to a pub with 
Sheikh, and I have to talk to strangers. I start talking to people and 
it goes OK. I don’t think English people really like it when a stranger 
starts speaking to them, but we laugh and I have some interesting 
conversations. Occasionally, Sheikh gives me advice. He reminds me 
to make eye contact with everyone I’m talking to, and tells me not to 
cross my arms – that kind of thing.
As we leave the pub, we shake hands. He says that the course has 
been good for me, and he gives me a thumbs up. So have I changed? 
Am I more charismatic? Not exactly – I’m never going to stand like a 
gorilla again, for example. But perhaps charisma is simpler than that, 
anyway; it’s about understanding who you are better, and showing 
the best version of yourself. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on pp.128–129, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
h	 Do this as a whole-class activity, getting all the Sts to 
demonstrate the phrases.
	 You could repeat the activity, getting individual Sts to act 
out some of the phrases.
i	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell Sts 
what you think and if you would do a charisma course.
5	READING & LISTENING  checking assumptions
a	 Read the definition of charisma as a class and make sure 
Sts understand it. Model and drill the pronunciation 
/kəˈrɪzmə/.
	 Find out if Sts know any public figures who they think 
have charisma.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
the two jobs are.
	 Elicit from the class who they think is who and why. 
Point out to Sts that Danish is an Indian name and is 
pronounced /dɑːnɪʃ/.
c	 Before Sts read the article, you could focus on the title, 
Can you learn how to be charismatic?, and point out 
that charismatic is the adjective and is pronounced 
/kærɪzˈmætɪk/. Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to read the article to find the answer to b and then 
to answer questions 1–4.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
The charisma coach is Danish Sheikh. 
1	 He’s worked with Microsoft, Yahoo, and the BBC.
2	 Yes – he charges £150 an hour, and plenty of people are 
paying.
3	 He followed Colin everywhere and watched how he behaved, 
because Colin is going to be his student.
4	 He can’t make conversation, he has negative body language, 
he doesn’t smile enough, and he seems bored when he’s 
talking to people.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts, in pairs, to tick the 
things they think a charismatic person does.
	 Elicit from various pairs what they have ticked.
e	 e 6.19  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Colin  
talking about what he learns and they must check their  
answers to d. 
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare answers with a partner.
	 Play the audio again if necessary, and then check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
A person with charisma does 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 10.
e 6.19
(script in Student’s Book on pp.128–129)
Danish Sheikh tells me that people with charisma do two basic 
things. They project their own personality, but at the same time, they 
also make other people feel important. Sheikh’s lessons are designed 
to help me to do both of these things, and in the next forty-eight 
hours I learn a lot.
Projecting your own personality is difficult to learn. Nobody likes 
people who talk about how fantastic they are, but nobody remembers 
people who don’t say anything about themselves. Sheikh says the 
solution is to talk about yourself enough, but not too much.
People with charisma also feel confident. Sheikh gives me advice 
to help me feel more confident, for example,  before I walk into a 
meeting or a party. He tells me to remember a time in the past when 
I was successful. This positive memory will stop me from feeling 
afraid or anxious. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 89@@
89
6B
S	 Really good. This is not something I would dare to go for normally, 
but I really, I really like it. I love it.
E	 OK, fantastic, so what I really like about it as well is the fact that 
none of the colours are actually matching, but they all work in 
harmony with each other really nicely.
N	 Sam then tries on outfit three.
E	 Oh wow, another completely different outfit.
S	 I really like this one.
E	 You like this one?
S	 Absolutely. It’s a very good idea, putting trainers with smarter 
trousers. I wouldn’t think to do that.
N	 And finally, he tries on outfit four.
E	 Wow! What another entrance!
S	 So this is a staple – everyone should have one of these.
E	 Everyone should have a denim shirt.
S	 See, I haven’t. Brilliant. 
N	 But which outfit does Sam like best? Outfit one…Outfit two…
Outfit three…Outfit four…
***
S	 I think outfit two really, because it was quite bold. I felt very smart 
in it and I wouldn’t have worn those kind of things.
b	 Now play the rest of Part 1 and elicit from the class which 
outfit Sam liked best and why.
Sam liked outfit 2 best because it was quite bold, he felt very 
smart, and he wouldn’t normally wear clothes like that.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to number the events in 
order 1–5. 
	 Now play Part 1 of the video again for Sts to watch and 
check.
	 Check answers.
1	 Sam fills in a questionnaire.
2	 Sam meets Elin at the Fashion Lounge.
3	 Elin asks Sam questions about his lifestyle.
4	 Sam goes shopping with Elin.
5	 Sam tries on four outfits.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read Elin’s 
four golden rules for dressing well. Get Sts to predict what 
they think the missing words might be, but don’t tell them 
if they are right at this stage.
	 Play Part 2 of the video the whole way through. Then play 
it again, pausing if necessary for Sts to compete the rules.
	 Check answers. You may want to explain that we can use 
wardrobe to refer not just to the piece of furniture, but also 
to the clothes in it.
1	 Look at your own wardrobe before you go shopping.
2	 Stay true to yourself when you go shopping.
3	 It doesn’t matter how much money you've got – you can 
look good.
4	 Everyone should have a good pair of jeans in their wardrobe.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that they are going 
to watch a video about Sam, an actor who has a session 
with Elin Mai, a personal stylist. Elicit / Explain the meaning 
of a personal stylist (= someone who advises people on 
what kind of clothes to wear for them to look good and 
feel more confident) and outfit (= a set of clothes that you 
wear together, e.g. trousers and a shirt).
	 Now focus on the four photos of Sam and elicit what he’s 
wearing in each photo, including items of clothing and 
colours. 
	 Play Part 1 of the video up to the point where Sam’s four 
outfits are on-screen (where *** is in the script). Pause the 
video and ask Sts which outfit they like best and why.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
A day with a personal stylist
Part 1
N = narrator, S = Sam, E = Elin
N	 Sam Alexander is an actor. He lives in London. Today he’s going to 
visit a personal stylist, Elin Mai, at the Westfield Shopping Centre 
in Shepherd’s Bush.
S	 I thought my wardrobe was getting quite boring and I dress up a 
lot for my job as an actor. Sometimes I don’t give any thought to 
my own wardrobe, so I was keen to sort of refresh things a bit and 
get a new opinion. 
Hi, Elin.
E	 Hello, Sam! Welcome!
S	 Thank you very much. Nice to meet you.
E	 Nice to meet you too. Welcome to the Fashion Lounge.  
I think having your unique personal style is something that’s 
incredibly important to each and every individual. And everyone 
should ideally try and find their own personal style as well.
N	 Before this session Sam has filled in a questionnaire with 
everything from his sizes to his dress sense.
E	 OK, tell me how today came about… With every session, we 
sit down at the beginning and we have a chat about their 
questionnaire, so we go into a bit more depth. And then we 
would ask them more questions about their lifestyle as well. 
When you’re actually working, how many days a week work are 
you actually at work?
S	 Well, the thing about being an actor is that you don’t have any 
routine, so sometimes I’m in a play, in which case I work six days 
a week and I’d have a routine. But then that stops suddenly and 
then I might be between jobs, in which case I’m at home a lot or 
I might be doing filming, which means fewer days, but very long 
hours.
E	 Now the consultation usually lasts, you know, fifteen to twenty 
minutes, but the consultation actually continues throughout the 
session as well. So those little questions about their lifestyle – and 
I find out things about what they like and what they dislike and 
about the shops that they’ve gone to in the past and about their 
relationship with clothes.
N	 After Sam and Elin have visited a few shops, they return to the 
Fashion Lounge and Elin divides the clothes into four outfits.
E	 Ready, Sam? Wow!
S	 Here we are.
E	 OK! This looks fantastic. How do you feel?
S	 I really like it. It is quite bold – the shirt – but yeah.
E	 How do the jeans fit?
S	 Great. These are jeans that stretch. They feel very comfy.
E	 What I wanted to show you now as well is actually how useful 
this outfit’s going to be, so I want you to put this smart blazer on 
just to show you that you can elevate this outfit and make it look 
smart by putting a blue blazer on top. Yeah, really, really nice. 
Have a look at yourself here then as well. What do you think?
S	 That’s very nice. Yeah, I really like it – very smart.
N	 Sam likes the second outfit, too.
E	 Let’s see this next one. Wow! Oh my goodness! Give me a twirl in 
this one as well. Fabulous. How do you feel?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 90@@
90
6B
Part 2
N	 So what are Elin’s golden rules?
E	 I would say my golden rules would be to look at you own 
wardrobe to begin with before even going shopping because 
without knowing what you’ve got, you can’t go out and buy the 
right things.  
OK, fantastic! 
I think a lot of the mistakes that people make are, they’re not 
staying true to themselves when they actually go out shopping.  
So perhaps they’ve seen kind of a lot of different things in 
magazines and online. And sometimes that can be really 
confusing. I truly believe that it doesn’t matter how much money 
you’ve got you can look good. It’s about where you shop and how 
you put things together.
N	 Is there one item that Elin thinks everyone should have?
E	 I do think that everyone should have a good pair of jeans in their 
wardrobe that fits them perfectly, that makes them feel good 
about themselves. 
Did you enjoy today?
S	 I did. It was absolutely brilliant. It exceeded my expectations. It 
was really great fun.
N	 Although not everyone needs Elin’s help, for Sam the day with a 
personal stylist has clearly changed his wardrobe and his attitude 
to it.
E	 No problem.
S	 Bye.
E	 Bye!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
Parts 1 and 2 of the video again with subtitles, so they can 
see exactly what they understood / didn't understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Discuss Elin’s rules together as a class and ask Sts if they 
would like to have a session with her, or with another 
personal stylist.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 91@@
91
Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 5&6 
Quick Test 6 
File 6 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  b    ​6  c    ​7  a    ​8  b    ​9  c    ​10  a    ​
11  a    ​12  b    ​13  a    ​14  c    ​15  b
VOCABULARY
a
1  lips / mouth    ​2  eyes    ​3  nose    ​4  hands    ​5  teeth
b
1  beat    ​2  court    ​3  get injured    ​4  scored    ​5  go
c
1  close    ​2  common    ​3  touch    ​4  got    ​5  fiancé
d
1  soundtrack    ​2  subtitles    ​3  special effects    ​4  star    ​5  scene
e
1  out    ​2  off    ​3  up    ​4  out    ​5  on
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  booked /t/    ​2  crowd /aʊ/    ​3  eyes /z/    ​4  shoulders /əʊ/    ​
5  world /ɜː/
d
1  referee    ​2  review    ​3  spectators    ​4  director    ​5  colleague
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	 The best exercise is the exercise that you will do.
b
1  B    ​2  E    ​3  C    ​4  A    ​5  F    ​6  G    ​7  D
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  a
e 6.21
1
I = interviewer, P = Philomena
I	 Do you prefer doing sport or watching it?
P	 Probably doing it. I find watching it really boring.
I	 What sport do you do?
P	 Er, I don’t do a lot. I’d say I don’t mind tennis, swimming in 
variation, depends on the weather.
I	 What sports do you most like watching?
P	 If I had to watch one, I like the rhythmic gymnastics or the diving, 
like for example at the Games, when they’re on TV.
I	 Why do you like them?
P	 I think because they’re kind of like a dance, it’s like a routine, it’s 
very graceful. It’s not as rough a sport.
2
I = interviewer, R = Rachel
I	 Do you know anyone who has gone out with someone they met 
online?
R	 I know lots of people who’ve gone out with people they’ve met 
online.
I	 How did it work out?
R	 A couple of people are married, for some of them they’re still with 
the other person, and for a lot of them it didn’t work out.
3
I = interviewer, A = Aileen
I	 Have you ever cheated in an exam?
A	 I have, yes.
I	 How did you cheat?
A	 I wrote the answers in a tissue and put it in my pocket and then 
went to the bathroom to read the answers that I’d written down.
I	 Were you caught?
A	 No. 
4
I = interviewer, C = Coleen
I	 What’s your favourite film of all time?
C	 That has to be the Lord of the Rings trilogy. I’ve read the books I 
have no idea how many times. I absolutely adored the films.
I	 How many times have you seen them?
C	 No idea, but probably getting on for ten times.
I	 Why do you like them so much?
C	 Part of that I think is because I never expected them to be made 
into films because they’re just so huge in scale. Um, and I think 
the CGI is amazing on them, and the characters, the casting is 
brilliant, so the whole thing really is just amazing.
5
I = interviewer, M = Miranda
I	 Do you have a profile photo?
M	 Yes, I have a profile photo on my Facebook, and Instagram, and 
Twitters.
I	 What is it?
M	 The photo, the profile photo on my Facebook page is of me and 
my husband in Las Vegas on our anniversary.
I	 Why did you choose it?
M	 Um, my make-up looked good.
	5&6	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 92@@
7A
92
	7A	 Live and learn
1	VOCABULARY  education
a	 Books open. Focus on the eight questions and give Sts 
two minutes to answer them individually or in pairs.  
You may want to explain that √36 = ‘the square root of 36’.
	 Check answers.
1  1939    2  Italy’s    3  Six    4  Universal Serial Bus    
5  Isaac Newton    6  Three    7  Leg    8  Hydrogen
	 Find out which Sts or pairs got the most answers correct.
b	 Tell Sts to complete each school subject.
	 Check answers by eliciting the words onto the board. 
biology    chemistry    geography    history    
information technology    literature    maths    physics
c	 e 7.1  Now give Sts time to match questions 1–8 in a to 
the school subjects in b by writing the number from a in 
each box.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation, especially 
geography /dʒiˈɒgrəfi/ and literature /ˈlɪtrətʃə/.
e 7.1
1	 history
2	 geography
3	 maths 
4	 information technology
5	 physics
6	 literature
7	 biology
8	 chemistry
	 Now get Sts to underline the stressed syllable in each 
school subject.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
See underlining in script 7.1
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stressed 
syllables as they do the matching exercise. Then check both 
at the same time.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Education on p.161. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight that in the British system, grades refers to the 
marks you get in exams when they are letters, not numbers, 
e.g. He got a grade A in chemistry A level. In the US system, 
grade can also refer to the year you are in, e.g. first grade. 
In Scotland students take Highers, not A levels.
College also has different meanings in the two systems. In 
British English, a college is a place where people can study 
or receive vocational training after school, e.g. a secretarial 
college or a teacher training college. However, in the US 
system, college is synonymous with university. 
There are several words that can be used as synonyms of 
head teacher, e.g. headmaster (for a man), headmistress (for 
a woman), or principal. 
 G   first conditional and future time clauses + when, until, etc.
 V   education
 P   the letter u
Lesson plan
This lesson is about education and provides two different 
angles on the topic. The lesson begins with a vocabulary 
focus which revises and extends Sts’ knowledge of 
vocabulary related to education. This is followed by a 
pronunciation focus on the letter u, and a speaking activity 
where Sts talk about their own education. Sts then read and 
listen to the account of an educational experiment, which 
was televised, where five teachers from China come to a 
British school for four weeks and teach three subjects to half 
of the Year 9 Sts. Sts then have a discussion on the Chinese 
education system, the British, and their own.
In the second half of the lesson, the grammar – first 
conditional sentences and the use of the present tense in 
future time clauses – is presented through the context of 
exams. Sts then read an online forum where people discuss 
whether or not it’s worth going to university, and also read 
about two people’s contrasting experiences. Finally, Sts have 
a debate on various topics related to education.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  first conditional and future time clauses + 
when, until, etc p.161 
Communicative  Three in a row p.190 (instructions p.173) 
Vocabulary  Education p.213 (instructions p.201)
For students
Workbook  7A
Online Practice  7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following on the board: 
 SCHOOL
Ask Sts how many words they can think of to describe a kind 
of school, e.g. primary.
Possible answers
primary    secondary    state    private    language    
faith / religious    boarding
If your Sts suggest public school, tell them that this is a 
correct collocation; however, in the UK it doesn’t refer to a 
school run by the government, which is a state school, but to 
a private school – usually a boarding school.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 93@@
93
7A
A
2  let    3  misbehave    4  be punished    5  make    
6  cheat    7  be expelled
B
1  take    2  pass    3  revise    4  fail    5  result
e 7.4
2 Discipline and exams
A	 Discipline is very strict in our school. We aren’t allowed to take our 
phones to school, and they don’t let us bring unhealthy food for 
lunch, like crisps or fizzy drinks. Most children behave well, but if 
you misbehave – for example, talk too much in class – you’ll be 
punished, and the teacher will probably make you stay behind 
after class. If you do something more serious, like cheat in an 
exam, you might even be expelled.
B	 Marc has to take an important English exam next week. He hopes 
he’ll pass, but he hasn’t had much time to revise, so he’s worried 
that he might fail. He won’t get the result until July.
	 For Activation, get Sts to cover the texts and look at 
the verbs, and try to remember as much information as 
possible from them.
	 Finally, focus on the make, let, and allow box and go 
through it with the class. With a stronger class, you might 
want to point out that when we use make in the passive, 
we use the infinitive with to, e.g. I was made to stand in the 
corner for ten minutes.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  the letter u
Pronunciation notes
The letter u has several different pronunciations, but 
between consonants it is usually (but not always) /ʌ/, e.g. 
sun, luck, summer, or /juː/, e.g. music, tune, student.
Sts often don’t realize that there is a kind of ‘hidden sound’ 
– /j/ – in words like music, and tend to pronounce them 
/ˈmuːzɪk/ or /ˈstuːdənt/.
You might want to remind Sts about the rule governing 
the use of the indefinite article a or an before words 
beginning with u. If the u is pronounced /ʌ/ (i.e. a vowel 
sound), then an is used, e.g. an umbrella, an uncle, but if 
u is pronounced /juː/ (i.e. a consonant sound), then a is 
used, e.g. a uniform, a university, a useful book.
a	 Focus on the box The letter u and go through it with 
the class.
	 Elicit the three words and four sounds: /juː/, up /ʌ/,  
boot /uː/, and bull /ʊ/.
	 Give Sts time to put the words in the correct column.
b	 e 7.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You may want to point out here that the 
/ʊ/ pronunciation is the least common.
e 7.5
/juː/  education, music, pupil, student, university
up /ʌ/  lunch, result, study, subject
boot /uː/  rude, rules, true
bull /ʊ/  full, put
	 Focus on 1 The school system in the UK and the US and 
get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
2  nursery    3  secondary    4  state    5  private    6  boarding    
7  pupils    8  students    9  head    10  terms    11  degree
e 7.2
Education
1 The school system in the UK and the US
In the UK
Children start primary school when they’re five. Before that, many 
children go to nursery school, for example between the ages of 
two and four, but this is not compulsory. From eleven to eighteen, 
children go to secondary school. The majority of schools in the  
UK – about ninety percent– are state schools, which means that they 
are paid for by the government, and education is free. The other 
ten per cent are private schools, where parents have to pay. A few 
of these are boarding schools, where children study, eat, and sleep. 
Children at primary school are often called pupils, and children at 
secondary school are usually called students, as are people who are 
studying at university. The person who is in charge of a school is 
called the head teacher. The school year is divided into three terms.
If you want to go to university, you have to take exams called A levels 
in your last year at school. If your results are good enough, you get 
a place. A person who has finished university and has a degree is 
called a graduate. 
	 Sts now do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.3  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
2  high    3  grades    4  kindergarten    5  twelfth grade    
6  semesters    7  college
e 7.3
In the US
The school system is divided into three levels, elementary school, 
middle school – sometimes called junior high school – and high 
school. School children are divided by age groups into grades. The 
youngest children start in kindergarten, followed by first grade, and 
continue until twelfth grade, which is the final year of high school. 
The school year is divided into two semesters. Higher education in 
the US is often called college.
	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs and tell them to cover the 
two texts. Sts then tell each other about the school system 
in both countries.
EXTRA IDEA   Get the class to tell you about the school 
system in their country.
	 Now focus on 2 Discipline and exams. You could  
elicit / explain the meaning of discipline /ˈdɪsəplɪn/  
(= training people to obey rules, and punishing them if 
they do not), and model and drill its pronunciation. Then 
get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Remind them to put 
the verb in the correct form.
	 e 7.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 94@@
94
7A
4	LISTENING  listening for numbers
a	 Focus on the photos and elicit from Sts what they can see. 
	 Tell Sts to read the description of a TV programme and 
answer questions 1–3. 
	 Check answers for questions 1 and 2 and elicit opinions 
for question 3. You could find out, with a show of hands, 
how many Sts think the Chinese system will prove better.
1	 Because in some subjects, Asian students are three years 
ahead of Western students of the same age.
2	 Five Chinese teachers are going to teach a group of British 
students for four weeks. They will then take tests to see who 
does better, the students taught by the British teachers or the 
students taught by the Chinese teachers.
b	 e 7.7  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Week 1 of 
the programme about the experiment. Make sure they 
understand the question. Tell Sts to listen and make notes 
for each time and number.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Now play the audio again, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
7.00 a.m.  They start the day at 7.00 a.m., much earlier than 
usual
30 minutes a day  They do 30 minutes of physical exercises 
every day instead of two hours a week.
50  There are 50 students in one class instead of 30.
11.30 a.m.  They have lunch, and it’s early for them.
5.00 p.m.  They finish lessons at 5.00, but they can’t go home.
7.00 p.m.  They clean the classroom before they go home.
12 hours  The school day is 12 hours long, which is very tiring 
for British students.
e 7.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
Week 1
On the first day of week one, students change their normal school 
uniforms for Chinese-style tracksuits. They start the day much earlier 
than usual, at seven in the morning, with thirty minutes of physical 
exercise. In Britain, PE is usually fun, and students only have two 
hours a week, but in the Chinese system, students do PE every day. 
Then lessons begin, and students get another shock – all fifty of 
them are together in one class. In Britain, the maximum is normally 
thirty, but in China it’s common to have fifty kids in one room. They 
stop for lunch early, at eleven thirty. Classes finish at five o’clock, but 
they’re not allowed to go home. They have dinner at school, and 
after dinner they still have a lot of homework and self-study. When 
they finish, at seven o’clock, they have to clean the classroom. The 
school day is twelve hours long. British students find this exhausting!
c	 e 7.8  Sts now listen to Weeks 2 and 3 of the 
programme and tick the sentences that are true about the 
Chinese teachers in the experiment. Give Sts time to read 
1–10, making sure they understand all the lexis.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Sts should tick: 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 e 7.6  Focus on the task and tell Sts that they are going 
to hear four sentences which they need to write down.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 7.6
1	 What subject did you study at university?
2	 Do pupils at your school wear a uniform?
3	 Most students have lunch in the canteen.
4	 I usually get good results in my music exams.
	 Then play it again, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board. 
See script 7.6
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to 
repeat and copy the rhythm. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
practise saying the sentences.
3	SPEAKING 
	 Education vocabulary is now put into practice in a free-
speaking activity. Sts interview their partner, asking the 
questions in the questionnaire. 
	 Focus on the question prompts, making sure Sts 
understand them all. Explain / Elicit that PE stands for 
physical education (= sport and exercise that is taught in 
schools). Remind Sts that if they are currently at secondary 
school, they should use the present tense (i.e. add do or  
is / are to the prompts). If they are no longer at school, 
they should use the past tense (i.e. add did or was / were 
to the prompts).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the questions in the questionnaire 
before you start the activity, by getting Sts to ask you the 
questions.
	 Sts take turns to interview each other. Remind the student 
who is interviewing to react to the interviewee’s answers 
and ask for more information where possible (Really? / 
That’s interesting. / Why didn’t you like it?, etc.).
	 Get some whole-class feedback at the end, by finding out, 
e.g. how many people liked / didn’t like their school and 
what their best / worst subjects were.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 95@@
95
7A
e 7.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
Week 4
During the last week of the experiment, the children in the Chinese 
class are behaving better. At the end of the week, all the students 
from the classes with Chinese teachers and the classes with British 
ones take tests in maths, science, and Mandarin. These tests will 
decide which style of teaching has worked better. So what do the 
results show?
In the maths test, the children taught by British teachers get an 
average of fifty-four per cent, and the class taught by Chinese 
teachers gets…sixty-eight per cent. In science, British-taught 
students get fifty per cent and Chinese-taught students get…
fifty-eight per cent. And in Mandarin, British-taught students get 
thirty-seven per cent, and Chinese-taught students get…forty-six 
per cent. The Chinese teachers are delighted and their students are 
really grateful and happy.
So the Chinese teachers get better results, but does that mean their 
teaching methods are better? Neil Strowger, the head teacher at 
the school, says, ‘It clearly gets good results, but the discipline is 
too strict for some students.’ The Chinese teachers agree that their 
method doesn’t help to develop personality or creativity. Perhaps 
the last word should go to Miss Li, the Mandarin teacher. As she says, 
‘It’s very hard to say which system is better…but I think we both 
learned from each other.’
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. You could also 
tell Sts where you would prefer to teach and why.
5	GRAMMAR  first conditional and future time	
	 clauses + when, until, etc.
a	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand 
them. Then get Sts, in pairs, to answer them.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs, and tell Sts how 
you feel or felt about exams.
b	 e 7.10  Tell Sts they are going to listen to two interviews 
with a student who took some important exams – the first 
interview is before she gets her results, and the second 
after. In the interviews, the speaker uses several examples 
of time clauses with if, when, as soon as, etc.
	 First, focus on the Exam results box and go through it 
with the class. Make sure Sts know what A levels are.
	 Now give Sts time to read questions 1–5. 
	 Play the audio, pausing if necessary after each answer is 
given.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 She’s sure she has passed, but she’s worried about her grades.
2	 She’ll get her results tomorrow at school.
3	 She doesn’t want to plan any celebrations until she knows the 
results.
4	 She wants to study Medicine at Cambridge University.
5	 She will probably do another year at school and take the 
exams again.
e 7.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
Weeks 2 and 3
There are big differences between Chinese and British teaching 
styles. The Chinese teachers teach very fast. Everything is done in 
books and on paper, and there is a lot of copying from the board. 
In Britain, for example in science, the approach is to let students do 
experiments and discover things by themselves, with less help from 
the teacher.
Discipline is also very different in British and Chinese schools. In 
China, the teachers have complete authority, but in Britain, the same 
teachers are having problems. They’re surprised that the students 
don’t take school seriously. When her students don’t pay attention, 
Miss Yang, the science teacher, makes them stand and look at the 
wall, but it doesn’t seem to work very well. As Rosie, one of the 
students, says, ‘It probably works in China, because everybody does 
what their teacher says. But here we don’t care. We think it’s funny.’
By week three there is a serious problem with discipline. Some 
students like the Chinese system, but a lot of others are behaving 
badly in class, and some students stop coming to class completely. 
The Chinese teachers are losing control, and realize they need to 
change the way they are teaching or their students will fail the tests 
in week four. They start to teach the children about Chinese culture 
and food, and they add Chinese face-massage to their daily lessons. 
They also try to teach patience and concentration using traditional 
Chinese games.
During a meeting with the parents, the Chinese teachers try to get 
them to help and to encourage their children to work hard. The 
parents are impressed, and the Chinese teachers are filled with new 
energy and confidence.
d	 e 7.9  Sts now listen to Week 4 of the programme, 
complete the numbers in the chart, and answer the 
question. First, check that Sts know what Mandarin is.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Test results
Students with 
British teachers
Students with 
Chinese teachers
maths
54%
68%
science
50%
58%
Mandarin
37%
46%
The British teachers learned that the Chinese method got good 
results, but that their discipline was too strict for some British 
students.
The Chinese teachers learned that their method didn’t help to 
develop personality or creativity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 96@@
96
7A
e 7.12
1	 They won’t give me a place unless I get at least two A stars and 
an A.
2	 As soon as I wake up, I’ll go to school and pick up the envelope.
3	 I don’t want to plan any celebrations until I know the results.
4	 If I don’t get into Cambridge, my parents will kill me.
5	 When I feel a bit more positive, I’ll try to get a place at another 
university.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.144. 
Grammar notes
Sts should be familiar with basic first conditional 
sentences (if + present, future (will)) from their  
Pre-intermediate course. Here they also learn to use unless 
(instead of if…not) in conditional sentences, and that 
other future time clauses (i.e. beginning with when, as 
soon as, unless, etc.) work in the same way as if-clauses, 
i.e. they are followed by a present tense although they 
actually refer to the future. This may be new for your Sts. 
Emphasize that in the other (main) clause, the verb form is 
usually will + infinitive, but it can also be an imperative or 
going to. 
A typical mistake includes using a future form after when, 
unless, etc., e.g. I’ll call you when I’ll arrive.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 7.13 
and e 7.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 That girl will get into trouble if she doesn’t wear her uniform.
2	 If you give in your homework late, the teacher won’t mark it.
3	 Don’t write anything unless you are / ’re sure of the answer.
4	 Gary will be expelled if his behaviour doesn’t improve.
5	 They’ll be late for school unless they hurry.
6	 Ask me if you don’t know what to do.
7	 Johnny will be punished if he shouts at the teacher again.
8	 My sister will finish university this year if she passes all her 
exams.
9	 I won’t go out tonight unless I finish my homework quickly.
10	 Call me if you need some help with your project.
b
1  until    ​2  before    ​3  when    ​4  after    ​5  unless    ​ 
6  as soon as    ​ 7  until    ​8  when    ​9  unless    ​10  before
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and focus on the questions. Tell Sts that 
they should make true sentences beginning with the 
phrases in the question, e.g. As soon as I get home I’ll…,  
If I don’t get a good mark in my next test, I’ll…, etc.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to think about their sentences. 
Then they ask each other the questions, and answer with 
full sentences.
	 Get some feedback.
e 7.10
J = journalist, O = Olivia
J	 What subjects did you take?
O	 Biology, chemistry, maths, and physics.
J	 Do you think you’ve passed?
O	 I’m sure I’ve passed, but I’m worried about what grades I’ll get.
J	 Why?
O	 Because I want to study Medicine at university – at Cambridge – 
and they won’t give me a place unless I get at least two A stars 
and an A.
J	 Do you think you’ll get them?
O	 I don’t know. I think I did OK, but I’m a bit worried about maths.
J	 When will you get your results?
O	 Tomorrow. I’m really nervous – and so are my parents! As soon as I 
wake up, I’ll go to school and pick up the envelope.
J	 And how will you celebrate if you get the grades you want?
O	 I don’t want to plan any celebrations until I know the results.
J	 What will you do if you don’t get the grades you need?
O	 I don’t want to think about it. If I don’t get into Cambridge, my 
parents will kill me. No, I’m joking. I suppose I’ll do another year at 
school and take the exams again.
J	 Well, good luck!
O	 Thanks.
c	 e 7.11  Tell Sts they will now find out what grades Olivia 
got. They must listen for the results and find out what she 
is going to do.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Olivia got an A star in biology, an A in chemistry and physics, and 
only a B in maths. 
She’s going to try to get a place at another university. But she’d 
really like to go to Cambridge, so she might retake her A levels 
again next year.
e 7.11
J	 Olivia – I can see from your face that the results, er, weren’t exactly 
what you wanted – am I right?
O	 Yeah. I got an A star in biology, an A in chemistry and physics, and 
only a B in maths. Not quite good enough.
J	 So what are you going to do now?
O	 At the moment, cry! When I feel a bit more positive, I’ll try to get a 
place at another university. But I’d really like to go to Cambridge, 
so I might take my A levels again next year.
J	 How did your parents react? Were they angry?
O	 No, my mum and dad have been really nice – they know how 
disappointed I am.
d	 e 7.12  Focus on the five sentences from the interviews 
and give Sts time to complete the gaps.
	 Then play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give 
Sts time to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Explain the meaning of unless (= if 
not) and as soon as (= the moment when).
1  I get    2  I wake up    3  I know    
4  my parents will kill me    5  I feel
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 97@@
97
7A
7	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Go through the 
instructions and the discussion topics in the list, making 
sure Sts understand them.
	 Give Sts time in their groups to each choose a different 
topic from the list. 
	 Focus on the Organizing and presenting your opinions 
box and go through it with the class. 
	 Then give Sts time (e.g. five minutes) to think of at least 
three reasons why they agree or disagree with the topic 
they have chosen and to prepare what they are going to 
say. Help Sts with any vocabulary they may need.
b	 Sts in each group now take turns to say whether they 
agree or disagree with the sentence they have chosen in 
a and why. The other Sts should listen, and at the end say 
if they agree or disagree with the student who introduced 
the topic, and why. Finally, each group votes on whether 
they agree or disagree. 
	 If there’s time, get feedback to find out who argued which 
topic in each group, and if they managed to convince the 
others in their group. 
6	READING & SPEAKING  understanding points	
	 of view
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts can identify 
which of the three categories they belong to. 
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner the 
answers to the questions that match their situation.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity by 
answering the questions about yourself first.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Point out to Sts that 
university is sometimes shortened to uni.
Is it really a good idea / a good use of your time, effort, and 
money?
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the difference between the three symbols.
	 Give Sts time to read the comments and complete 
the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the comments the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  S    2  f    3  g    4  g    5  f
d	 Give Sts time to read the comments again and then think 
about university education in their country. 
	 Get some feedback.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
f	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication University or not?, A on p.108,  
B on p.112.
	 Go through the instructions. Sts A read about Jack while 
Sts B read about Emily-Fleur. As they are reading, walk 
around monitoring and helping with any queries.
	 When they have finished reading, Sts A should start by 
asking their questions about Emily-Fleur. Sts B can have 
their books open, but should try to answer from memory. 
Then they swap roles and Sts B ask their questions 
about Jack.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When Sts have finished, elicit as much 
information as possible from the class about Jack and  
Emily-Fleur.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 98@@
98
7B
	7B	 The hotel of Mum and Dad
b	 Focus on the title of the article, Things you know if you 
still live with your parents, and get Sts, in pairs, to think of 
one advantage and one disadvantage of living with your 
parents as an adult. 
	 Elicit some advantages and disadvantages onto the board.
c	 Now tell Sts to read the article and see if the advantages 
and disadvantages they mentioned are included. Tell 
them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary
d	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and this time 
complete each gap with the correct words from 1–10.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  matter    2  embarrassing    3  let    4  awake    5  hear    
6  wrong    7  afford    8  realized    9  remove    10  bills
e	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand pros and 
cons. Get them to close their books. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other all the pros 
and cons they just read about living with parents as an 
adult.
	 Elicit all the pros and cons from the class.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the four questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	GRAMMAR  second conditional, choosing	
	 between conditionals
a	 Tell Sts that some people have written online comments 
after reading the article Things you know if you still live with 
your parents in 1. Tell them to read the comments and find 
out whether they want to leave home and why (not).
	 Check answers.
Vivienne  Yes, she wants to have her own things, and not be 
told what to do.
Marco  No because somebody else cooks and cleans and he has 
a nice room.
Andrea  Yes, she doesn’t feel independent.
Carlos  Yes, his mum drives him mad and he’d like a dog.
EXTRA IDEA   Depending on the age of your class, you 
could ask Sts how many of them live with their parents and 
whether they agree with any of the writers.
b	 Tell Sts to look at the highlighted phrases in the 
comments. In pairs, Sts answer questions 1–3.
	 Check answers.
1	 The past simple
2	 The conditional form (would + infinitive)
3	 b (a situation they are imagining)
 G   second conditional, choosing between conditionals
 V   houses
 P   sentence stress, the letter c
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is people’s homes. In the first half 
of the lesson, Sts start by reading an article about the 
advantages and disadvantages in the UK of living with your 
parents as an adult. This leads to Sts discussing the situation 
in their own country. The grammar, second conditionals, is 
presented through online comments where young people 
respond to the article and say whether they would like to 
leave home and live independently or not. This is followed 
by a pronunciation focus on sentence stress and rhythm, 
and oral practice of the second conditional. 
In the second half of the lesson, there is a vocabulary focus 
on lexis related to houses and where people live. This leads 
to a pronunciation section on the letter c and its three 
possible pronunciations, /s/, /ʃ/, and /k/. Sts then listen to 
an audio guide about a London building (now a museum) 
where both the composer George Handel and the musician 
Jimi Hendrix once lived. Sts then describe their own dream 
houses. The lesson ends with writing, where Sts write a 
description of their house / flat for a home rental website.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  second conditionals, choosing between 
conditionals p.162 
Communicative  If you had to choose… p.191 
(instructions p.173) 
Vocabulary  Houses p.214 (instructions p.201)
For students
Workbook  7B
Online Practice  7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following on the board: 
PLACES TO LIVE WHEN YOU’RE A UNIVERSITY STUDENT
Elicit the three most common places, e.g. at home, in a 
shared flat with friends, in a hall of residence. 
If any of your Sts are at, or have been to, university, ask them 
where they live(d).
1	READING & SPEAKING  understanding pros	
	 and cons
a	 Books open. Give Sts time to look at the photos and 
answer the questions in pairs.
	 Check the answer to the first question and get some 
feedback for the others.
Photo 1  at home
Photo 2  in shared accommodation
Photo 3  in a hall of residence / uni accommodation
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 99@@
99
7B
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Guess the sentence, A on p.108,  
B on p.113. 
	 Demonstrate the activity by writing in large letters on a 
piece of paper the following sentence:
	
IF I HAD A JOB, I’D RENT MY OWN FLAT. 
	 Don’t show the piece of paper to Sts yet. Then write on 
the board:
	
IF I HAD A JOB, I 
 MY OWN FLAT. (+)
	 Tell Sts that they must guess the exact sentence that you 
have written on a piece of paper. Elicit ideas. If they are 
wrong, say Try again, until someone gives exactly the 
correct answer. Then show them your piece of paper with 
the sentence on it.
	 Tell Sts to look at instruction a. Give them a few  
minutes to complete their sentences in a logical way 
in their heads – remind them not to write anything yet. 
Explain that their partner has the same sentences, already 
completed, and the idea is to try and complete the 
sentences in the same way. Monitor and help while they 
are doing this. 
	 Now tell Sts to look at instruction b. Sts A read out 
sentence 1, and Sts B tell A if he / she has guessed the 
sentence correctly. If not, A has to guess again. When A 
guesses the sentence correctly, he / she should write in 
the answer.
	 When Sts A have finished, Sts B read their sentences to  
Sts A and do the same thing.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  sentence	
	 stress
Pronunciation notes
Sts continue to work on sentence stress and are given 
practice in pronouncing more strongly the words in 
a sentence which convey important information (e.g. 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs). Other, shorter 
words (e.g. articles and pronouns) should be pronounced 
less strongly. Getting this balance right will help Sts 
pronounce English with the correct rhythm.
For more notes, see Pronunciation p.20 in Lesson 1B and 
p.35 in Lesson 2B.
a	 e 7.16  Tell Sts they are going to work on sentence stress. 
Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen, and elicit that the bold words are stressed.
e 7.16
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.71
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   In pairs, Sts practise saying the sentences.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to choose their six 
sentence beginnings and complete them. Go round 
making sure that Sts are writing correct sentences.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.145. 
Grammar notes
Sts who previously used English File Pre-intermediate or 
a similar-level course will have already been introduced 
to second conditional sentences: if + past, conditional 
(would / wouldn’t). Here they both revise the second 
conditional and contrast it with the first conditional.
What is also introduced here is the use of the conditional 
form without if in sentences like I would never buy a flat 
next to a pub or restaurant. This use should not be too 
problematic, as Sts may well have a conditional form of 
the verb in their L1. They have also already met this use of 
the conditional in the phrase I would like…
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 7.15 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the information box and go through it with  
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences. 
In b, ask Sts after each sentence if it is a first or second 
conditional.
a
1	 Nick wouldn’t have to commute every day if he worked 
from home.
2	 If they didn’t have such a noisy dog, they’d get on better 
with their neighbours.
3	 I wouldn’t buy that bike if I were you – it’s too expensive.
4	 Would we sell our house if somebody offered us enough 
money?
5	 If my mother-in-law lived with us, we’d get divorced.
6	 Would you share a flat with me if I paid half the rent?
7	 If my sister tidied her room more often, it wouldn’t be such a 
mess.
8	 You wouldn’t treat me like this if you really loved me.
9	 If we painted the kitchen white, would it look bigger?
10	 I wouldn’t buy a house with a garden if I didn’t enjoy 
gardening so much.
b
1	 My kids would get up earlier if they didn’t go to bed so  
late. (2nd)
2	 Where will you live if you go to university? (1st)
3	 If you don’t pass your exams, what will you do? (1st)
4	 I’d buy a bigger house if I was sure we could afford it. (2nd)
5	 We couldn’t have a dog if we didn’t have a garden. (2nd)
6	 How will you get to work if you sell your car? (1st)
7	 If we sit in the shade, we won’t get sunburnt. (1st)
8	 If you could change one thing in your life, what would  
it be? (2nd)
9	 He won’t be able to pay next month’s rent if he doesn’t find a 
job soon. (1st)
10	 If she made less noise, her neighbours wouldn’t complain so 
often. (2nd)
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 100@@
100
7B
	 Now focus on 2 Parts of a house and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.18  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers.
e 7.18
2 Parts of a house
3	 attic
5	 balcony
8	 basement
2	 chimney
7	 entrance
12	 gate
6	 ground floor
10	 path
1	 roof 
9	 steps
13	 terrace / patio
4	 top floor
11	 wall
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the words, look at the 
pictures, and see if they can remember the words.
	 Now focus on 3 Describing a house or flat and get Sts to 
do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.19  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 7.19
3 Describing a house or flat
2	 I live in a cottage in the country. It’s old and made of stone, and 
the rooms have very low ceilings. There’s an open fire in the living 
room and it’s very cosy in the winter. 
1	 I live in a modern flat in the city centre. It’s spacious and very 
light, with wooden floors and big windows.
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
highlighted phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on the chimney or fireplace? and roof or ceiling? 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the 
descriptions and look at the photos. They can test 
themselves or a partner by describing the rooms.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the difference 
between the words.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
1	 the outskirts = the area around a town or city which is the 
furthest from the centre
	
a suburb = a residential area outside the centre of a large city
2	 a village = a very small town located in a country area
	
a town = a place where people live and work, which is larger 
than a village, but smaller than a city
c	 Focus on the speech bubbles. Put Sts in pairs, A and B.  
Sts A tell Sts B their first sentence. Sts B should ask for 
more information. Then Sts B say their first sentence, etc.
	 Monitor and encourage Sts to get the correct sentence 
rhythm.
	 Get some feedback from the class. Find out if any Sts had 
the same endings as their partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before they say the sentences, Sts could 
underline the stressed words in the completed sentences for 
you to check.
4	VOCABULARY  houses
a	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to write down three  
things / pieces of furniture, etc. for each room in the chart. 
Point out the example in each column.
	 Elicit answers and write them on the board in columns. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Houses on p.162. 
Vocabulary notes
Where people live
Some languages have a word similar to suburbs, but 
which has a negative connotation like slums. You may 
want to point out that in English, suburbs simply means a 
residential area where people live outside the city centre. 
The outskirts is the area around a city which is the furthest 
from the centre, e.g. They live on the outskirts of Milan.
Parts of a house
You may want to make sure Sts are clear about the 
difference between a terrace and a balcony. A terrace is 
an outside area on the ground floor, whereas a balcony is 
always outside a window on an upper floor.
Describing a house or flat
You may want to point out the difference between a 
fireplace (= an open space for a fire in the wall of a room) 
and an open fire (= a fireplace with a wood fire in it, as 
opposed to e.g. a woodburning stove).
	 Focus on 1 Where people live and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. Make sure they write in the 
Preposition column and not in the sentences.
	 e 7.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 7.17
Houses
1 Where people live
1	 I live in the country, surrounded by fields.
2	 I live on the outskirts of Oxford, about three miles from the centre.
3	 I live in a village.
4	 I live in Cromer, a small town on the east coast.
5	 I live on the second floor of a large block of flats.
6	 I live in Croydon, a suburb of London about fifteen miles from the 
city centre.
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do c and tell Sts to cover the Preposition column. Can 
they remember sentences 1–6 with the prepositions? 
	 In Activation, Sts, in pairs, describe where they live.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 101@@
101
7B
	 Check answers.
They are both musicians.  
They both left their countries to live in London. Handel came to 
London in the 18th century and Hendrix in the 1960s.  
They lived in the same building in London.
	 Now find out which bedroom Sts like best, and why.
c	 Focus on the instructions and eight extracts, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis. 
	 Then focus on the Glossary and go through it with the 
class.
	 Now give Sts time to decide who each extract (1–8) is 
about.
d	 e 7.21  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  Han    2  Hen    3  Han    4  Han    5  Hen    6  Hen    
7  Hen    8  Han
e 7.21
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
Welcome to the Handel Hendrix house
Handel’s House
In seventeen twelve, the German composer George Frideric Handel 
decided to settle permanently in England, where he was employed 
as musician to the English court. After living in Surrey for some years, 
he moved to London, and during the summer of seventeen twenty-
three, he rented a house at twenty-five Brook Street. He was the first 
occupant of the house, but as a foreigner, he was not allowed to 
buy it. However, after becoming a British citizen five years later, he 
decided to continue renting the house. In seventeen forty-two, his 
annual rent for Brook Street was fifty pounds.
The plan of the house in Brook Street was usual for a modest London 
townhouse of the period. There was a basement containing the 
kitchens, and on the ground floor there was a room at the front 
for receiving visitors. On the first floor there were bigger rooms, 
where Handel entertained and worked. In the largest room, he 
kept his instruments – a harpsichord and a little house organ – and 
he occasionally rehearsed there. The room next to it is where he 
composed many of his most famous works, including the Messiah.
The second floor contained the bedroom at the front, with a 
dressing room at the back, where he kept his clothes. In the attic at 
the top of the house, the servants had their rooms.
During the last decade of his life, Handel’s eyesight got worse, and 
by seventeen fifty-four he was completely blind. He died at his Brook 
Street house on the fourteenth of April, seventeen fifty-nine. He was 
buried in Westminster Abbey, and more than three thousand people 
attended his funeral.
Hendrix’s Flat
Although Jimi Hendrix’s career only lasted four years, he is widely 
regarded as one of the most influential electric guitarists in the 
history of rock music. 
The flat on the upper floors of twenty-three Brook Street was found 
by Jimi’s girlfriend, Kathy Etchingham, when she saw an advert in 
one of the London evening newspapers in June nineteen sixty-
eight, while he was in New York. He moved in briefly in July, before 
returning to the United States for an extensive tour. He spent some 
time decorating the flat to his own taste. He bought curtains and 
cushions from the nearby John Lewis department store, as well as 
ornaments from Portobello Road market and elsewhere. He told 
Kathy that this was ‘my first real home of my own’.
In January the following year, he gave a series of press and media 
interviews and photo shoots in the flat. He also appeared on the BBC 
and gave two concerts in February at the Royal Albert Hall.
3	 a roof = the structure that covers the whole house
	
a ceiling = the top inside surface of a room
4	 a balcony = a platform that is built on the upstairs outside 
wall of a building, with a wall or rail around it
	
a terrace = a flat, hard area, especially outside a house, where 
you can sit, eat, and enjoy the sun
5	 a chimney = a structure through which smoke is carried up, 
away from a fire, etc. and through the roof of a building
	
a fireplace = an open space for a fire in the wall of a room
6	 the ground floor = the floor of a building that is at the same 
level as the ground outside
	
the first floor = the level of a building above the ground 
level (NB in American English, the first floor = the ground floor)
7	 wood = noun; the hard material that the trunk and branches 
of a tree are made of; this material when it is used to build or 
make things, or as a fuel
	
wooden = adjective; made of wood
5	PRONUNCIATION  the letter c
Pronunciation notes
Some consonants in English have a single pronunciation – 
m is always /m/, k is always /k/, j is always /dʒ/, etc. But 
some consonants can have more than one pronunciation, 
depending on the surrounding letters, and c is a good 
example. The two most common pronunciations of c 
are /k/ and /s/. /ʃ/ isn’t very common, and is only when 
the letter c is before i + vowel. Sts will have come across 
lots of words with the two main pronunciations of c, but 
this is the first time in English File that they’ve focused 
on the difference. This section gives spelling rules for 
how c is pronounced, and these will help Sts to work out 
pronunciations for themselves.
You may want to point out that c can very occasionally be 
silent after the letter s, in words like science and scene. 
With words with double c, if the second c comes before 
e or i, the pronunciation is /ks/, e.g. success. If the second 
c comes before a, o or u, the pronunciation is /k/, e.g. 
account.
a	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to say all the words in groups 
1–5 to each other.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time, in pairs, to 
complete rules 1–5.
c	 e 7.20  Play the audio for Sts to listen to how the words 
in a are pronounced and to check their answers to b.
	 Check answers.
1  /k/    2  /s/    3  /ʃ/    4  /k/    5  /ks/
e 7.20
See words in a in Student’s Book on p.72
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
6	LISTENING  using prediction to understand	
	 content
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Don’t worry if Sts don’t 
know anything about Handel or Hendrix, as they will find 
out some information in the listening.
b	 Now tell Sts to read the information on the poster and 
check their answers to a. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 102@@
102
7B
7	SPEAKING & WRITING  describing a house	
	 or flat
a	 Focus on the speaking task and give Sts a few minutes 
to think about what they are going to say. Go round the 
class, helping Sts with any vocabulary they might need 
which isn’t in Vocabulary Bank Houses.
b	 Put Sts into small groups of three to five. They take turns 
to describe their ‘dream house’ in as much detail as 
possible. They must also say which of the other houses 
they like best.
	 When the activity has finished, you could get feedback 
from each group to find out which house was the most 
popular. 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing a house or flat on 
p.120. 
	 Focus on the instructions for a and tell Sts to read the 
two posts and decide which one they would choose for 
a holiday. You might want to elicit / teach what a villa is 
(= a house where people stay on holiday, especially in 
southern Europe).
	 In pairs, Sts tell each other which one they have chosen 
and why.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could have a 
show of hands for each place to see if there is a favourite.
	 For b, focus on the instructions and make sure the task is 
clear. Give Sts time to read about the flat in Florence.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts can remember what 
the adjectives mean (stunning = extremely attractive or 
impressive). Model and drill pronunciation.
	 In c, Sts now read about the Turkish villa and improve the 
description with the adjectives they underlined in b.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Possible answers
a fully-equipped kitchen    a sunny terrace    
stunning views    a large garden    lovely beaches    
ideal for a family
	 Focus on the Describing location box and go through it 
with the class.
	 For d, tell Sts they are going to write a description of their 
house or flat for the website. If Sts don’t want to write 
about their own home, they can invent one. 
	 Focus on the plan and go through it with Sts. 
	 Sts should write four paragraphs, as in the model, and use 
the language in the Describing location box and the 
Vocabulary Bank Houses to help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their description, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
	 In e, Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving 
it in.
In March nineteen sixty-nine, he went back to New York again, and 
although Kathy stayed at Brook Street for a while longer, Jimi did not 
live there again. He died in London in nineteen seventy, at the age of 
twenty-seven, but in a hotel, not in the Brook Street flat.
Over the years, his flat was used as an office, until it was taken over 
in two thousand by the Handel House Trust. It opened to the public 
on Wednesday the tenth of February, twenty sixteen.
The whole house is now a museum and a concert venue where both 
men’s music can be heard in live performances.
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and they must 
answer questions 1–10. Give them time to read the 
questions.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after Sts have heard about 
Handel to give them time to answer questions 1–5. Then 
play the rest of the audio.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1	 Nobody   
2	 Because he was a foreigner.   
3	 Entertaining and working   
4	 A bedroom and a dressing room   
5	 The servants   
6	 Four years   
7	 Hendrix’s girlfriend   
8	 In March 1969   
9	 In a London hotel   
10	 As an office
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 e 7.22  Tell Sts to read the six extracts from the listening 
and to complete the gaps. They can do this in pairs or 
individually.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to check their guesses.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand the meaning 
of the words. Model and drill pronunciation.
1  settle    2  moved    3  occupant    4  upper    
5  decorating    6  venue
e 7.22
1	 Handel decided to settle permanently in England…
2	 After living in Surrey for some years, he moved to London…
3	 He was the first occupant of the house…
4	 The flat on the upper floors of twenty-three Brook Street was 
found by… 
5	 He spent some time decorating the flat to his own taste. 
6	 The whole house is now a museum and a concert venue…
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you have visited a 
house where a famous person lived, tell the class about it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 103@@
103
PE4
e 7.23
P = Paul, R = Rob
P	 Bad luck, mate.
R	 Nice shot.
P	 I’ve had years of practice.
R	 You used to play pool a lot at university.
P	 You did, too.
R	 Yeah. I don’t really have the time any more…
P	 Or anybody to play with?…So what do you do in your free time?
R	 The magazine keeps me pretty busy. And when I’m free, I’m 
usually with Jenny…
P	 Tch. Your turn. Don’t blow it.
R	 What is it?
P	 I was just thinking about you.
R	 What about me?
P	 Do you remember the great times we had at uni? You had such 
crazy hair – last time I saw you it was blond!
R	 Don’t remind me.
P	 Those were the days. Look at you now, with your girlfriend and 
your nine-to-five job. If you don’t come back to London soon, 
you’ll become an all-American boy!
R	 Come off it.
P	 It’s true! I mean, just look at that shirt.
R	 What’s wrong with my shirt?
P	 You look like a businessman! Did you buy it?
R	 Me? No. It was…it was a present from Jenny.
P	 I thought so.
R	 What does that mean?
P	 It’s Jenny’s taste. 
R	 Yes, and I really like it.
P	 Jenny seems to know what she wants – and she probably gets it.
R	 That’s one of the things I like about her…Terrible.
P	 You said it.
R	 Sorry, Paul. We’ve got to go.
P	 Oh come on, Rob. We haven’t even finished the game.
R	 Another time. Jenny’s waiting for us.
P	 Jenny. Right. 
b	 Focus on sentences 1–6. Go through them with Sts and 
make sure they understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Remind them to correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T 
2	 F (He doesn’t have much free time. / His job keeps him busy.)
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (Jenny gave Rob the shirt he’s wearing.)
6	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function    making and responding to suggestions,  
making an excuse and apologizing
Language  Why don’t we…?, What about…?, That’s a great 
idea., etc.
Lesson plan
In the fourth episode, the main functional focus is on 
expressions for making and responding to suggestions. 
In the first scene, Rob and Paul are in a bar, playing pool 
and reminiscing about old times. Paul thinks that Rob has 
changed a lot and is becoming very ‘American’, which he 
puts down to Jenny. In the next scene, Jenny joins them for a 
meal, and they then decide what they are going to do. They 
can’t agree, and in the end, Paul and Rob decide to go to a 
gig Kerri (from Episode 2) is doing, and Jenny, rather upset, 
calls Monica and goes round to see her. The last scene takes 
place in the office. Jenny is at work and ready for a meeting 
with Don, but Rob phones in saying that he doesn’t feel well 
and isn’t going to make it.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 4 
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 4 
Can you remember? 1–7
Online Practice  Practical English 4 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 4, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 3. Ask Who is Monica? What is her big news? 
Whose friend is Paul? What do Rob and Paul do at the end of the 
episode?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 3.
1	r ROB AND PAUL CATCH UP
a	 e 7.23  Books open. Tell Sts that this is the following day 
to the previous episode, after work. Focus on the photos 
and elicit what Sts think is happening. Elicit / Teach pool 
(the game they are playing).
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
He clearly doesn’t like her, and implies that she is bossy / 
controlling.
	 4	
Practical English  Boys’ night out
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 104@@
104
PE4
b	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–7 and to think who 
might have made each suggestion.
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to write the 
correct initial.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  P    2  J    3  P    4  J    5  J    6  P    7  R
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 7.25  Give Sts a minute to read through the extracts 
from the conversation and to think about what the 
missing words might be.
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  do, Let’s    2  don’t, keen, could    3  How    4  What    
5  shall, Why    6  could, idea
e 7.25
1
P	 What shall we do now?
R	 What do you want to do?
P	 Well…I haven’t been on a dance floor for weeks now. I’ve got to 
move my body. Let’s go dancing!
2
J	 I’m going running in the morning. Why don’t you join me?
P	 No, thanks. I’m not very keen on running. But I’ve read about this 
place called Deep Space, where they play great music. We could 
go there.
3
J	 How about going to the late show at MOMA?
P	 MOMA? What’s that?
4
J	 What about staying in and watching a movie on TV?
P	 I’m in New York. I can watch TV anywhere.
5
P	 I didn’t think so. So shall we go there?
R	 Why not?
6
R	 We could meet her outside and go together.
P	 That’s a great idea!
d	 Focus on the Verb forms box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the word emphatic (= given with force to 
show that it is important).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
Let’s (go dancing).
e	 e 7.26  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in the 
extracts in c. They should listen and repeat the phrases, 
copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to watch or listen 
and repeat.
2	r MAKING SUGGESTIONS
a	 e 7.24  Focus on the photos and elicit what Sts think is 
happening. 
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the three 
questions and cover the rest of the page.
	 Before playing the video / audio, elicit / teach a gig /gɪg/ 
(= a performance by musicians playing popular music or 
jazz in front of an audience).
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers.
Paul and Rob decide to go and see Kerri playing in a gig. 
Jenny says she has a busy day the next day. 
She ends up going to Monica’s house.
e 7.24
P = Paul, R = Rob, J = Jenny, M = Monica
P	 Oh, yeah. That was good. So! What shall we do now?
R	 What do you want to do?
P	 Well…I haven’t been on a dance floor for weeks now. I’ve got to 
move my body. Let’s go dancing.
J	 I’m going running in the morning. Why don’t you join me?
P	 No, thanks. I’m not very keen on running. But I’ve read about this 
place called Deep Space, where they play great music. We could 
go there.
J	 A club?
P	 Don’t you feel like dancing?
J	 Not on a Wednesday night. How about going to the late show at 
MOMA?
P	 MOMA? What’s that?
J	 MOMA. It’s the Museum of Modern Art. There’s a Kandinsky 
exhibition.
P	 That isn’t exactly my idea of a great night out.
J	 What about staying in and watching a movie on TV?
P	 I’m in New York. I can watch TV anywhere.
J	 Who’s that?
R	 It’s a text from Kerri. She’s doing a gig at the Bowery Ballroom. 
P	 Kerri who?
R	 Kerri Johnson. I interviewed her last week.
P	 Kerri Johnson? I’ve seen her play live. She’s cool. Do you like her, 
Jenny?
J	 I have to admit I’m not crazy about her music…or her, for that 
matter.
P	 I didn’t think so. So shall we go there? 
R	 Why not? Actually, Kerri’s staying very near here and she doesn’t 
know New York very well. We could meet her outside and go 
together. 
P	 That’s a great idea!
R	 I’ll send her a text.
J	 I think I might have an early night. You two can go on your own.
R	 Are you sure you don’t mind?
P	 Of course she doesn’t mind!
J	 No, Rob, it’s fine. I have another busy day tomorrow. You do, too, 
actually.
R	 I know, we’re meeting Don. I haven’t forgotten…Oh, it’s Kerri. 
She’s on her way now.
P	 What are we waiting for? Let’s go!
***
M	 Hello?
J	 Hi, Monica – it’s not too late to call, is it?
M	 Jenny! No, why? Are you OK?
J	 I need to talk.
M	 Can you come over? Why don’t you take a cab?
J	 OK, thanks.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 105@@
105
PE4
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–7. Make sure Sts realize they must use 
between one and three words only to complete each 
sentence.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to complete the sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  terrible    2  a party    3  the meeting    4  important meeting    
5  it won’t happen    6  is leaving    7  a professional
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 7.28  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  anyway    2  why    3  happen    4  off    
5  that    6  word    7  such
e 7.28
1	 Where are you, anyway?
2	 That’s why I’m calling. I’m not going to make it. 
3	 It won’t happen again.
4	 He’s off to Boston this afternoon.
5	 I mean, it’s not that I don’t like Paul, but…
6	 I wanted to have a word with him before the meeting.
7	 He’s such a professional.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  7    B  2    C  6    D  5    E  3    F  4    G  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
e 7.26
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on p.74
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversations in c.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
g	 Put Sts in small groups and tell them to organize their 
end-of-term class party using the expressions for making 
suggestions.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
3	r THE MORNING AFTER THE NIGHT 
	 BEFORE
a	 e 7.27  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where are Rob and Jenny? What’s happening?, etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
Rob and Jenny have a meeting with Don, but Rob hasn’t come 
in to work, because he isn’t feeling well.
e 7.27
J = Jenny, R = Rob, D = Don
J	 Rob?
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Are you OK? Where are you, anyway?
R	 I’m at home. I’m feeling terrible. We got back really late last night.
J	 Why doesn’t that surprise me? You know, you’re not a student any 
more. 
J	 I know. There was a party after the gig – Kerri invited us, and of 
course Paul said yes.
J	 And this morning’s meeting? In…ten minutes?
R	 That’s why I’m calling. I’m not going to make it. I’m really sorry.
J	 Rob! It’s a very important meeting! I’ll cover for you this time, but I 
won’t be able to do it again.
R	 It won’t happen again. I promise. Anyway, Paul’s leaving.
J	 He’s leaving?
R	 That’s right. He’s off to Boston this afternoon.
J	 Maybe that’s a good thing. I mean, it’s not that I don’t like Paul, 
but…
R	 I know, I know…
J	 I have to go. Talk to you later.
D	 Jenny, have you seen Rob? I wanted to have a word with him 
before the meeting, and he isn’t even here.
J	 I know. He just called to say he can’t make it. 
D	 He what?
J	 I was with him last night. He wasn’t feeling very well. But it’s OK – 
he told me everything I need to know for the meeting.
D	 Oh. OK, then.
J	 You know Rob. He’s such a professional.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 106@@
106
8A
	8A	 The right job for you
1	VOCABULARY  work
a	 Books open. Focus on pictures 1–9 and sentences A–I. Tell 
Sts they must match the sentences and pictures. Point out 
that the first one (E1) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts, in pairs, a couple of minutes to complete 
the task.
b	 e 8.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation of the bold 
words and phrases.
2  I    3  G    4  D    5  C    6  F    7  H    8  A    9  B   
e 8.1
E 1	 Clare worked for a marketing company.
I   2	 She had to work very long hours and do overtime.
G 3	 She had a good salary, but she didn’t like her boss.
D 4	 They had an argument, and Clare was sacked. 
C  5	 She was unemployed, and had to look for a job. 
F  6	 She applied for a lot of jobs, and sent in CVs. 
H 7	 She had some interviews, but didn’t get the jobs. 
A  8	 She decided to set up an online business selling birthday cakes.
B 9	 Her business is doing very well. Clare is a success!
Vocabulary notes
Point out that:
•	 set up = start (a business)
•	 we use apply for when sending a letter or a completed 
form to a company to ask for a job (usually in response 
to an advertisement).
•	 CV stands for Curriculum Vitae (but we always use 
the abbreviated form) and means a document which 
shows your education / qualifications, experience, and 
interests.
•	 overtime = extra hours that you work over and above 
your normal working hours
•	 sacked can be used with either be or get. If you are 
sacked, you lose your job.
	 Now get Sts to cover the sentences and look at the 
pictures. Then get them to retell the story, in their pairs, 
from memory, A testing B and then swapping.
	 Then elicit the story from the class by asking individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts work in pairs, you could elicit 
from the whole class the sentence for each picture.
c	 Now tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Work on p.163. 
Vocabulary notes
You could point out the difference between the nouns job 
and work:
•	 job is a countable noun, e.g. There are several jobs 
available in this company. I’m looking for a job. Did they 
offer you the job?
•	 work is an uncountable noun and has no plural, e.g. I’m 
looking for work. I have a lot of work to do today. Looking 
after children is very hard work.
 G   choosing between gerunds and infinitives
 V   work
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is work. In the first half of the lesson, 
Sts learn words and phrases related to work, and these are 
recycled and practised orally in Pronunciation and Speaking. 
The grammar focuses on when Sts have to use a gerund (or 
-ing form) or an infinitive, and the context is a questionnaire 
which helps people to see what kind of job would most suit 
their personality. The grammar is practised in a speaking 
activity. The first half of the lesson ends with Sts writing a 
covering email to go with a job application.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read about a British TV 
programme called Dragons’ Den, in which contestants try to 
convince a panel of business people to invest in a product 
or service. In Listening, they hear a contestant talking about 
his experience on Dragons’ Den. Finally, in Speaking, Sts take 
part in a role-play where they present a new product to the 
class, as if they were appearing on the programme.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  choosing between gerunds and 
infinitives p.163 
Communicative  I think… p.192 (instructions p.174) 
Vocabulary  Work p.215 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook  8A
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Do a jobs quiz. Put Sts in pairs or small groups, then read out 
the following quiz questions or write them on the board.
CAN YOU NAME…?
•	 TWO JOBS WHICH PEOPLE DO IN A RESTAURANT
•	 TWO JOBS CONNECTED WITH TRANSPORT
•	 TWO JOBS THAT PEOPLE DO IN A HOSPITAL
•	 TWO JOBS WHERE YOU SPEND A LOT OF TIME OUTSIDE
•	 TWO JOBS IN ENTERTAINMENT
Elicit some answers, making sure Sts can spell and 
pronounce the words correctly.
Some possible answers
•	 waiter, chef, etc.
•	 taxi driver, pilot, bus driver, etc.
•	 nurse, doctor, etc.
•	 police officer, farmer, etc.
•	 actor, singer, musician, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 107@@
107
8A
	 Now focus on 3 Word-building and the typical endings 
for job words. In pairs or individually, give Sts time to do a 
and b. 
	 e 8.4  Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the words onto the board.
e 8.4
3 Word-building
a
1	 promote, promotion
2	 apply, application
3	 retire, retirement
4	 employ, employment
5	 qualify, qualification
6	 resign, resignation
b
1	 science, scientist
2	 law, lawyer
3	 music, musician
4	 pharmacy, pharmacist
5	 farm, farmer
6	 translate, translator
	 Either get Sts to underline the stressed syllable in the new 
words before playing the audio again, or play the audio 
again, pausing after each word for Sts to underline the 
stressed syllable.
	 Elicit which syllables are stressed and underline them on 
the board.
a
2  application    3  retirement    4  employment    
5  qualification    6  resignation    
b 
1  scientist    2  lawyer    3  musician    4  pharmacist    
5  farmer    6  translator
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 For Activation, get Sts to cover the Noun columns 
and look at 1–6 in a and b. They can test each other or 
themselves on the nouns.
	 Now write the four endings on the board. Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to think of two more jobs for each ending.
	 Elicit answers onto the board.
Possible answers
-er:  hairdresser, banker
-or:  actor, director
-ian:  electrician, optician
-ist:  pianist, receptionist
EXTRA IDEA   If most of your Sts work, get them to tell you 
what they do.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the Words with different meanings box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the 
difference between sentences a and b in 1–5.
	 Check answers.
	 Focus on 1 Verb phrases and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs. 
	
e 8.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.2
Work
1 Verb phrases
1	 Dan has to do overtime.  
He has to work extra hours.
2	 Matt got promoted last week.  
He was given a more important job.
3	 Most nurses have to work shifts.  
Sometimes they work during the day and sometimes at night.
4	 A man in our department was sacked yesterday.  
The boss told him to leave.
5	 Colin was made redundant.  
He lost his job because the company didn’t need him any more.
6	 The director of the company is going to resign.  
He has decided to leave his job. 
7	 Lilian is going to retire next month.  
She’s sixty-five, and she’s going to stop working.
8	 Angela has set up a business selling clothes online.  
She had the idea and has started doing it.
9	 Everyone in the office has to do a training course.  
They need to learn how to use the new software.
10	 Mandy applied for a job online.  
She replied to an advert and sent in her CV. 
11	 My parents run a language school in Brighton.  
They employ six teachers, who teach English to foreign students.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
verb phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Point out 
the silent g in resign. Give further practice of any words 
your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Finally, get Sts to cover the first sentence in each number 
and look at the second one. Can they remember the verb 
or verb phrase used in each one?
	 For Activation, either put Sts in pairs or do this as a 
whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback from various 
pairs.
	 Now focus on 2 Saying what you do and get Sts to do a 
and b individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.3  Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.3
2 Saying what you do 
a
1	 I’m unemployed.
2	 He’s self-employed.
3	 He’s a freelance designer.
4	 It’s a temporary job.
5	 It’s a part-time job.
b
1	 I work for a multinational company.
2	 I’m in charge of the Marketing Department. 
3	 I’m responsible for customer loans.
4	 I’m at school.
5	 I’m in my third year at university.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences in a, or model and drill them yourself. Highlight 
the silent syllable in temporary. Give further practice of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 108@@
108
8A
2  helping    3  not earning    4  listening    5  making    
6  Taking    7  to work    8  managing    9  expressing   
10  to follow    11  to be    12  improvising    13  Doing    
14  solving    15  to understand    16  to calculate
b	 Now tell Sts to read each sentence in the questionnaire 
individually, and tick the sentences that they strongly 
agree with.
	 When they have finished, get them to compare their 
answers with a partner, explaining why they have ticked 
certain statements.
c	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to go to 
Communication Match your personality to the job  
on p.108.
	 Get Sts to read the ‘answer’ paragraph corresponding to 
the section where they have most ticks. Some Sts may 
have an equal number of ticks in two sections, in which 
case they should read both answer sections.
	 Get feedback from some Sts to find out what kind of job, 
according to the questionnaire, would suit them, and if 
this is the kind of job that they would actually like to do. 
If some of your Sts already have jobs, ask them what they 
think of the results of the questionnaire.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
d	 Now focus on the rules and give Sts time to complete 
them individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  the gerund    2  to + infinitive    3  to + infinitive    
4  the gerund    5  the gerund
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.146. 
Grammar notes
Sts who used English File Pre-intermediate have learned 
rules for using gerunds (or -ing forms) and the infinitive 
(with to) before, but separately. In this lesson, they are 
brought together.
Sts will see in this lesson that there are three common 
verb forms in English: to go (infinitive with to), go (infinitive 
without to), and going (gerund or -ing form).
 !   Like is listed as a verb which takes the gerund; however, 
Sts may hear or see it used with the infinitive with to, e.g. 
in American English, and they will be understood using 
either form. However, in British English there is a subtle 
difference in meaning, which you may want to point out 
to your Sts. Compare:
I like getting up early in the morning. = I enjoy it.
I like to get up early in the morning. = I think it is a good idea 
to do this (but I don't necessarily enjoy doing it). 
Verbs which can take either the gerund or infinitive, but 
with a different meaning, will be focused on in more detail 
in English File Upper-intermediate.
Emphasize the importance of learning which verb form 
to use after a particular verb or construction, and give Sts 
plenty of practice. In time, they will develop an instinctive 
feel for whether a gerund or infinitive is required.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 8.6, 
e 8.7 and e 8.8 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
1	 a  running = in charge of, managing
	
b  running = as a sport
2	 a  was fired = lost her job
	
b  fired = shot
3	 a  work = it’s my job.
	
b  doesn’t work = is broken
4	 a  market = the number of people who want to buy sth
	
b  market = an open area for shopping
5	 a  company = business
	
b  good company = a nice person to be with
2	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  word stress
a	 Focus on the words and phonetics and ask Sts if they 
can remember how the phonetics show them where the 
stress falls (the syllable after the apostrophe (ˈ) is the one 
which is stressed). 
	 Get Sts to underline the stressed syllable in each word.
b	 e 8.5  Play the audio, pausing after each word for Sts to 
listen and check. You could also ask Sts to tell you how 
each word is pronounced just before you play it.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.5
1	 apply
2	 salary
3	 redundant
4	 experience
5	 overtime
6	 permanent
7	 qualifications
8	 resign
9	 responsible
10	 temporary
	 Now give Sts a few minutes to practise saying the words. 
You could get them to practise saying the words correctly 
by looking only at the phonetics and / or by repeating 
after the audio.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the questions 
and think of the answers for the person they are 
thinking of.
d	 Focus on the example.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Get Sts B to start by telling their 
partner who they are going to talk about. Then get Sts A 
to ask the questions in c. Encourage Sts to give, and ask 
for, as many details as they can.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts with the task, tell them about a 
real person you know for two or three of the questions.
3	GRAMMAR  choosing between gerunds and	
	 infinitives
a	 Focus on the instructions and the questionnaire. Quickly 
go through the questionnaire with Sts and make sure they 
understand all the vocabulary, e.g. instincts, improvise, etc.
	 Get Sts to complete it individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers. They should be able to do this reasonably 
well from what they already know and by instinct. If Sts 
ask for a reason why a particular verb has to be in the 
gerund or infinitive, tell them that they will see all the 
rules in the Grammar Bank.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 109@@
109
8A
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You might want to point out that enclose in 4 
would be the correct verb if Ricardo were sending a letter, 
not an email. 
1  I am writing    2  I have been working    
3  I speak English very well    4  attach    
5  I look forward to hearing from you.    6  Yours faithfully,
	 Focus on the information box A formal email and go 
through it with the class.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to apply for one of the jobs in the 
next World Athletics Championships, so they need to 
write a covering email.
	 Sts should use Ricardo’s email as their model to help them, 
and the box A formal email. If Sts have not had any work 
experience, tell them to invent the details.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their covering email, e.g. 15–20 
minutes.
d	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
5	READING  predicting from evidence
a	 Focus on the instructions and the four questions.
	 Point out the Glossary and give Sts time to read the first 
paragraph and answer the questions. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers to 1–3. Elicit answers to 4 and find out if Sts like 
the programme.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 They are five multi-millionaires who have made their fortunes 
through business.
2	 In the ‘Den’, the room where the programme is filmed
3	 The contestants present their product to the ‘Dragons’ in 
three minutes. The Dragons ask them questions and decide 
whether or not to invest in the contestants’ businesses. If they 
decide not to invest, they say ‘I’m out.’
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
b	 Sts now look at the photos, read about three products 
that were presented on the show, and answer the three 
questions.
	 You may want to explain the names Slappies and Tangle 
Teezer by telling Sts that the idea of the watch is that you 
slap it on your wrist and the strap closes (demonstrate 
slap if necessary), and that hair is tangled when it is 
knotted and hard to comb. 
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to discuss 
their ideas.
	 Elicit opinions from various groups. Don’t tell them if they 
are correct.
c	 Put Sts in groups of three, A, B, and C. Tell them to go to 
Communication Dragons’ Den, A on p.109, B on p.113, 
and C on p.114. 
	 Sts A read about Tingatang, Sts B read about Slappie 
watches, and Sts C read about Tangle Teezer. Go through 
the instructions and make sure Sts know what to do. 
	 Focus on the three information boxes and go through 
them with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  to spend    2  Applying    3  to do    4  to open    
5  not to ask    6  working    7  solving    8  not going    
9  modelling    10  to learn
b
1	 My parents are planning to retire before they are 65.
2	 Rob spends three hours commuting to work and back every 
day.
3	 Mark and his wife agreed not to worry about the problems 
he had at work.
4	 Did you remember to lock the door?
5	 In the end I decided not to buy the shoes because they were 
very expensive.
6	 The manager lets us leave work early on Fridays.
7	 All employees must wear a jacket and tie at work.
8	 Please try not to make any more mistakes in the report.
9	 I don’t mind doing overtime during the week.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to 
choose five topics and to write a couple of words and 
think about what they are going to say. Demonstrate the 
activity by talking about a couple of the topics yourself.
g	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
tell the other people in the group what they have written. 
The others should listen and ask for more information 
when possible. Monitor to check that Sts are using the 
correct forms of the verbs.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 Get feedback from various groups.
4	WRITING  a covering email
	 In this writing lesson Sts practise writing a formal ‘covering’ 
email, i.e. the email you include with your CV when you 
send it to a company or organization in response to a job 
advertisement. The layout and style apply both to letters 
and emails.
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A covering email on p.121.
a	 Focus on the job advertisement and make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
	 In pairs, Sts tell each other which position they could 
apply for and why.
	 Get some feedback and get Sts to tell you what a CV is. 
You could have a show of hands for each position, to see if 
one is more popular than the others.
b	 Focus on the task and explain / elicit what a covering email 
(or covering letter) is (= an email / letter you send when 
you also attach / enclose something else, e.g. a CV or a 
form, where you explain what you are sending and why). 
Remind Sts that the email is formal, and that they should 
circle the expression that they think is more formal in 
each pair.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 110@@
110
8A
1	 F (Joe applied without telling Jake.)
2	 F (They worked very hard and practised a lot.)
3	 T
4	 F (They practised their pitch the night before and they 
prepared the furniture they needed.)
5	 T
6	 F (They were the first contestants.)
7	 T
8	 F (Contestants aren’t allowed to meet the Dragons before 
they go on.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 e 8.10  Now tell Sts to listen to what happened in Part 2 
and answer the question.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Then play 
again if necessary.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
They were offered a job, not investment in their business.
e 8.10
(script in Student’s Book on pp.129–130)
Part 2
I	 What were the Dragons like? 
J	 Well, they’re obviously told by the producers to be really 
unfriendly and aggressive. So I remember thinking, when the 
doors opened and we walked in, what I wanted to do was just to 
smile at one of them. That was my way of making myself relaxed. 
And I looked at Deborah Meaden because she was in the middle, 
and I smiled at her, but she just, you know, stared at me, stony-
faced, to make me feel nervous. And it worked.
I	 Did you think you did a good presentation?
J	 Yeah, we did. But Jake, who usually never gets anything wrong, 
he forgot his first words, and he just never does that. So we both 
thought, when he got the introduction wrong, that it was going 
to go badly, but it didn’t.
I	 So what happened after you’d done your pitch? 
J	 Yeah, well, four of the Dragons said, ‘I’m out’ – they said they 
weren’t interested. So we were feeling pretty depressed – pretty 
negative.
I	 And then?
J	 The last Dragon was Peter. And he’s quite scary – he’s incredibly 
tall: over two metres. And at first he really criticized us. But then 
he told us he had a big chain of camera shops called Jessops and 
they were starting online printing and photo framing as part of 
their business. And then he said, ‘I’ve got fifteen guys in Hong 
Kong trying to do what you guys are doing, but you guys are 
doing it better. I’m going to offer you both a job.’
I	 Were you very surprised?
J	 Totally, because it had never happened on Dragons’ Den before. In 
ten years they’d never offered someone a job.
I	 So he offered you jobs, just like that?
J	 Well, his offer was that he wanted to have our business, and for us 
to work with him at Jessops.
I	 With a good salary?
J	 Very.
I	 So what did you do?
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 2 again and they 
must make notes for questions 1–6.
	 Play the audio again. You could pause it each time Joe has 
answered the interviewer’s question, to give Sts time to 
write.
	 When they have finished reading, they must tell their 
group about their product.
	 Finally, check the answers to the three questions in b in 
the main lesson.
1	 The product the Dragons invested in and has been successful: 
Slappie watches
2	 The product the Dragons didn’t invest in and has been a 
failure: Tingatang
3	 The product the Dragons didn’t invest in, but has been very 
successful: Tangle Teezer
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
6	LISTENING  listening and making notes
a	 Focus on the photo of two Dragons’ Den contestants and 
their product. Elicit from Sts if they think the contestants 
were successful, but don’t tell them yet if they are correct. 
You could elicit opinions with a show of hands.
b	 e 8.9  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–8.
	 Play Part 1 of the interview. 
	 Give Sts time to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
e 8.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
I = interviewer, J = Joe Kenyon
Part 1
I	 Whose idea was it to go on the programme?
J	 It was my idea. I applied without telling my business partner 
Jake. Of course, I never really expected to get on it. But then they 
phoned me from the BBC and said, ‘You’re on the programme,’ so 
that’s when I told him.
I	 Did you spend a long time preparing your pitch?
J	 Yes. We worked really hard, and we practised a lot so that we 
knew the pitch word for word. The evening before the show, we 
actually went for a run – up in Manchester, where it’s filmed – and 
we went running together, just repeating the pitch over and over 
again.
I	 How did you feel when you arrived at the Den?
J	 Erm, well, we were told to get to the set at about eleven o’clock, 
the night before, because you had to prepare everything in 
advance, like any furniture you need, things like that. It was 
freezing cold, and we were exhausted – we didn’t get back to our 
hotel until the middle of the night – and a car came to pick us up 
a few hours later, at half five in the morning.
I	 What time did you actually do your pitch?
J	 Erm, half past eleven. So we were lucky because we were the first 
in that particular programme. 
I	 Why lucky?
J	 Because we didn’t have to wait too long. The other contestants 
spent ages just waiting around. Some of them – the ones who are 
on last – had to wait twelve hours!
I	 Did you meet the Dragons before you went in to do the pitch?
J	 No. You’re not allowed to. Like, if you go to the toilet before you 
go on, someone has to escort you in case you meet a Dragon. So 
the first time you see them is when you go into the Den.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could check whether answers are true 
or false before Sts listen again and correct the false ones.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again and 
this time they must correct the false sentences.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 111@@
111
8A
7	SPEAKING
a	 e 8.12  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Joe 
and Jake on Dragons’ Den. They must listen and order 
questions A–E in the order that Joe and Jake answer them. 
	 Give Sts time to read A–E. Make sure they understand all 
the lexis, e.g. slogan.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
A  4    B  2    C  1    D  5    E  3
e 8.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
Ja = Jake Hayman, J = Joe Kenyon
Ja	 Good morning. I’m Joe and this is Jake. Oh no, sorry, I’m Jake and 
this is Joe, and we’re here to tell you about our new product, 
Frame Again.
J	 Frame Again is an online service for printing and framing your 
photos. At the moment, it’s easy to take a photo, but it’s difficult 
to print and frame it attractively. With Frame Again, it couldn’t be 
simpler. First, you upload your photo to the Frame Again website, 
straight from your phone, tablet, or computer. Then you choose 
the colours of your frame. Then we print, frame, and deliver 
your photo to you the very next day. It’s quick and it’s easy. The 
product’s great, and the service is great.
Ja	 Frame Again is for today’s smartphone photographers and 
Instagram users. That’s why we designed a modern frame which is 
square – perfect for framing Instagram photos. We think it will be 
very popular, because the frames look great in any home or office.
J	 One photo, printed, framed, and delivered to your door, will cost 
twelve pounds ninety-nine.
Ja	 Our slogan is ‘Printed, framed, and delivered in twenty-four hours.’
b	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs. 
	 Give Sts time to think about their product and answers to 
questions A–E in a.
c	 Focus on the Presenting a product box and go through 
it with the class.
	 In their pairs, Sts prepare their pitch, taking turns to speak.
d	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to ‘invest’ in the 
products or say ‘I’m out’ (and explain why). 
	 Now get all the pairs to present their product to the class.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 He smiled at her to help himself to relax, but she just stared at 
him to make him feel nervous.
2	 Jake forgot his first words, which he never usually does.
3	 Four of the Dragons said, ‘I’m out,’ to show that they weren’t 
interested in investing.
4	 Peter is incredibly tall – more than two metres – which makes 
him scary.
5	 Peter owns a big chain of camera shops called Jessops.
6	 Peter offered them a job, which has never happened on 
Dragons’ Den before.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.129–130, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 e 8.11  Focus on the task and elicit some opinions to the 
first question.
	 Now play the end of the interview once the whole way 
through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
Joe and Jake decided not to accept the jobs, because it wasn’t a 
good time and they were enjoying running their own business. 
Yes, they think it was the right decision, and they don’t regret it.
e 8.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
Part 3
J	 It was very stressful because we knew we had to make a decision 
immediately. So Jake said, ‘Yes, let’s take the jobs,’ but I said, ‘You 
don’t want to work for Jessops.’ And he stayed silent and I said, 
‘I don’t want to work for Jessops.’ I mean, neither of us were in a 
position where we could have dropped everything and gone and 
worked for Jessops full-time. It was completely…it was ridiculous.
I	 So you said no?
J	 That’s right.
I	 Have you ever regretted saying no?
J	 No, not for a second. It was still early days for us then, so we were 
still kind of having fun and enjoying running our own business. 
And things worked out well for us. Frame Again was successful, 
and eventually we sold the business this year.
I	 But not to one of the Dragons?
J	 No, but that would have been perfect!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 112@@
112
8B
	8B	 Have a nice day!
1	READING & SPEAKING
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
know what a customer and a sales assistant are.
	 Give Sts time to mark 1–10 C (customer) or SA (sales 
assistant).
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand all the lexis. 
You may want to point out that changing rooms are also 
sometimes called fitting rooms.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs to do the activity.
1  SA    2  SA    3  C    4  SA    5  C    6  SA    7  C    8  C    
9  SA    10  SA
b	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
No. The second one talked too much and kept asking questions.
c	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts understand 
appropriate /əˈprəʊpriət/ (= acceptable for the particular 
circumstances).
	 Now give Sts time to read the article again and underline 
all the questions the second sales assistant asks, and 
decide which ones they think aren’t appropriate.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
He asks seven different questions (he repeats one):
•	 Hello, do you need any help?
•	 Are you going anywhere nice? (x 2)
•	 Where do you work?
•	 Do you like football?
•	 Are you going to watch the England match?
•	 What are you doing after work?
•	 Are you doing anything for the rest of the day?
Many people would think that only the first one is appropriate.
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
2	GRAMMAR  reported speech: sentences and	
	 questions
a	 Focus on the instructions and the example.
	 Give Sts time to write the sales assistant’s questions for 
2–5 and the customer’s answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 ‘Where do you work?’  ‘I work in an office round the corner.’ 
3	 ‘Do you like football?’  ‘It’s OK.’
4	 ‘Are you going to watch the England match?’  ‘No, I’m not.’
5	 ‘What are you doing after work?’  ‘I’m having dinner with a 
friend.’
 G   reported speech: sentences and questions
 V   shopping, making nouns from verbs
 P   the letters ai 
Lesson plan
Shopping and customer service are the main themes for this 
lesson, which revises and extends Sts’ knowledge of reported 
speech.
At the beginning of the lesson, Sts read an article about 
someone’s shopping experience and then discuss how 
helpful or unhelpful sales assistants can be. This article 
provides the context for the presentation of reported 
speech. Grammar is followed by shopping vocabulary and a 
questionnaire.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read five stories about 
good customer service. This leads into a spot on the different 
pronunciations of the letters ai. In Listening, Sts listen to 
a true story about bad customer service, and then talk 
about their own experiences. Vocabulary focuses on how 
to make nouns from verbs. Sts then watch a video about 
complaining, and how to do it politely and successfully, 
and role-play making complaints. Finally, in Writing, Sts are 
shown how to write an email of complaint.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  reported speech: sentences and questions  
p.164 
Communicative  I want to speak to the manager p.193  
(instructions p.174)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  How to complain
For students
Workbook  8B
Online Practice  8B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
PETROL 
FRUIT AND VEGETABLES 
ELECTRONIC DEVICES
Ask Sts to think about when they buy these things. Then ask 
if they prefer to be helped by an assistant or choose / serve 
themselves, and why.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 113@@
113
8B
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 8.15  Focus on the task and the example. Tell Sts they 
are going to hear a question being asked by a man to a 
woman, or vice versa, and they will also hear the answer. 
Then they will hear the question again, and they must 
change it to either He asked her or She asked him and put 
the question in reported speech. They will also need to 
change the answer to reported speech. Tell Sts they will 
hear each mini conversation once before they need to 
make the changes.
	 Play the example and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
	 Then play the audio, pausing if necessary after each 
question and answer to give Sts time to make the change.
e 8.15
M = man, W = woman, N = narrator
1
M	 Where do you live?
W	 I live in the city centre.
M	 Where do you live? (pause) 
N	 He asked her where she lived.
W	 I live in the city centre. (pause) 
N	 She said that she lived in the city centre.
2
W	 What are you doing in the evening?
M	 I’m going to the cinema.
W	 What are you doing in the evening? (pause) 
N	 She asked him what he was doing in the evening.
M	 I’m going to the cinema. (pause) 
N	 He said that he was going to the cinema.
3
M	 Will you be at home at eight o’clock?
W	 No, I’m going out.
M	 Will you be at home at eight o’clock? (pause)
N	 He asked her if she would be at home at eight o’clock.
W	 No, I’m going out. (pause)
N	 She said that she was going out.
4
M	 Where did you buy your bag?
W	 I bought it online.
M	 Where did you buy your bag? (pause) 
N	 He asked her where she had bought her bag.
W	 I bought it online. (pause) 
N	 She said that she had bought it online.
5
W	 Have you seen the new James Bond film?
M	 I’ve seen it twice!
W	 Have you seen the new James Bond film? (pause) 
N	 She asked him if he had seen the new James Bond film.
M	 I’ve seen it twice. (pause) 
N	 He said that he’d seen it twice.
6
M	 Can I try on the jacket?
W	 The changing rooms are over there.
M	 Can I try on the jacket? (pause) 
N	 He asked her if he could try on the jacket.
W	 The changing rooms are over there. (pause) 
N	 She said that the changing rooms were over there.
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts, write on the board:  
HE ASKED  HER… / SHE ASKED HIM…  
HE SAID THAT HE… / SHE SAID THAT SHE….
	 Now play the audio again, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.147.
Grammar notes
Reported sentences
This is a structure which may be new for some Sts and 
not for others (it was introduced in English File Pre-
intermediate, in File 12). The basic principle of reported 
speech is quite straightforward – when you report 
what someone else said, you move the tenses / forms 
‘backwards’, i.e. present to past, will to would, etc. 
 !   Must changes to had to BUT mustn’t stays the same, e.g. 
‘You mustn’t touch it.’ She said I mustn’t touch it.
Point out that that after say and tell is optional.
You should point out that when direct speech is reported 
at a later time or in a different place from when / where it 
was originally said, some time / place words may change 
as well, e.g. tomorrow may change to the next day, this to 
that, etc.
 !   In conversation, people sometimes do not change the 
past to the past perfect.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 confusing tell and say, e.g. He said me that he was ill.
•	 forgetting to change the tenses, e.g. The waiter said he 
will call the manager.
Reported questions
These will probably be new to most Sts. The most 
important things to emphasize are the change in word 
order and the use of if / whether in yes / no questions.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 forgetting to change the word order in reported 
questions, e.g. She asked him what was his name.
•	 using did in reported questions in the past, e.g. They 
asked me where I did live.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 8.13 
and e 8.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the two information boxes, and go through 
them with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 My friend Tim said (that) he was selling all his books.
2	 Emma told me (that) she had booked the flights.
3	 My mother told me (that) my new dress didn’t suit me.
4	 Matt said (that) he might not be able to go to the party.
5	 Jenny said (that) she wouldn’t wear those shoes again.
6	 My brother told me (that) he hadn’t bought me a present.
7	 Luke told me (that) he couldn’t find anywhere to park. 
b
1	 My parents asked me when I was leaving.
2	 She asked him if / whether he had ever been married.
3	 Anna asked Robert if / whether he would be home early.
4	 My sister asked me where I usually bought my clothes.
5	 We asked him if / whether he had worn a suit to the job 
interview.
6	 I asked Lisa if / whether she ever went to the theatre.
7	 Sally asked the policeman if / whether he could help her.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 114@@
114
8B
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to answer 
questions 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  B, D, E    ​2  C, E    ​3  B, D    ​4  A, B, D
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Focus on the five questions and give Sts time to think of 
their choice for each one.
	 Now ask each question to the whole class and elicit some 
opinions and answers.
5	PRONUNCIATION  the letters ai
Pronunciation notes
The letters ai between consonants are usually 
pronounced /eɪ/ if they are stressed, e.g. main, complain. 
Remind Sts that this sound is a diphthong. If you want to 
remind them what a diphthong is, refer them back to the 
information box on diphthongs in Lesson 6B,  
4 Pronunciation on p.87.
Said has an irregular pronunciation /sed/.
The letters ai between consonants but unstressed are 
pronounced /ə/, e.g. bargain /ˈbɑːgən/.
 !   The word again is pronounced by some native 
speakers as /əˈgen/ and by others /əˈgeɪn/.
The letters air are pronounced /eə/.
a	 e 8.16  Focus on the words in the list and tell Sts to listen 
to the audio and underline the stressed syllable.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each word to give Sts time to 
complete the task.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stressed syllable 
in each word before you play the audio.
e 8.16
See words in Student’s Book on p.82
	 Now focus on the three sound pictures and elicit the 
words and sounds: train /eɪ/, chair /eə/, and computer /ə/.
	 Give Sts time to put the words in the list in the correct 
column. Remind them that this kind of activity is easier if 
they say the words aloud to themselves.
b	 e 8.17  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, eliciting the words onto the board in 
columns and getting Sts to tell you the stressed syllable in 
each word.
/eɪ/ 	 claim, complain, contain, email, explain, paid, waiter
/eə/	 airline, fair, hair, repair
/ə/	
bargain, certain
e 8.17
train /eɪ/  claim, complain, contain, email, explain, paid, waiter
chair /eə/  airline, fair, hair, repair
computer /ə/  bargain, certain
	 Now either elicit the answers to questions 1–3 as a class, 
or put Sts in pairs to answer them.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
3	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  shopping
a	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to discuss the 
difference between the pairs of words.
	 Check answers. Alternatively, you could give Sts a minute 
or so to discuss them one by one, and elicit answers 
before moving onto the next pair of words. Model and 
drill pronunciation of the words.
1	 A basket is a small container for holding or carrying things;  
a trolley is a large basket on wheels.
2	 When you use a credit card, you don’t have to pay the 
money immediately; with a debit card, you do.
3	 A receipt is a piece of paper to prove you’ve paid for 
something; a refund is money you get back if you return 
something you’ve bought.
4	 A discount is money taken off the usual cost of something;  
a bargain is a thing bought for less than the usual price.
5	 A chain store is one of a series of similar shops owned by the 
same company; a department store is a large shop divided 
into different sections, which sell a lot of different things.
6	 A library is a place where you can borrow (but not buy) 
books; a bookshop is a shop where you can buy books.
7	 To put on a shirt is to get dressed; to try on a shirt is to put 
it on before buying it.
8	 It fits you means it’s the right size for you; it suits you means 
it looks good on you.
b	 Focus on the questionnaire and quickly go through the 
questions with the whole class.
	 Give Sts time in their pairs to answer all the questions. 
Encourage them to give as much information as they can.
	 Monitor and help Sts with any vocabulary they need.
	 When they have finished, get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   Get the class to interview you first, with some 
or all of the questions in the questionnaire.
4	READING  predicting the end of a story
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
introduction to the article and answer the question.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit some ideas before Sts read the 
introduction.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary. 
Because people can use social networks to tell millions of other 
people about good or bad service.
b	 Before Sts read the five stories, focus on the title of the 
article, Going the extra mile, and elicit / explain what it 
means (= to make a special effort to help somebody). 
	 Now tell Sts to read each story and try to complete the 
last sentence in each one. Tell Sts that the aim isn’t to 
guess the exact words, but how the story ends.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit some 
ideas from Sts, but don’t tell them if they are correct 
or not.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Going the extra mile 
on p.109 to check their answers to b. 
	 When Sts have finished reading, find out with a show of 
hands how many Sts had guessed the endings correctly.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 115@@
115
8B
They immediately complained to United Airlines employees in 
Chicago, but nobody listened to them.
When they arrived in Omaha, Dave discovered that the neck of 
his very expensive Taylor guitar had been broken. It cost him one 
thousand two hundred dollars to get it repaired. For nine months 
he tried to claim compensation from United Airlines. He phoned 
and emailed their offices in Halifax, Chicago, and New York without 
success. In the end, he even suggested that instead of money, they 
could give him one thousand two hundred dollars of flight tickets. 
But after all his complaints and suggestions, United simply said no.
So, what else could a singer-songwriter do? Dave wrote a song 
about his experience, and produced a music video to go with it. The 
song was called United Breaks Guitars. He posted it on YouTube and 
it was a huge hit. The song reached number one on the iTunes music 
store within a week, and the video has had over sixteen million 
views.
After one hundred and fifty thousand views, United Airlines 
contacted Dave and offered him a payment if he agreed to take the 
video off YouTube. He refused, and suggested they gave the money 
to charity. Of course, the impact of Dave’s song went far beyond 
YouTube. Soon newspapers, websites, TV and radio stations all 
over North America were doing stories about the song. Dave was 
interviewed on many radio and TV shows, where, of course, he retold 
the story of how United Breaks Guitars. He did over two hundred 
interviews in the first three months!
Dave Carroll’s favourite guitar was broken, but in the end, United 
Airlines were the bigger losers. After the video had gone viral, the 
BBC reported that United Airlines’ share price had dropped by ten 
per cent within four weeks of the release of the video, which means 
that the company lost an incredible one hundred and eighty million 
dollars. It would have been much cheaper to repair Dave’s guitar!
d	 Tell Sts to read events 1–10 and then put them in 
the order in which they happened. Make sure they 
understand all the lexis, and point out that the first and 
last ones have been done for them. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2	 They saw the baggage handlers throwing their guitars, and 
complained to airline staff.
3	 They got their connecting flight to Omaha, Nebraska.
4	 Dave discovered that his guitar was broken.
5	 He complained again to United Airlines by phone and email, 
but they didn’t help him.
6	 He wrote a song about his experience.
7	 He put a video of the song on YouTube.
8	 United Airlines contacted him and offered him money.
9	 He did lots of media interviews.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you have any 
experience of very good or bad customer services, tell Sts 
about it. 
1	 a  ai when stressed is usually /eɪ/. b  ai when unstressed is 
usually /ə/. Email is the exception.
2	 air is pronounced /eə/.
3	 Said is pronounced /sed/.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again for Sts to listen and 
repeat after each group of words. Then get them to practise 
individually or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
6	LISTENING  understanding the order of events
a	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. If you have 
ever had a problem with luggage when travelling, tell Sts 
about it. 
b	 e 8.18  Tell Sts they are going to listen to a story about 
bad customer service, but first they must listen to six 
extracts from the programme and complete the gaps. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
1  throwing    ​2  complained    ​3  claim    ​4  produced    ​
5  contacted, offered    ​6  reported, dropped
e 8.18
1	 My God! They’re throwing guitars out there!
2	 They immediately complained to United Airlines.
3	 For nine months, he tried to claim compensation.
4	 Dave wrote a song about his experience, and produced a video to 
go with it.
5	 United Airlines contacted Dave and offered him a payment.
6	 The BBC reported that United Airlines’ share price had dropped by 
ten per cent.
c	 e 8.19  Now give Sts time to read questions 1 and 2.
	 Then play the audio the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 To complain about the experience he’d had with United 
Airlines
2	 Because the video went viral on YouTube and was watched 
by millions of people, who found out about United Airlines’ 
bad customer service
e 8.19
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
Hello and welcome to How’s Business? Today we’re going to look at 
how social media can affect businesses. And I’d like to start with the 
story of Dave Carroll, an American singer-songwriter, who had a very 
bad experience with United Airlines.
Dave and his band were flying with United Airlines from Halifax, in 
Nova Scotia, to Omaha, in Nebraska, with a stopover in Chicago. 
As they were waiting to get off the plane in Chicago, they heard 
another passenger say, ‘My God! They’re throwing guitars out there!’ 
As Dave and the other band members looked out of the plane 
window, they were horrified to see that the baggage handlers, who 
were taking the luggage off the plane, were throwing the band’s 
guitars to each other. They couldn’t believe what they were seeing. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 116@@
116
8B
+ ation	  compensation, consideration, demonstration, 
explanation, temptation, valuation
+ ment	  achievement, agreement, argument, attachment, 
improvement, management, payment, treatment
new word	  choice, complaint, delivery, failure, loss, response, 
sale, service, success
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 For Activation, put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) 
tell Sts B (book closed) a verb. Sts B say the noun. Then 
they swap roles. 
	 For c, tell Sts to complete each gap with a noun from a. 
Tell them to be careful with singular and plural nouns.
	 e 8.21  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.21
d
1	 Have you ever been on a demonstration? What were you 
protesting about?
2	 Have you ever opened an email attachment that contained a virus?
3	 Do you often have arguments with your family? What about?
4	 Do you prefer reading grammar explanations in your own 
language, or do you think it’s better to read them in English?
5	 Have you ever made a complaint to a company and got 
compensation?
6	 Do you think that there’s too much choice when you’re shopping, 
for example for a new phone?
7	 In a restaurant, what’s more important for you, the food or the 
service?
	 Put Sts in pairs for Activation and get them to interview 
each other using the questions in c.
	 Get some feedback. 
	 Tell Sts they will be doing Part 2 in a later lesson (9A) and 
tell them to go back to the main lesson 8B.
!   The Vocabulary photocopiable activity for this 
Vocabulary Bank includes Part 2, so should be done in 9A.
8	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Focus on the questions and ask Sts to share their 
experiences of complaining. You could also ask if they 
usually complain about problems, and if they think they 
are good or bad at complaining.
b	 Tell Sts that they are going to watch a video which gives 
tips on how to complain effectively, but first, they will hear 
the top five things people complain about in hotels.
	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the question. 
	 Elicit ideas from various pairs.
c	 Play Part 1 of the video once the whole way through for 
Sts to watch and check their answers to b.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach  any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1	 Air-conditioning (24% of complaints)
2	 Wi-fi (14% of complaints)
3	 Noise (11% of complaints)
4	 Rooms not being clean (10% of complaints)
5	 Slow or bad service (9% of complaints)
7	VOCABULARY  making nouns from verbs
a	 Focus on the instructions and the three nouns from the 
listening. Elicit the verbs from the class.
compensate    complain    pay
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Word-building  
on p.164. 
Vocabulary notes
Making nouns from verbs
Sts have come across word-building in English many 
times before, e.g. study / student and teach / teacher, and 
English File Pre-intermediate has focuses on -ed / -ing 
adjectives and noun formation (e.g. decide 
 decision, 
invite 
 invitation). The examples in this Vocabulary 
Bank are more advanced, and show two common 
patterns of word-building that are useful for Sts to know, 
as well as nouns that are related to verbs, but that are not 
made by word-building.
Point out to Sts that whenever they learn a new word, 
they should also see if there are related parts of speech 
that they could learn at the same time – this is a very 
good way of expanding their vocabulary at Intermediate 
level and beyond. To demonstrate this, you could look 
back at the 1 Verb phrases section of Vocabulary Bank 
Work on p.163, and point out that the verb apply 
becomes the noun application, that promote becomes 
promotion, resign becomes resignation, and retire becomes 
retirement.
One important thing for Sts to notice is that word stress 
very often changes when making nouns from verbs, so 
it’s important that they note pronunciation as well as 
meaning.
	 Focus on 1 Making nouns from verbs and get Sts to do 
a individually or in pairs. Before Sts start, check they know 
the meaning of all the verbs.
	 e 8.20  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.20
Word-building
1 Making nouns from verbs, b
-ation  compensation, consideration, demonstration, explanation, 
temptation, valuation
-ment  achievement, agreement, argument, attachment, 
improvement, management, payment, treatment
new word  choice, complaint, delivery, failure, loss, response, sale, 
service, success
	 Now get Sts to underline the stressed syllable in the nouns.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word, and get Sts to underline the stressed syllable. Then 
play it again and check answers.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 117@@
117
8B
Part 2
J = Joanne, C = chambermaid, P = Phil, R = receptionist, W = waiter
J	 So what should you do if you have one of these problems? What’s 
the best way to complain? Let’s look at three examples of how not 
to do it. Here’s Phil, a hotel guest who’s on a work trip.
C	 Oh, sorry, sir! I’ll come back later.
P	 No, it’s fine, go ahead. It’s so hot in here, I couldn’t sleep. I can’t get 
the air-conditioning to work. Can you see if you can fix it?
C	 I’m sorry, sir, I don’t really know about the air-conditioning.
P	 Well, I’m afraid I don’t know about it either.
C	 I’ll tell reception later.
J	 So what did Phil do wrong? The first rule of complaining is to 
complain to the right person. The chambermaid can’t fix Phil’s 
air-conditioning and it isn’t her job to get it fixed. Phil needs to go 
down and complain to reception – it’s always better to complain 
in person, rather than just phoning. So, let’s take a look at how 
Phil should have complained.
R	 Good morning, sir, how can I help you?
P	 Good morning. I think there’s a problem with the air-conditioning 
in my room – room forty-two. It’s very hot and I can’t get it cooler. 
Could you ask someone to have a look at it before this evening?
R	 Of course, sir. I’ll do it right away.
***
W	 Here you are, sir. Bacon and eggs, toast and an espresso.
P	 I think I asked for brown toast. And a cappuccino, not an espresso.
W	 Brown toast and a cappuccino? I’m very sorry, sir. The order must 
have got mixed up.
P	 Never mind. I’m in a hurry. I’ll have the espresso.
W	 And the toast? I can bring you some brown toast in a few minutes.
P	 OK then. Oh, it doesn’t matter. White toast will be OK.
W	 Thank you, sir.
J	 Here Phil complains to the right person, but there’s no point 
complaining if you don’t want somebody to do something about 
it. If you want to complain successfully, you need to know what 
your ideal solution is and make it clear. So, let’s take a look at how 
Phil should have complained.
W	 Bacon and eggs, toast and an espresso.
P	 I think I asked for brown toast. And a cappuccino, not an espresso.
W	 Brown toast and a cappuccino? I’m very sorry, sir. The kitchen 
must have made a mistake.
P	 If you could change them, that would be great. And as quickly as 
you can please. I don’t have much time.
W	 Of course, sir. I’ll be right back.
***
R	 Good morning, sir. Can I help you?
P	 Yes, I’d like to check out, please.
R	 Of course, sir. I hope you enjoyed your stay.
P	 No I didn’t enjoy it at all. My room was noisy and the wi-fi was 
slow – it was impossible to get any work done. I certainly won’t be 
recommending this hotel; you can be sure of that.
R	 I’m very sorry to hear that, sir.
J	 Why complain about your room and the wi-fi when you’re 
checking out? You should always complain as soon as you notice 
a problem. If you wait till later, the hotel might not have the 
chance to put the problem right. Above all – and this is probably 
the most important tip – never be rude or aggressive. If you 
complain politely, you’re far more likely to be successful. A smile 
will always make people want to help you. So, let’s take a look at 
how Phil should have complained.
R	 Hello again, sir. Can I help you?
P	 Yes, I’ve been trying to do some work in my room and there’s a lot 
of traffic noise from the street. Would it be possible to move to a 
different room, maybe at the back of the hotel?.
R	 I’ll see what we have. Yes, we do have a room free…overlooking 
the garden.
P	 That sounds perfect. I also noticed the wi-fi seems to be very slow. 
It’s like being at home.
R	 I’ll get someone to look at that right away, sir. Here’s your new 
room key. Just let me know if you’re still having problems with the 
wi-fi in ten minutes.
P	 Thanks very much.
J	 Finally, remember that if you’re staying in a good hotel, they’ll 
always want the chance to put things right. But they can’t help 
you if they don’t know there's a problem, so you should always 
complain. And now you know how!
How to complain
Part 1
Joanne
Hello, and welcome to Ten-Minute Travel for all your travel tips, news 
and reviews. Many of us travel a lot, on holiday or for work, and 
that often means staying in a hotel. So today we’re looking at hotel 
problems, and what we should do when things go wrong. The hotel 
industry is a competitive one, and hotels really do want you to enjoy 
your stay, especially in this digital age, where guests can leave good 
or bad reviews instantly. But sometimes things go wrong – let’s start 
by looking at the top five complaints.
Air-conditioning is top of the list, with nearly a quarter of all the 
complaints. At number two, is wi-fi, with fourteen per cent of 
people complaining that the hotel wi-fi is too slow or that they can’t 
connect. Eleven per cent of hotel guests have had problems with 
noise, either from the street outside or from neighbouring rooms. 
And a similar number have complained about their room not being 
clean enough. And finally, in fifth place – service. Nine per cent of 
guests have suffered from slow or bad service, especially with hotel 
breakfasts or room service. 
d	 Tell Sts that they are going to watch Phil, a hotel 
guest, complaining in three different situations. First, 
he complains in the wrong way, then he does it the 
right way.
	 Play Part 2 of the video and pause after Situation 1, when 
the screen says ‘What did Phil do wrong?’ 
	 Elicit ideas.
Situation 1 – the air-conditioning doesn't work.
Phil complains to the wrong person, the chambermaid, but she 
can’t fix it, and it isn’t her job to ask somebody else to fix it.
	 Now play the rest of Situation 1, including the presenter’s 
advice and Phil complaining the right way. 
	 Pause again and elicit how he complains better.
The second time Phil complains to the right person, the 
receptionist, who can arrange for the air-conditioning to be 
fixed.
	 Then repeat for Situations 2 and 3 (including the 
presenter’s final comments).
Situation 2
The waiter brings Phil the wrong things for breakfast – he 
wanted brown toast and a cappuccino. Phil complains to the 
right person, the waiter, but he then accepts the white toast and 
the cappuccino. There’s no point complaining if you don’t want a 
solution to the problem.
The second time Phil asks the waiter to bring the right toast and 
coffee, as soon as possible, so his problem is solved.
Situation 3
Phil’s room was noisy and the wi-fi was slow. Phil complains 
when he’s checking out at the end of his stay, so it’s too late to 
do anything about it. He’s also rude and aggressive.
The second time he complains politely and at the right time, so 
the receptionist can give him a new room and investigate the 
problem with the wi-fi.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 118@@
118
8B
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell 
them to go to Communication I want to speak to the 
manager, A on p.109, B on p.113. 
	 Go through the instructions for the first role-play situation. 
Remind Sts that in the first role-play, Sts A are the 
customer and Sts B are the shop assistant. Tell Sts A to 
start first, saying, Excuse me, I bought…
	 When they have finished role-playing the first situation, 
tell Sts to read the instructions for the second situation. 
This time Sts A are the restaurant manager and Sts B are 
the customer. B starts, Good evening. Are you the manager?
	 Get feedback to see whether different customers achieved 
their objectives or not.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
9	WRITING  an email of complaint
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An email of complaint on p.122.
a	 Focus on the task and tell Sts to read the email and then 
answer the four questions. Tell them not to worry about 
the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1	 Sandra Adams, the Head of Department of John Leavis 
Customer Service
2	 A coffee machine. He ordered it two weeks ago and it still 
hasn’t arrived, but payment has been taken from his credit 
card.
3	 The customer service line
4	 The person he spoke to was rude and could not give him any 
information.
b	 Tell Sts to match the three paragraphs (A–C) in the email 
to what they are about.
	 Check answers.
C	 something positive about the company (if possible), and that 
you expect them to do something
A	 an introduction that gives the context of the problem
B	 a detailed explanation of the problem
c	 Now tell Sts to read the email again and to complete the 
gaps with a word or phrase from the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  Dear    ​2  reference    ​3  in stock    ​4  delivered    ​5  However    ​
6  unhelpful    ​7  service    ​8  forward    ​9  Yours
d	 Tell Sts they are going to write a similar email of complaint 
about something they bought online. They should follow 
the model and use the A formal email box on p.121 to 
help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their email, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
e	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 119@@
119
Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    ​2  a    ​3  b    ​4  b    ​5  c    ​6  b    ​7  a    ​8  b    ​9  a    ​10  a    ​
11  b    ​12  c    ​13  b    ​14  c    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a	
1  terms    ​2  nursery    ​3  secondary    ​4  behave    ​5  boarding
b	
1  on    ​2  ceiling    ​3  gate    ​4  on    ​5  fireplace
c
1  overtime    ​2  shifts    ​3  temporary    ​4  set    ​5  self-employed
d
1  choice    ​2  agreement    ​3  success    ​4  complaint    ​
5  demonstration    ​6  improvement    ​7  qualifications    ​
8  translator    ​9  scientists    ​10  explanation
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  ceiling /s/    ​2  email /eɪ/    ​3  repair /eə/    ​4  roof /uː/    ​
5  spacious /ʃ/
d
1  secondary    ​2  unemployed    ​3  delivery    ​4  apply    ​
5  achievement
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	 2
b
1  obey    ​2  value    ​3  prepared    ​4  depending on    ​5  longer    ​
6  encourage    ​7  losing    ​8  shoppers
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  a
e 8.22
1
I = interviewer, P = Philomena
I	 What was your favourite subject when you were at school?
P	 History, predominantly modern history. That’s the main reason, 
my history teacher is the reason why I became a teacher. She was 
really inspiring and she made the subject come alive.
I	 Were there any subjects you hated?
P	 Maths, again due to bad teachers, and predominantly I just don’t 
have a mathematical brain, so I found it very difficult.
2
I = interviewer, A = Adina
I	 What kind of things do you often buy online?
A	 I buy online clothes, food to get delivered to home, um, and also 
a lot of beauty products as well.
I	 Is there anything you would never buy online?
A	 I don’t think there is anymore, I don’t think there is anything 
anymore that I wouldn’t buy online.
3
I = interviewer, D = Daniel
I	 Have you ever had really bad customer service?
D	 Yes, I have had very bad customer service before.
I	 What happened?
D	 Um, I’ve had a waiter be very rude to me and sort of drop the 
plate on the table when they served the dish.
I	 What did you do?
D	 I did not tip that waiter.
4
I = interviewer, S = Scott
I	 If you could change one thing about your flat, what would it be?
S	 Um, a bit more green. Green space. We have a garden, a little 
patio, which is great, but eh, yeah, a garden with some green 
space would be amazing, obviously for, now summer’s coming, 
hopefully, um, that would be amazing, yeah.
5
I = interviewer, C = Coleen
I	 What’s more important to you about a job, having a good salary 
or doing something you really enjoy?
C	 When I first started work, I thought it was the salary, um, but later 
on in my working life, I decided it was actually more important 
to have really, a job that you really enjoyed, but I’ve come to the 
conclusion that they’re both important. You can do a job that you 
really enjoy, but you know, at the end of the day we all need to 
live, so you do need the salary as well.
	7&8	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 120@@
120
9A
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the story and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 9.1
See story in Student’s Book on p.86
	 Then put Sts in pairs and tell them to summarize what 
happened using the words and phrases in the list.
	 Elicit the summary from the class.
c	 e 9.2  Elicit some ideas about what Sts think happened 
next, but don’t tell them if they are correct.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen to the end of the 
story. Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Elicit what really happened, and ask Sts if any of them 
guessed correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 9.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
The ticket inspector touched my arm. ‘Listen,’ he said, ‘when we get 
to Peterborough station, run as fast as you can to platform one. The 
Leeds train will be there.’  
I looked at him, without really understanding what he had said. 
‘What do you mean?’ I said. ‘Is the train late or something?’ ‘No, it’s 
not late,’ the ticket inspector said. ‘I’ve just radioed Peterborough 
station. The train is going to wait for you. As soon as you get on, it’ll 
leave. The passengers will complain, but let’s not worry about that. 
You’ll get home, and that’s the main thing.’ And he walked away.
I suddenly realized what an amazing thing he had done. I got up and 
went after him. I wanted to give him everything I had, all the money 
in my wallet – but I knew he would be offended. I grabbed his arm.  
‘I, er, just wanted to…’, but I couldn’t continue.
‘It’s OK,’ he said. ‘No problem.’  
‘I wish I had a way to say thank you,’ I said. ‘I really appreciate what 
you’ve done.’  
‘No problem,’ he said again. ‘Listen, if you want to thank me, the next 
time you see someone in trouble, help them. That will pay me back. 
And tell them to do the same to someone else. It’ll make the world a 
better place.’
When the train stopped, I rushed to platform one and, sure enough, 
the Leeds train was there, waiting, and a few hours later I was with 
my mum in hospital. 
Even now, years later, whenever I think of her, I remember the Good 
Ticket Inspector on that late-night train to Peterborough. It changed 
me from a young man who was nearly a criminal into a decent 
human being. I’ve been trying to pay him back ever since then.
d	 Tell Sts to read the four questions, and play the audio again. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1	 The ticket inspector radioed Peterborough station and asked 
them to make the train to Leeds wait for Bernard.
2	 He was incredibly grateful. He wanted to give the ticket 
inspector everything he had.
3	 He asked Bernard to help the next person he sees who’s in 
trouble, and to tell them to do the same to someone else.
4	 It changed him from a young man who was nearly a criminal 
into a good human being.
 G   third conditional
 V   making adjectives and adverbs
 P   sentence rhythm, weak pronunciation of have
Lesson plan
This lesson presents the third conditional in the context of 
different aspects of luck. The lesson begins with Sts saying 
what they would do in different situations where a stranger 
needed help. This leads into Sts reading and listening to the 
writer Bernard Hare talking about how he was helped by 
a stranger when he was a student. Sts then listen to three 
more people talking about being helped by strangers. 
Extracts from the stories provide an introduction to the 
grammar, which is then further practised in pronunciation, 
focusing on the stress patterns in third conditionals.
The second half of the lesson opens with Sts talking about 
how lucky or unlucky they consider themselves to be. This 
leads to a reading activity on some research carried out by 
Richard Wiseman on how to improve your luck. There is then 
a vocabulary focus on adverb and adjective formation, and 
this is consolidated through a writing game. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  third conditional p.165 
Communicative  Sentence race p.194 (instructions p.174) 
Vocabulary Word-building p.216 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook  9A
Online Practice  9A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Draw a horseshoe on the board, with the open part at the 
top. Ask what it is, and tell Sts that in Britain and America, 
people believe that if you find a horseshoe, it will bring you 
good luck, and people often hang them up on the wall. Ask 
if horseshoes also mean good luck in your Sts’ country.
Then put Sts in pairs and ask them to think of things which 
in their country are considered either good luck or bad luck.
Get feedback and write the things in two columns, GOOD 
LUCK / BAD LUCK, on the board. Then ask Sts if they really 
believe in this.
1	LISTENING & SPEAKING  listening to	
	 summarize
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions and go through 
them, making sure Sts know the meaning of hitchhiking. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the six situations.
	 Get some feedback.
b	 e 9.1  Focus on the instructions and the words and 
phrases in the list, making sure Sts know what they mean. 
You might want to tell Sts that Bernard Hare was born in 
1958 in Leeds, in the north of England, into a mining family.
	 Play the audio for Sts to read and listen at the same time.
	9A	 Lucky encounters
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 121@@
121
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each story to give Sts 
time to complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  2    C  3    D  1    E  2    F  1    G  3    H  1    I  2
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
g	 In pairs, get Sts to answer the questions. Check Sts 
understand the meaning of the adjective moving 
(= causing you to have deep feelings of sadness or 
sympathy).
	 Get some feedback. You could also tell Sts what you think.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do these as a whole-class activity.
h	 In pairs, small groups, or as a whole class, Sts answer the 
questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the following on the board to help 
Sts:
• WHERE IT HAPPENED 
• WHAT THE PROBLEM WAS
• WHAT YOU DID TO HELP A STRANGER / WHAT THE STRANGER DID TO 
HELP YOU
Now get Sts to tell their partner / group about their story 
using the prompts to help them.
	 Get some feedback. If you have a story of your own, tell 
the class. You could also ask Sts if, after listening to the 
four stories, they would change any of their responses to 
the situations in 1a.
2	GRAMMAR  third conditional
a	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to match the 
sentence halves.
	 Check answers.
1  C    2  B    3  A    4  D
b	 Focus on the questions and the two sentences. Then 
either get Sts to answer the questions in pairs, or elicit the 
answers from the class.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
2 describes what happened.
1 describes an imaginary situation.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.148. 
Grammar notes
If Sts have a similar structure in their own language, they 
may not have too many problems with the concept, 
but most Sts will have problems with the ‘mechanics’ of 
the structure, i.e. remembering which verb form goes in 
each part of the sentence, and also in understanding and 
producing contracted forms.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 using would have in the if-clause, e.g. If I would have 
known, I would have done something about it.
•	 using the past perfect in both clauses, e.g. If I had 
known, I had done something about it.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 e 9.3  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to three more 
people telling stories about being helped by strangers. 
Make sure Sts know the meaning of stranger /ˈstreɪndʒə/ 
(= a person who you do not know). Model and drill the 
pronunciation. Sts must listen and decide which stories 
happened when the speaker was travelling.
	 Ask Sts to look at the three photos and think of words they 
expect to hear in each story.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Stories 1 and 3
e 9.3
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
Story 1 
When I was seven, my family were on holiday in the USA, and one day 
we drove to the Grand Canyon. The car window was open, and at one 
point, my favourite blanket flew out the window and was gone. I was 
devastated. It was my security blanket and I couldn’t sleep without 
it. Soon after, we stopped for petrol at a service station. I was sitting 
in the car, feeling miserable, eating a sandwich, when a biker gang – 
you know, a group of guys on motorbikes in leather jackets – drove 
into the petrol station. A huge, frightening man with a grey-and-
black beard got off his bike and came to the car. He knocked on 
the window and then pulled my blanket from his jacket pocket and 
handed it to my mum. He then went back to his motorbike. I was so 
happy I ran up to him and gave him my sandwich.
Story 2 
This happened about twenty years ago, but the memory is still really 
vivid. I was recently married, my wife was pregnant, and we had 
very little money because I only had a part-time job. It was a few 
days before payday and I went to a food store to get only what we 
absolutely needed. In all, I bought about ten dollars’ worth of stuff. 
At the checkout, I swiped my debit card. The cashier said, ‘Sorry. 
It says Declined. Try again.’ I asked her to take one item out of the 
basket, and then I swiped again. There was now a line of customers 
behind me. The cashier said, ‘Sorry. Declined again.’ I went on taking 
things out until the only thing I had left was a loaf of bread, and 
then the card was accepted. I took my bread and left – I was feeling 
absolutely humiliated. A few seconds later, I heard the voice of a 
little girl behind me, a girl who was standing with her mother right 
behind me in the line. She gave me a grocery bag full of all the 
things I’d put back. Her mother had bought them for me. I still cry 
when I remember that moment and think how such a small act can 
mean so much for a person in need. 
Story 3
I’m a painter, and a couple of years ago I was travelling by plane to 
see friends, and I’d taken my painting things with me. I forgot about 
the rules about not being able to take liquids in carry-on luggage, 
so when I got to security at the airport, the man took away all my 
paints. I was really angry with myself for being so stupid. But when I 
came back a week later, the security man was there at the baggage 
reclaim area with my paints. Not only had he kept them for me, but 
he’d also looked up the date and time of my return flight so that he 
could be there to meet me.
f	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the three stories again 
and this time they must match three sentences from A–I 
to each story. Give Sts time to read the nine sentences.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 122@@
122
9A
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
b	 e 9.6  Focus on the task and tell Sts that they are going 
to hear five third conditional sentences and they need to 
try to write them down.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board. 
e 9.6
1	 It would have been much quicker if we’d taken a taxi.
2	 She wouldn’t have found out if you hadn’t told her.
3	 The tickets would have been cheaper if we’d booked them earlier. 
4	 If you hadn’t done your homework so quickly, you wouldn’t have 
made so many mistakes.
5	 I would have lent you some money if you’d asked me.
EXTRA IDEA   Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen 
and repeat, copying the rhythm. Then put Sts in pairs and 
get them to practise saying the sentences.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Guess the conditional, A on p.109,  
B on p.113.
	 Demonstrate the activity by writing in large letters on a 
piece of paper the following sentence: IF I’D KNOWN IT WAS 
YOUR BIRTHDAY, I WOULD HAVE BOUGHT YOU A PRESENT.
	 Don’t show the sentence to your Sts.
	 Then write on the board: IF I’D KNOWN IT WAS YOUR BIRTHDAY,  
I 
 YOU A PRESENT (+).
	 Tell Sts that you have this sentence completed on a piece 
of paper and they have to try to guess exactly what it is.
	 Elicit possible completions with a + verb phrase (e.g. 
would have got / would have given). Say Try again if Sts say 
something different, until someone says the phrase  
I would have bought you a present. Then say That’s correct.
	 Now go through the instructions. Emphasize that Sts 
should only complete the gap when their partner says 
That’s correct. 
	 Sts continue in pairs. Monitor and help.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
4	READING & SPEAKING  understanding topic	
	 sentences
a	 Do this in pairs or as a whole-class activity. Make sure Sts 
know what lucky means.
	 With a show of hands, find out how many Sts think they 
are lucky. Get a few Sts to explain why (not).
b	 Tell Sts that they are going to read an article about luck. 
First, focus on the Topic sentences box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then go through topic sentences A–E, making sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Now get Sts to read the article and complete each 
paragraph with one of the topic sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 9.4 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  I    2  F    3  H    4  E    5  A    6  J    7  B    8  G    9  C
b
1	 If you hadn’t taken me to the station, I would have missed 
my train.
2	 We wouldn’t have won the match if the referee hadn’t 
given us a penalty.
3	 You would have enjoyed the weekend if you had come 
with us.
4	 If I hadn’t bought the theatre tickets online, they would 
have been more expensive.
5	 Mike would have forgotten his wife’s birthday if she hadn’t 
reminded him.
6	 If the police had arrived five minutes later, they wouldn’t 
have caught the thief.
7	 If you hadn’t lent me the money, I wouldn’t have been able 
to go away for the weekend.
8	 That girl would have fallen in the river if you hadn’t caught 
her arm!
9	 We wouldn’t have found the hotel if we hadn’t seen the 
signpost.
10	 If I had known about the job, I would have applied for it.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the six sentence beginnings and make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
	 Now give Sts time to complete each one in their own words.
	 Monitor and help, especially with the third conditional.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare sentences.
	 Elicit some sentences for each sentence beginning in d.
3	PRONUNCIATION  sentence rhythm, weak 	
	 pronunciation of have
Pronunciation notes
The main focus here is on getting Sts to say third 
conditional sentences with good rhythm, by stressing the 
information words. You may also want to highlight the 
weak form of would have /wədəv/ and the contraction 
of had in these kinds of sentences. These forms are 
commonly used by native speakers, but at this level, it is 
more important for Sts to be able to understand them 
rather than produce them themselves.
a	 e 9.5  Focus on the instructions and give Sts a moment 
to read the sentences.
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
	 Ask Sts how have is pronounced after would.
Have is pronounced /əv/.
e 9.5
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.87
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 123@@
123
9A
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives and adverbs, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to underline the stressed syllable in 
all the words in the chart.
luck  lucky, unlucky, luckily, unluckily
fortune  fortunate, unfortunate, fortunately, unfortunately
comfort  comfortable, uncomfortable, comfortably, 
uncomfortably
patience  patient, impatient, patiently, impatiently
care  careful, careless, carefully, carelessly
	 Focus on c and get Sts to complete each gap with the 
adjective or adverb made from the noun in bold. Tell them 
to be careful, as some are positive and some negative.
	 e 9.8  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.8
d
1	 The beach was beautiful, but unfortunately it rained almost  
every day.
2	 My new shoes are very comfortable. I wore them all day 
yesterday and they didn’t hurt at all.
3	 He did the exam quickly and carelessly, and so he made lots of 
mistakes.
4	 We were really unlucky. We missed the flight by just five minutes.
5	 Jack is a very impatient driver! He can’t stand being behind 
someone who is driving slowly.
6	 It was a bad accident, but luckily nobody was seriously hurt.
7	 It was raining, but fans waited patiently in the queue to buy 
tickets for tomorrow’s concert.
8	 The roads will be very icy tonight, so drive carefully.
9	 The temperature dropped to minus ten degrees, but fortunately, 
we were all wearing warm coats.
10	 The bed in the hotel was incredibly uncomfortable. I hardly slept 
at all.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to play The sentence game, and read 
the rules together as a class. Make sure everything is clear. 
You could demonstrate the activity by writing on the 
board: FRIEND (7 WORDS), and then PEOPLE IN MY COUNTRY ARE 
VERY FRIENDLY.
d	 Put Sts in teams of three or four and give them five 
minutes to write five sentences. If you can see that they 
need more time, extend the limit.
e	 When the time is up, get each team to read out their 
sentences. The teams with five correct sentences are the 
winners.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write each team’s sentences on 
the board and get the other teams to say if they are correct 
or not.
1  B    2  E    3  C    4  D    5  A
c	 Focus on the instructions and quickly go through 1–5, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and then choose 
the best option in the five multiple-choice questions. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  a    2  b    3  a    4  b    5  c
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 In pairs, Sts discuss the four questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do question 1 with the whole 
class, and then elicit answers to the other questions from 
individual Sts.
5	VOCABULARY  making adjectives and adverbs
a	 Focus on the sentences from the article, and elicit that 
luck is a noun and lucky / unlucky are adjectives.
!   The phrase be lucky may be a problem for some Sts who 
express the same concept in their L1 as have luck.
	 Now focus on questions 1 and 2 and get Sts, either in pairs 
or individually, to answer them.
	 Check answers.
1  luckily    2  unluckily
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Word-building on 
p.164. 
Vocabulary notes
Making adjectives and adverbs
Point out that:
•	 -y and -able are both typical endings for adjectives
•	 un- and im- are common prefixes to make an adjective 
negative, but adjectives formed with the suffix -ful, e.g. 
careful, sometimes (but not always) make the opposite 
adjective with -less, e.g. useful – useless
•	 the suffix -ful = full of or with, -less = without
•	 sometimes there are spelling changes, e.g. the final e is 
dropped before an -ly suffix in, for example, comfortably, 
possibly, etc., and with adjectives ending in consonant 
+ y, the y changes to i before adding the suffix, e.g. 
lucky – luckily, healthy – healthily, etc.
	 Focus on 2 Making adjectives and adverbs and go 
through the Adjective prefixes and suffixes box with Sts. 
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 9.7  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 9.7
Word-building
2 Making adjectives and adverbs, b
luck      lucky, unlucky, luckily, unluckily
fortune  fortunate, unfortunate, fortunately, unfortunately
comfort  comfortable, uncomfortable, comfortably, uncomfortably
patience  patient, impatient, patiently, impatiently
care     careful, careless, carefully, carelessly
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 124@@
124
9B
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  	
	 electronic devices; linking
Vocabulary notes
Sts may ask about the difference between switch on / off 
and turn on / off. Explain that they both mean the same 
thing, but they originated because of the way in which 
power was connected or disconnected. Turn on came into 
use because of things which had knobs that were turned 
right or left to connect or disconnect, and switch on for 
things which had switches. Today they are synonymous 
and can be used for anything, no matter whether it has a 
switch, a knob, or a button.
However, we use turn + up / down, as many devices still 
use a knob which must be turned to increase power, 
volume, etc.
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions and elicit the 
meaning of devices. Model and drill the pronunciation of 
device /dɪˈvaɪs/ and the plural devices /dɪˈvaɪsɪz/. 
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. You could tell 
the class which device you use the most.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the words. Point out that 
the first one (a memory stick) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to match the words 
and photos.
c	 e 9.9  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.9
2	 an adaptor 
4	 a charger
5	 a keyboard 
1	 a memory stick
13	 a mouse
6	 a plug
8	 a printer
10	 a remote control
3	 a router
11	 a socket
9	 a speaker
7	 a switch
12	 a USB cable
	 Then play it again, pausing after each word for Sts to listen 
and repeat.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to test each other by 
covering the words and looking at the photos. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask the class if they know any other 
technology words, e.g. a joystick, a screen, hardware,  
software, etc.
d	 Tell Sts that all the sentences refer to electronic devices 
and the verbs or phrases we commonly use to talk about 
them. 
	 Now give Sts time to match 1–10 to A–J according to their 
meaning.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
 G   quantifiers
 V   electronic devices
 P   linking, ough and augh
Lesson plan
This lesson revises and extends Sts’ knowledge of quantifiers, 
e.g. a lot of / plenty of, too much, not enough, etc. through the 
topic of digital detoxes.
The first half of the lesson starts with a vocabulary focus on 
electronic devices and phrasal verbs associated with these 
devices, and this is followed with pronunciation practice on 
linking words. Then Sts listen to a journalist who decided to 
go on a three-day digital detox course. The first half ends 
with Sts discussing digital detoxes and whether they can 
cope without the internet.
The second half starts with grammar, which is presented 
through sentences related to the internet and electronic 
devices. There is then a pronunciation focus on the 
frequently problematic combinations -ough and -augh.  
Sts then read and discuss an article about how to ‘tidy up’ 
their digital life, i.e. how to deal with emails, old software, 
etc. The lesson ends with a writing focus where Sts 
write a magazine article analysing the advantages and 
disadvantages of smartphones.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  quantifiers p.166 
Communicative  True or not? p.195 
(instructions p.175)
For students
Workbook  9B
Online Practice  9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Bring into class as many of the items in 1b as you can and 
put them on the table, e.g. an adaptor, a charger, a plug, a 
mouse, a speaker, a USB cable. 
Ask Sts to come up and look at what’s on the table for a 
minute. 
Then tell them to go back to their places and, in pairs, try to 
write down the objects that were on the table (meanwhile, 
put the objects in a bag or cover them).
Then take the objects out one by one and see if Sts had 
remembered them, and if any Sts knew how to say them in 
English.
	9B	 Digital detox
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 125@@
125
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding	
	 attitude
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand to be 
addicted to something (= unable to stop using or doing 
something as a habit).
	 Get Sts to answer the questions in pairs, or do it as a 
whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article.
	 Now put them in pairs and get them to answer 
questions 1–3.
	 Check the answer to 1, then elicit opinions for question 2. 
Finally, check the meaning of unplug in 3, and then elicit 
Sts’ answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Digital detox means taking a break from technology, e.g. 
switching off or not using digital devices.
3	 Unplug means ‘disconnect from technology’.
c	 e 9.12  Tell Sts they are going to listen to journalist Anna 
Magee, who went on a three-day digital detox course. 
First, they are going to listen to five things that Anna said 
while she was on the course, and they need to decide if 
she is positive or negative about each one. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  negative    2  positive    3  positive    4  negative    5  positive
e 9.12
1	 Suddenly I felt cut off and panicky.
2	 We had lots of conversations with real-life humans. 
3	 I slept really well, for the first time in months.
4	 I felt really disconnected and lonely. 
5	 I really noticed the beauty of the countryside.
d	 e 9.13  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the whole 
radio programme and they must decide if Anna is positive 
or negative in general about her experience.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
positive
e	 e 9.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  H    2  F    3  D    4  A    5  G    6  I    7  J    8  C    9  E    10  B
e 9.10
1	 H  I changed the heating from twenty degrees to eighteen 
degrees. I turned it down.
2	 F  I disconnected my printer from the computer. I unplugged it.
3	 D  I made the volume on the TV louder. I turned it up.
4	 A  I pressed the ‘off’ button on the TV. I switched it off.
5	 G  I programmed the alarm on my phone for seven thirty.  
I set it.
6	 I  I put my phone charger into a socket. I plugged it in.
7	 J  I pressed the ‘on’ button on my laptop. I switched it on.
8	 C  I got the latest version of an app. I updated it.
9	 E  I put anti-virus software on my computer. I installed it.
10	 B  I removed a photo I didn’t like. I deleted it.
f	 e 9.11  Focus on the Separable phrasal verbs box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and notice how the words 
are linked. Elicit after each phrase whether the -ed ending 
is pronounced /t/, /d/, or /ɪd/.
Pronunciation notes
Linking
These phrasal verbs related to technology are often used 
with the pronoun it followed by the particle, and the three 
words are linked. When the verbs are in the past tense 
(they are all regular), the linking also enables Sts to hear 
clearly how the -ed is pronounced.
As many of these are common phrases (e.g. switch it off, 
turn it down), Sts will benefit from learning to say them as 
one linked phrase.
You may want to point out that in H it and down are 
linked, because it ends and down begins with very similar 
consonant sounds.
e 9.11
See sentences A–J in Student’s Book on p.90
	 Then play it again, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
	 Now play the audio again, getting responses from 
individual Sts.
	 Finally, tell Sts to cover sentences A–J, look at 1–10, and 
say A–J from memory.
g	 Quickly go through questions 1–5, making sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. Encourage them to give reasons for their 
answers.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 126@@
126
9B
1	 F (One in three UK adults checks their phones in the middle 
of the night.)
2	 T
3	 T
4	 F (The second evening, she felt very disconnected and lonely, 
and burst into tears during yoga.)
5	 T
6	 F (She didn’t check her phone on the train.)
7	 F (She’s ‘technology-free’ on Saturdays and doesn’t do email 
after 8.00 p.m.)
8	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit first if the answers are true or false. 
Then play the audio again for Sts to correct the false 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.130–131, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss questions 1–3.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
3	GRAMMAR  quantifiers
a	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to try to guess what the 
missing words in sentences 1–6 are. Tell them not to write 
anything yet.
b	 e 9.14  Tell Sts to listen and complete the gaps in a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Drill the pronunciation where necessary, e.g. 
enough /ɪˈnʌf/.
1  a lot    2  enough money    3  too much    4  a few    
5  big enough    6  too expensive
e 9.14
1	 I used to have a lot of different gadgets, but now I use my phone 
for almost everything.
2	 I’d like to have a better computer, but I don’t have enough money 
to buy one right now.
3	 I spend too much time online. I think I need a digital detox.
4	 I have a lot of friends on Facebook, but only a few of them are 
close friends.
5	 I never watch TV or films on my phone because the screen isn’t 
big enough.
6	 I like Apple products, but I can’t afford them – I think they’re too 
expensive. 
e 9.13
(script in Student’s Book on pp.130–131)
Technology addiction is real, and it’s creating mental health 
problems all over the world. According to a recent survey, one in 
three UK adults is so addicted to their phone that they regularly 
check it in the middle of the night. So it’s no surprise that the idea of 
a ‘digital detox’ is growing in popularity. But what is it actually like to 
go on one?
Time to Log Off is an organization which runs three-day digital 
detoxes in an old country house in Dorset, in the south-west of 
England. People who go on them are not allowed to use digital 
devices at all for three days.
Journalist Anna Magee felt she was addicted to her smartphone, so 
when she read about the detoxes, she decided to go on one.
‘When I arrived, the first thing I discovered was that there was no 
mobile phone coverage, so I couldn’t cheat even if I wanted to! 
Suddenly I felt cut off and panicky. What if something happened to 
my husband? What if something terrible happened in the world?
There were eight other people on the detox with me. At six p.m. we 
met in the living room and handed in our devices – our phones or 
tablets or whatever. People looked scared. I was worried there were 
going to be lots of lectures on psychology, things like that, but no. 
Instead, there was yoga, and walks through the countryside where 
we picked fruit and had lots of conversations with real-life humans. 
The first night I slept really well for the first time in months.
But it wasn’t always easy. The second evening without my phone, I 
felt really disconnected and lonely. At yoga that night, I burst into 
tears, and I felt awful not being able to call a friend. But by the third 
and final day, I had changed. When we went on our walk, I really 
noticed the beauty of the countryside. And I was able to sit still 
on the sofa, reading a book for nearly half an hour without losing 
concentration. I started colouring in pictures in books. I was even 
eating more slowly, in a more relaxed way.
At lunchtime the next day, we got our devices back and said 
goodbye. When I finally managed to get coverage, I hungrily 
checked my phone for messages, likes, comments, news. But 
nothing had really happened. I managed the whole two-hour train 
journey back without checking my phone again, just noticing the 
countryside instead.
It’s now three weeks since I went on the detox and though I can’t 
quite believe it, I have managed to control my use of technology. 
I have one full day unplugged each week, on Saturdays, and I feel 
incredibly rested on Sundays as a result. I don’t do email after eight 
p.m., and that really helps me to sleep. I know they’re tiny steps, but 
I feel that I’ve changed. When I’m chatting to friends, I feel that I’m 
much more present: I’m really focusing on them and not getting 
distracted by my phone. And I find that when I have a break, instead 
of wanting to scroll through Twitter or check WhatsApp, what I really 
want is real-life conversation.
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the programme again 
and this time they must mark 1–8 T (true) or F (false). Give 
Sts time to read sentences 1–8. Remind them to correct 
the false ones.
	 Play the audio again, pausing if necessary after each 
answer to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary. 
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 127@@
127
4	PRONUNCIATION  ough and augh
Pronunciation notes
The aim of these exercises is to help Sts remember the 
pronunciation of a group of high-frequency words which 
all contain -ough / -augh – a combination of letters 
which has rather an anarchic spelling–pronunciation 
relationship.
a	 Focus on the ough and augh box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Then focus on the six columns and elicit the picture word 
and sound for each, e.g. horse /ɔː/, up /ʌ/, etc.
	 Now get Sts to put the words in the correct column. They 
could do this in pairs. Encourage them to say the words 
out loud and to use their instinct to help them decide.
b	 e 9.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.19
horse /ɔː/  bought, brought, caught, daughter, thought
up /ʌ/  enough, tough
phone /əʊ/  although
car /ɑː/  laugh
boot /uː/  through
clock /ɒ/  cough
	 Then ask Sts Which is the most common sound?
The most common sound is /ɔː/.
	 Point out to Sts that this is true especially when there 
is a t after -ough or -augh. This includes the past tense / 
participle forms (bought, brought, caught, taught, and 
thought).
	 Now ask Sts Which four words finish with the sound /f/?
enough, tough, laugh, and cough
	 Emphasize that this is a small group of very common (but 
slightly irregular) words and it is worthwhile for Sts to 
memorize their pronunciation.
	 Finally, play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
c	 e 9.20  Focus on the sentences, which all contain the 
target sounds, and play the audio once the whole way 
through for Sts just to listen. 
e 9.20
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.92
	 Give Sts time to practise saying them in pairs.
	 Finally, elicit the sentences from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Then get Sts to practise saying them.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.149. 
Grammar notes
Quantifiers
Sts should have seen most or all of these forms previously, 
but here they are brought together.
Large quantities
Lots of is a colloquial equivalent of a lot of. Be careful Sts 
don’t say a lots of. You may also want to teach loads of – 
another colloquial equivalent. 
Some nationalities confuse plenty of and full of because of 
L1 interference.
Small quantities
A little and very little are quite different in meaning (the 
second is more negative). The same applies to a few and 
very few.
More or less than you need or want
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 using too much + an adjective, e.g. I’m too much busy.
•	 the position of enough, e.g. I’m not enough tall to open 
the cupboard.
•	 mispronouncing enough
Zero quantity
Point out that no must be used with a noun, e.g. I have no 
time, no brothers and sisters, etc. None is a pronoun, so it is 
used on its own, e.g. ‘Is there any milk?’  ‘No, I’m afraid there’s 
none left.’ 
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 9.15, 
e 9.16, e 9.17 and e 9.18 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  a few    2  much    3  f    4  very few    5  f    6  a lot    
7  too    8  f    9  old enough    10  f
b
1  g A lot!    2  f    3  g There isn’t enough time / There’s no time   
4   g too loud    5  f    6  g isn’t fast enough    7  g too many 
emails    8  g None    9  g only a few people    10  f
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss whether 1–6 in a 
are true for them. Tell them to give as much information as 
possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 128@@
128
9B
6	WRITING  an article – advantages and	
	 disadvantages
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An article – advantages and 
disadvantages on p.123.
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
article. Tell them not to worry about the mistakes.
	 Tell Sts to cover the article. Put them in pairs and get them 
to answer the three questions from memory.
	 Check answers.
1	 It has information about more or less everything, and the 
information is easy to find.
	
It gives a good, basic introduction to a topic.
	
It gives links and references to other sources.
2	 The information is sometimes inaccurate.
	
You don’t know who’s written the articles.
3	 Generally ‘for’
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before Sts read the article, write on the 
board ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF WIKIPEDIA.  
Put Sts in pairs or small groups and tell them to think of two 
advantages and two disadvantages. Then get them to read 
the article to see if their ideas are there.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article again and this time to correct 
the ten mistakes.
	 Check answers, eliciting the corrections onto the board.
1  an    2  millions    3  usually    4  On    5  are    6  it’s    
7  written    8  In    9  you’re    10  to get
c	 Now tell Sts they are going to write a similar article about 
smartphones. As an alternative, they could write about 
an app or website they know well instead – depending 
on your Sts, they might find this more motivating. If they 
do, you’ll need to modify the title, e.g. The pros and cons of 
(app / website).
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to write a list of three 
advantages and three disadvantages of smartphones.
d	 Individually, Sts now number their advantages and 
disadvantages 1–3 with 1 being the most important 
advantage and disadvantage.
	 Focus on the Writing about advantages and 
disadvantages box and go through it with the class.
e	 Write the title of the article on the board:  
SMARTPHONES – ESSENTIAL FOR MODERN LIFE?
	 Go through the introduction with Sts and tell them 
to write three paragraphs following the order in the 
chart, and to use the Writing about advantages and 
disadvantages box to help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their article, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
5	READING & SPEAKING  understanding	
	 technical language
a	 Focus on the questions. Elicit the meaning of wallpaper 
in the penultimate question (= the background pattern 
or picture that you choose to have on the screen of your 
computer, phone, etc.) and explain its non-technology 
meaning, i.e. paper used for covering the walls of a room.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering the 
first few questions.
	 When Sts have finished, they should decide who has a 
more organized digital life.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. 
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the title,  
11 ways to tidy up your digital life. Then set a time limit for 
them to read the 11 headings and tick the ones they need 
to tidy up. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Tell Sts to now read the article and complete the gaps 
with the verbs in the list.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  answer    2  make    3  find    4  Delete    5  keep    6  Update    
7  forget    8  click    9  set up    10  Choose    11  recycle
d	 Focus on the four tips from the article and tell Sts they 
need to look for adjectives in the article with the prefix un- 
to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
Tip 1  unopened, unanswered    Tip 2  Uninstall    
Tip 5  unfollow    Tip 8  unsubscribe
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Tell Sts that this time they need to complete eight 
sentences with the prefix un- and a word from the list. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation. You could tell Sts 
that Ctrl stands for Control.
1  unread    2  undo    3  unfriend    4  unlock    5  unhelpful    
6  unknown    7  unclear    8  uncomfortable
	 You may want to point out that un- is the most common 
negative prefix in English, and is often used to make the 
negative of new ‘technology’ verbs, e.g. unfriend, unfollow.
f	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
tips in the article again and choose three that they think 
would be the most useful for them.
	 When Sts are ready, put them in small groups of three or 
four to discuss their choices.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 129@@
129
PE5
	 5	
Practical English  Unexpected events
e 9.21
P = Paul, J = Jenny, R = Rob
P	 Yeah? 
J	 Hi there. It’s me. Should I come up?
***
J	 Paul!
P	 That’s right. 
J	 Er…hi.
P	 Hi…Are you OK?
J	 Yes, fine. Thanks. It’s just that I, erm…
P	 What?
J	 I wasn’t expecting to see you.
P	 Really? Well, as you can see, I’m still here. It seems Rob just can’t 
live without me. Yeah, he’s going to miss me when I’m gone. But 
not for long. We’ll meet up again when he goes back to London.
J	 Goes back…?
P	 Yeah, he told me last night he was planning to leave New York 
pretty soon.
J	 He what?
R	 Hi, Jenny. Do you want some breakfast? I’ve got bagels.
J	 No, thank you, Rob. Why don’t you two enjoy them?
R	 What’s wrong?
P	 No idea. I just said you were planning to leave New York soon, and 
she… 
R	 You what? I didn’t say that!
P	 You didn’t have to. This New York life isn’t you, Rob, and you  
know it.
R	 No, I don’t! I like New York, and Jenny’s here.
P	 Oh, come on! What’s the big deal? It’s not like you want to 
marry her.
R	 Well…
P	 What? You do?!
R	 Look, Paul. I’m serious about New York and I’m serious about 
Jenny. And I want you to leave. Today.
P	 You’re joking, mate.
R	 No, I’m not. I’ll even buy the ticket.
b	 Focus on sentences 1–6. Go through them with Sts and 
make sure they understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Remind them to correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (Paul tells Jenny that Rob is planning to go back to 
London.)
3	 F (Rob arrives with bagels for breakfast.)
4	 T
5	 T
6	 F (Rob says he will buy Paul’s ticket to Boston.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function    asking indirect questions
Language  Could you tell me why…?, Do you know if…?, etc.
Lesson plan
In this final episode, Sts learn how to ask questions in an 
indirect way, e.g. beginning with Could you tell me…? or  
Do you know…?
In the first scene, Jenny arrives at Rob’s flat, and is surprised 
to find Paul still there, as Rob had said he was leaving. Paul 
then tells Jenny that Rob is planning to go back to the 
UK, and she leaves upset, just as Rob arrives. Rob is furious 
with Paul for telling Jenny something that simply isn’t true, 
and makes it clear to Paul how serious he is about the 
relationship. In the next scene, Rob attempts to explain and 
put things right, but Jenny is not convinced that he is serious 
about the relationship. However, in the final scene, Rob does 
his best to prove that he is.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 5 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 5 
Can you remember? 1–9
Online Practice  Practical English 5 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Elicit from the class what happened in the previous episode. 
Ask some questions, e.g. Where did Rob and Paul go? Where 
did Jenny go? Why didn’t she go with them? 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 4.
1	r JENNY GETS A SURPRISE
a	 e 9.21  Books open. Focus on the photos and ask Sts 
Where is Jenny? (Outside Rob’s apartment building), What 
do you think Rob is saying?, etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
Jenny is upset and Rob is furious.
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 130@@
PE5
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 9.23  Give Sts a minute to read through the extracts 
from the conversation and to think about what the 
missing words might be. 
	 Now play the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  tell    2  know    3  like    4  wonder    5  Can
e 9.23
1
J	 Could you tell me why Paul is still in your apartment?
R	 Well, he couldn’t get a ticket to Boston…
2
J	 Do you know if he’s got one now?
R	 I bought it! He’s leaving this evening.
3
J	 Look, Rob, I’d like to know what you really want. 
R	 What do you mean? 
4
J	 I wonder if you really want to be here. I wonder if…
R	 Jenny, what is it?
5
D	 I need a word. Can you tell me what you decided at the last 
meeting?
J	 Right away, Don. Rob was just leaving.
d	 e 9.24  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in the 
extracts in c. They should listen and repeat the phrases, 
copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to watch or listen 
and repeat.
e 9.24
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on p.94
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversations in c.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
f	 Focus on the Indirect questions box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
complete indirect questions 1–5.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 where the station is
2	 what he said
3	 if / whether she likes me
4	 if / whether your brother is coming tonight
5	 what time the shop closes
2	r INDIRECT QUESTIONS
a	 e 9.22  Focus on the photo and the instructions and 
make sure Sts understand the question.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check the answer. 
No, they don’t.
e 9.22
R = Rob, J = Jenny, D = Don
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Rob.
R	 Paul told me what he said to you, and it’s not true. I’m not 
planning to leave New York.
J	 Oh really? And could you tell me why Paul is still in your 
apartment?
R	 Well, he couldn’t get a ticket to Boston…
J	 But you told me he was going a few days ago. Or was that  
another lie?
R	 No, of course it wasn’t! He couldn’t get a ticket. The buses to 
Boston were all full.
J	 So do you know if he’s got one now?
R	 I bought it! He’s leaving this evening. But that isn’t really the issue 
here, is it? You have to believe me – I don’t want to leave  
New York!
J	 How can I believe you? I know you’re missing London, because 
you said the same thing to Kerri at the restaurant. Look, Rob, I’d 
like to know what you really want. 
R	 What do you mean?
J	 When you and Paul were together, it was like you were a different 
person.
R	 You know what Paul’s like. What was I meant to do? But that isn’t 
the kind of life I want any more. I’m not like that. 
J	 I know you’re not, but I wonder if you really want to be here. I 
wonder if…
R	 Jenny, what is it?
J	 Forget it. 
R	 Jenny…what are you worrying about?
J	 I don’t know if this is going to work out.
R	 You’re not serious.
J	 I'm just…I’m just not sure if we want the same things any more.
R	 That’s crazy…
D	 Jenny – oh, good morning, Rob.
R	 Don.
D	 I need a word. Can you tell me what you decided at the last 
meeting?
J	 Right away, Don. Rob was just leaving.
b	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–5. 
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Paul couldn’t get a ticket to Boston because all the buses 
were full.
2	 Because Rob bought Paul’s ticket to Boston.
3	 Because he told Kerri that he misses London.
4	 He behaved like a different person.
5	 She doesn’t know if it is going to work out.
130
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 131@@
131
PE5
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–6. Make sure Sts realize they must use 
between two and four words only to complete each 
sentence.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to complete the sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  is serious    2  go back to London    3  life in New York    
4  Jenny’s parents    5  the chocolates    6  marry him
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 9.26  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  obvious    2  course    3  either    4  guess    5  What    6  stop
e 9.26
1	 It’s obvious you want to go back.
2	 Of course I miss London, but I love my life here.
3	 And I won’t forget the chocolates this time either.
4	 Well, that’s a start, I guess.
5	 What if I proposed to you?
6	 Rob, stop it. It’s embarrassing.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  2    B  6    C  3    D  4    E  5    F  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
g	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Asking politely for information,  
A on p.110, B on p.114. 
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Tell them 
to focus on instruction a and give them time to write the 
indirect questions. When they are ready, tell Sts A they 
are the tourists and they should turn to Sts B and start by 
saying Excuse me.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 When they have finished, get feedback. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 5.
3	r ROB GETS SERIOUS
a	 e 9.25  Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. What’s happening? How do they look?, etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write the 
question on the board, or get Sts to focus on the question 
and cover the rest of the page. You could elicit some 
opinions before playing the video / audio.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
It’s a happy ending (assuming you think marriage is a happy 
ending!).
e 9.25
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 But what can I do, Jenny? What can I say to convince you I’m 
serious?
J	 I don’t know, Rob. 
R	 Wait! What Paul said just isn’t true. 
J	 It isn’t just what Paul said. It’s obvious you want to go back.
R	 Of course I miss London, but I love my life here. What proof do 
you want of my commitment to New York, to you, to everything?
J	 I don’t know. 
R	 There must be something I can do. 
J	 Look, we’re going to see my parents later. I don’t want us to 
be late.
R	 We won’t be late. And I won’t forget the chocolates this time, 
either.
J	 Well, that’s a start, I guess. 
R	 But Jenny – we need to talk about this.
J	 We don’t have time to discuss it now.
R	 Jenny!
J	 What is it?
R	 What if I proposed to you?
J	 ‘Proposed’?
R	 That’s right. Proposed.
J	 Like, ‘Will you marry me?’
R	 Exactly.
J	 On one knee?
R	 I can do that…So what would you say?
J	 Rob, stop it. It’s embarrassing.
R	 Tell me.
J	 Are you for real?
R	 Yes, I am, actually. What about you?
J	 Yes!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 132@@
10A
132
10A
	 Now tell Sts to go to Communication The year our 
heroes died on p.110 to check their answers. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
	 Get Sts to write the people’s names in the blanks in the 
text headings.
b	 Tell Sts to read the texts about the nine people.
	 Elicit from Sts which people they already knew most 
about and any other interesting information they know 
about them, and which people (if any) they hadn’t heard 
of at all.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the texts the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Focus on the nine questions and quickly go through them 
with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the texts again and answer the 
questions with the people’s initials.
	 Check answers.
1  P (Prince)    ​2  JC (Johan Cruyff)    ​3  CF (Carrie Fisher)    ​ 
4  ZH (Zaha Hadid)    ​5  MA (Muhammad Ali)    ​ 
6  AR (Alan Rickman)    ​7  HL (Harper Lee)    ​ 
8  LC (Leonard Cohen)    ​9  DB (David Bowie)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If there are any famous 
people you admire, you could tell the class.
2	GRAMMAR  relative clauses
a	 Tell Sts to cover the texts and look at extracts 1–5. They 
should complete the gaps with a relative pronoun from 
the list in the rubric.
	 Check answers and ask Sts who each extract is about.
1  which (Harper Lee)    ​2  where, who (Leonard Cohen)    ​
3  which (Carrie Fisher)    ​4  who (Muhammad Ali)    
​5  whose (Zaha Hadid)
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could write these two questions on 
the board: 
1   WHICH TWO RELATIVE CLAUSES GIVE INFORMATION WHICH IS 
ESSENTIAL TO UNDERSTAND WHAT COMES BEFORE? 
2   IN WHICH RELATIVE CLAUSE IS THE RELATIVE PRONOUN NOT 
NECESSARY?
Check answers. For question 2, point out to Sts that the 
relative clause can be left out, as it gives extra information, 
and that this extra information is between commas.
1  2 – who he lived with on the Greek island of Hydra
    3 – which made her famous
2  2 – the Norwegian woman (who) he lived with on the Greek 
island of Hydra
Tell Sts that they will learn the rules in the Grammar Bank 
for when they can leave out the relative pronoun and when 
they can use that instead of who / which.
 G   relative clauses: defining and non-defining
 V   compound nouns
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
The theme of this lesson is icons, both people and objects. 
The first half of the lesson focuses on nine famous people 
who died in 2016. This context is used to revise and extend 
Sts’ knowledge of relative clauses, and leads to a quiz with 
relative clauses. Finally, the new grammar (non-defining 
clauses) is consolidated in a writing activity about Umberto 
Eco, the Italian author of The Name of the Rose.
The second half of the lesson focuses on four British design 
icons, such as the miniskirt. Sts listen to information about 
these icons and how they were designed. They then talk 
about iconic people and objects they admire. The lexical and 
pronunciation focus is on compound nouns, and the lesson 
finishes with a vocabulary race revising compound nouns 
that have been learned earlier in the book.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  relative clauses: defining and 
non‑defining p.167 
Communicative  Relative clauses quiz p.196 
(instructions p.175)
For students
Workbook  10A
Online Practice  10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Elicit from Sts the names of famous national or international 
figures who have died in the last year. Get Sts to say as much 
as they can about their lives and achievements.
Then tell Sts that they are going to look at the lives of nine 
iconic people who died in 2016, a year that had an unusual 
number of celebrity deaths.
1	READING  reading with purpose
a	 Books open. Focus on the photos and read the 
introduction as a class, making sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, especially the meaning of icon here (= a famous 
person that people see as a symbol of a particular idea, 
way of life, etc.).
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other if they 
recognize any of the people in the photos.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
	10A	Idols and icons
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 133@@
10A
133
10	 We all went to the match except Angela, who doesn’t like 
football.    ​
11	 That man who you saw at the party was my boyfriend!    ​
12	 That’s the park where I learned to ride a bike.
b
The following sentences should be ticked: 3, 4, 6, and 11
Sts should circle the following pronouns: 3 which,  
6 which, 11 who
c
3  Beijing, which is one of the world’s biggest cities, has a 
population of over 25 million.
4  Adele’s 25, which was released in 2015, is one of the best-
selling albums of the last ten years.
6  Sally and Joe, who got married last year, are expecting their 
first baby.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to cover the texts  
in 1 and look only at the photos. Focus on the instructions. 
Sts A say one sentence about a person, using a relative 
clause, and Sts B add any information that he / she can.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Elicit information about each celebrity from the class.
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (texts covered) 
tell Sts B what he / she can remember for 1–5. Sts B (texts 
uncovered) help. Then they swap roles for 6–9.
3	SPEAKING
a	 Tell Sts to answer the quiz questions individually. You 
could point out that the answers are all vocabulary that 
Sts have studied earlier in the course.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
1  an extra    ​2  a zebra crossing    ​3  your tongue    ​4  the roof    ​
5  her fiancé
	 Find out with a show of hands if any Sts got all five correct. 
Now tell Sts that they are going to write similar quiz 
questions of their own.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face, and tell 
them to go to Communication Relative clauses quiz,  
A on p.110, B on p.114.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. You could demonstrate 
the activity by doing number 1 (for A and B) with the 
whole class, before getting Sts to write their questions.
	 Monitor to help Sts with the questions.
	 Sts then take it in turns to ask their questions to their 
partner.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.150. 
Grammar notes
Sts who used English File Pre-intermediate have already 
had an introduction to defining relative clauses, but not to 
non-defining ones. Highlight that while defining clauses 
give important information which can’t be left out (e.g. 
Alan Rickman is the actor who played Snape in the Harry 
Potter films), non-defining clauses give extra information 
which can be left out and the sentence will still make 
grammatical sense (e.g. Alan Rickman, who died in 2016, 
is the actor who played Snape in the Harry Potter films). 
Non-defining clauses appear between commas in written 
English.
Although that is a common alternative to who / which 
in defining relative clauses, it cannot be used in non-
defining relative clauses. 
Whom is also sometimes used as a relative pronoun 
instead of who to refer to the object of the verb in the 
relative clause, or after prepositions, e.g. She’s the woman 
whom I met yesterday. He’s the man to whom I spoke 
yesterday. It is much less common and more formal than 
who. You may wish to point out its use to Sts.
Some typical mistakes include:
•	 confusing who and which, e.g. She’s a friend which lives 
near her.
•	 using a personal pronoun, e.g. He is the man who he 
works with my father. 
•	 using that in non-defining relative clauses, e.g. The film, 
that won an Oscar in 2018, will be shown on TV tonight for 
the first time.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 10.1 
and e 10.2 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 Rob and Corinna, who have twins, often need a babysitter.   
​2	 Downing Street, where the British Prime Minister lives, is in 
central London.  ​
3	 The sandwich which you made me for lunch was delicious.   
​4	 The woman who lived here before us was a writer. 
​5	 David Bowie, whose songs inspired us for nearly 50 years, 
died in 2016.   
​6	 My computer is a lot faster than the one which I used to have. ​ 
7	 The Mona Lisa, which has been damaged several times, is 
now displayed behind glass.    ​
8	 Look! That’s the woman whose dog bit me last week.   
​9	 On our last holiday we visited Startford-upon-Avon, where 
Shakespeare was born.  ​
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 134@@
10A
134
e 10.3
1	 In nineteen twenty-four, the Post Office organized a competition 
to design a new phone box. The winner was the architect Giles 
Gilbert Scott.
2	 George Carwardine licensed his design for the Anglepoise desk 
lamp to a company, who brought it out in nineteen thirty-five.
3	 The classic Penguin book cover was designed by Edward Young in 
nineteen forty-six.
4	 In nineteen sixty-six, Mary Quant saw a group of tap dancers at a 
nearby school, which inspired her to create the miniskirt.
b	 e 10.4  Focus on the task and explain that Sts are going 
to listen to an exhibition audio guide and they must 
make notes about the items under each of the four British 
designs. Point out the Glossary. You could elicit the 
meaning of icon, which Sts saw in 1, and tell Sts that it can 
also be used for things.
	 Give Sts time to look at the exercise.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each design to give Sts time 
to make notes.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 10.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
1	 The red phone box
In nineteen twenty-four, the Post Office organized a competition to 
design a new phone box. The winner was the architect Giles Gilbert 
Scott, who also designed Liverpool Cathedral and the building that 
is now Tate Modern. The first phone box was built in London in 
nineteen twenty-six. It was painted red to make it easy to see at a 
distance, although Scott had originally suggested silver with a blue 
interior. With the arrival of mobile phones in the twenty-first century, 
people didn’t need phone boxes any more, and most of them have 
now been removed. However, today they are considered design 
icons of historic importance, and several are now tourist attractions, 
including one of the original ones next to the Royal Academy of Arts 
in Piccadilly. Others have found new lives in local communities, as 
mini-libraries or art galleries, and a very few still survive as working 
phones. 
2	 The Anglepoise lamp
George Carwardine was an engineer who specialized in suspension 
systems for cars. He worked for car manufacturers for several 
years, but when the company he was working for went bankrupt, 
he decided to set up a small company on his own. He had a little 
workshop in his garden, and there he designed a lamp which could 
be moved in different directions, inspired by the human arm. He 
licensed his design to a company which made the springs for his 
lamps, and in nineteen thirty-five they brought out the three-spring 
Anglepoise desk lamp. It was an instant success, and the exact same 
model, the Anglepoise twelve twenty-seven, is still made today. 
Carwardine later developed many variations on the original design, 
including lamps for hospital operating theatres and for military 
aeroplanes. But it is the classic, ever-popular Anglepoise twelve 
twenty-seven which is today considered an iconic British design.
3	 The Penguin book covers
Penguin books was started in nineteen thirty-five, although the 
classic cover was not designed until eleven years later. In nineteen 
thirty-five, publisher Allen Lane was at a bookstall on a railway 
platform, looking for something to read, but he could only find 
magazines. He decided that people needed to be able to buy books 
that were good-quality fiction, but cheap, and not just in traditional 
bookshops, but also on railway stations and in chain stores.
Lane wanted a dignified but amusing symbol for the new books, 
and his secretary suggested a penguin, so graphic designer Edward 
Young was sent to London Zoo to make drawings of penguins. The 
first Penguin paperbacks appeared in the summer of nineteen thirty-
five. They included the works of Agatha Christie and the American 
writer Ernest Hemingway. The classic book cover was designed 
4	WRITING  a biography
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A biography on p.124.
a	 Focus on the instructions and find out if Sts know who 
Umberto Eco is. 
	 Give Sts time to read the biography, and then find out if 
they know any more information about him.
b	 Now focus on the first sentence of the biography, the 
extra information in 1, and the example.
	 Tell Sts to read the biography carefully and rewrite it using 
sentences 2–7. Point out that sentences 2–7 are in the 
correct order. Remind Sts that they might have to change 
or delete some information.
	 Check answers.
2  After he graduated, he worked for Radiotelevisione Italiana, 
where he became friends with artists, painters, musicians, and 
writers.
3  In September 1962, he married Renate Ramge, who was a 
German art teacher. 
4  They lived in an apartment in Milan, where Eco had a library of 
30,000 books.
5  Eco is best known for his novel The Name of the Rose, which 
was published in 1980 and made into a film six years later.
6  The book, which sold 15 million copies and made him an 
international literary star, is a murder mystery set in a  
14th-century Italian monastery.
7  Eco, who had been diagnosed with cancer, died in Milan in 
2016.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to cover sentences 1–7 and read 
the biography to see if they can remember the extra 
information.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to write a biography of an 
interesting or successful person that they know enough 
information about. They should write three to five 
paragraphs, and try to use relative clauses.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their biography, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
d	 Sts should check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
5	LISTENING  listening for facts
a	 e 10.3  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
what a decade /ˈdekeɪd/ is (= a period of ten years).  
Elicit / Explain how we say decades in English, e.g. the 
1960s = the (nineteen) sixties. Elicit some answers and ideas. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
The red phone box – the 1920s
The Anglepoise lamp – the 1930s
The Penguin book covers – the 1940s
The miniskirt – the 1960s 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 135@@
10A
135
7	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
compound nouns; word stress
Pronunciation notes
Compound nouns, e.g. bus stop, have more stress on the 
first word, e.g. bus stop. Depending on their L1, some Sts 
may tend to stress the second word, i.e. bus stop. This rule 
applies whether the compound noun is one word, e.g. 
sunglasses, or two, e.g. traffic jam.
a	 Focus on the instructions and elicit what a compound 
noun is (Sts have seen them in Lesson 2A on p.17, and in 
the Vocabulary Bank Transport on p.155).
	 Now focus on the two columns and tell Sts to match a 
noun from A to one from B to form a compound noun.  
Tell Sts that all the compound nouns are in Lesson 10A.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 10.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to tell you if the compound 
nouns are one word or two.
See script 10.5
The two written as one word are paperback and songwriter.
e 10.5
paperback, book cover, child prodigy, car manufacturer, desk lamp, 
songwriter, phone box
	 Now ask Sts which noun is usually stressed more in 
compound nouns.
The stress is normally on the first noun.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words, 
paying particular attention to stress.
c	 Tell Sts that the answers to questions 1–12 are all 
compound nouns from Files 1–10. They have three 
minutes, in pairs, to answer as many as possible.
	 When time is up, check answers. The pair with the most 
correct answers is the winner.
1  a cycle lane    ​2  the rush hour    ​3  a parking fine    ​ 
4  a tennis court    ​5  a traffic jam    ​6  a seat belt    
​7  the head teacher    ​8  the soundtrack    ​9  science fiction    ​
10  a memory stick    ​11  the ground floor    ​12  a state school
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to write their names on a piece of 
paper and then the answers to the questions. When time is 
up, collect all the pieces of paper and redistribute them. Sts 
correct each other’s answers.
by Young in nineteen forty-six. The books were colour-coded – 
orange for fiction, blue for biography, and green for crime. The way 
people thought about books had changed forever – the paperback 
revolution had begun.  The cover designs of Penguin books have 
changed a lot over the years, but the original nineteen forty-six  
cover, which is considered a design icon, was recently brought back, 
and is also used on mugs, notebooks, and other items.
4	 The miniskirt
The nineteen sixties was famous for many things, from The Beatles 
to the first man on the moon, but the miniskirt remains one of 
the decade’s most long-lasting icons. Mary Quant was a British 
fashion designer who had a boutique called Bazaar in the King’s 
Road, the most fashionable shopping street of the time. As a girl, 
she had always tried to make her school uniform skirts shorter, ‘to 
be more exciting-looking’. In nineteen sixty-six, she saw a group of 
tap dancers at a nearby school in very short skirts, with socks and 
dance shoes. This inspired her to create the miniskirt, which she 
named after her favourite car, the Mini. However, the miniskirt was 
not popular with everyone. Coco Chanel described it as ‘just awful’. 
But Quant’s customers loved it. Before the nineteen sixties, young 
women had been expected to dress like their mothers, but this 
was about young people looking young. Although nineteen sixties 
fashion soon changed to the long, hippie clothes of the nineteen 
seventies, the miniskirt has never disappeared, and is still worn 
today by women of all ages all over the world.
c	 Get Sts to compare notes with a partner.
	 Now play the audio again the whole way through for Sts 
to add more information.
	 Get Sts to compare again with their partner.
d	 In pairs, Sts cover their notes, look at the four designs, and 
see how much they can remember about each one.
	 Elicit as much information as possible from the class for 
each design.
See script 10.4
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell the class 
which design you find the most attractive and why.
6	SPEAKING
a	 This is a free-speaking activity which gives Sts a chance to 
talk about their own icons.
	 Give Sts time to write a name or item in as many of the 
seven categories as possible, and give them a few minutes 
to prepare to talk about them (who they are, what they 
have done, and why they admire them, why they like the 
landmark / object, etc.). Monitor and help Sts with any 
vocabulary they may need.
b	 Put Sts in small groups of, ideally, three Sts (or if this is 
impractical, in pairs).
	 Sts share information about each category.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   Begin by telling Sts about two or three of your 
own answers and explain why.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 136@@
136
10B
1	VOCABULARY & READING  crime
a	 Books open. Elicit answers to the questions. You could 
write down anything Sts know about Jack the Ripper on 
the board, but don’t say whether any of the information is 
correct. Tell Sts that they will find out later.
b	 Tell Sts to read definitions 1–9 and then match them to 
the words in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 10.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Model and drill any tricky words for your 
Sts. You can use the audio to do this. You could also tell 
Sts that suspect can be a verb, but is then stressed on the 
second syllable /səˈspekt/.
e 10.6
1	 detectives
2	 witnesses
3	 victims
4	 murderer
5	 murder
6	 evidence
7	 suspects
8	 solve
9	 prove
	 In pairs, Sts practise saying the words.
d	 Tell Sts they are now going to read about Jack the Ripper. 
They need to complete each gap with a word from the list 
in b. Point out that the first one (murder) has been done 
for them.
	 Give Sts time to do the task, and then get them to 
compare with a partner. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
2  murderer    ​3  victims    ​4  witnesses    ​5  detectives    ​
6  evidence    ​7  prove    ​8  suspects    ​9  solve
e	 Focus on the instructions and the questions, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Now set a time limit for Sts to read the article again and 
answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1  In London in the autumn of 1888    ​2  Five    ​3  Three months  ​
4  A doctor, a businessman, a painter, a sailor, a singer, and a 
member of the royal family
2	LISTENING  listening and making notes
a	 e 10.7  Focus on the six photos and tell Sts that the 
photos at the top are of people who have investigated 
Jack the Ripper.
	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 1 of an interview 
with a retired police inspector. They must write 1 in the 
box next to the person Jan Bondeson suspects, and 
complete the man’s occupation. 
 G 	 question tags
 V 	 crime
 P 	 intonation in question tags
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is murder mysteries: first, the true 
story of Jack the Ripper and three theories as to who he was, 
and then a well-known short story by Ruth Rendell.
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on words 
and phrases related to crime. Then Sts activate the new 
vocabulary by completing an article about Jack the Ripper. 
In Listening, Sts listen to an expert on Jack the Ripper giving 
his opinion about three people’s theories on who Jack the 
Ripper was. The grammar focus is question tags, which are 
further practised in Pronunciation and Speaking.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read and answer 
questions about the first two parts of the Ruth Rendell 
short story called May and June, and then they listen to and 
answer questions on the third part. The lesson ends with a 
video about Ruth Rendell and Agatha Christie.
If you would like to end the last lesson without the book, 
there is a Communicative revision photocopiable activity on 
p.198 (instructions p.175).
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  question tags p.168 
Communicative  Four little mysteries p.197 
(instructions p.175) 
Revision p.198 (instructions p.175) 
Vocabulary  Revision: Phrasal verbs p.217 
(instructions p.202)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Queens of crime
For students
Workbook  10B
Online Practice  10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the word MURDER on the board and elicit what it means 
and how it’s pronounced /ˈmɜːdə/. 
Then give Sts, in pairs, three minutes to brainstorm as many 
words connected with murder as they can.
Elicit their suggestions onto the board.
Possible words include:
murderer, kill, victim, detective, knife, gun, police, police station, 
body, blood, suspect, crime, witness, etc.
Finally, ask Sts if they can think of a famous British murderer 
from the past. Tell Sts they are going to learn about one in 
the lesson.
	10B	And the murderer is…
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 137@@
137
10B
e 10.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
Part 2
I	 The next recent theory I’m interested in comes from the film 
director Bruce Robinson, who wrote a book in twenty sixteen 
called They All Love Jack. What can you tell us about it? 
M	 Bruce Robinson is convinced that Jack the Ripper was in fact 
Michael Maybrick, the brother of one of the original suspects, 
James Maybrick. He thinks that the style of the murders indicates 
that there was a connection with the Freemasons – which both 
brothers were. 
I	 What did Michael do?
M	 He was a popular singer and composer of songs at the time, and 
Robinson thinks that the Ripper’s letters are similar in style to 
some of his songs, and the fact that they were posted from so 
many different parts of the UK makes sense because Michael was 
on tour at the time. Robinson thinks he was a psychopath and 
was responsible for at least sixteen more murders that took place 
in England later. He even thinks that Michael went on to murder 
his brother James.
I	 But he was never arrested, was he?
M	 No, he wasn’t. However, Bruce thinks that by eighteen ninety-
three the police had begun to suspect him, but because many 
of the police themselves were Freemasons, they allowed him to 
escape to the Isle of Wight, where he lived for the rest of his life.
I	 And what do you think?
M	 I think the book is well researched, but I don’t really believe his 
conspiracy theory that the police knew it was Michael and let 
him get away. I think the reason the Ripper was never caught was 
because the police were incompetent, not corrupt.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen again and this 
time they need to complete the second column in the 
chart in b.
	 Before playing the audio, read the definition of the 
Freemasons and the Isle of Wight in the Glossary.
	 Then play the audio again the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
what evidence there is  The Ripper’s letters are similar in style 
to some of his songs. The letters were posted from different 
parts of the UK, and Maybrick was on tour at the time.
what Inspector Morton thinks  He doesn’t believe this theory.
	 Finally, tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 3 – Patricia 
Cornwell’s theory. The only name remaining in a is 
Walter Sickert, so this time Sts only need to complete his 
occupation.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
3	 Walter Sickert, a painter
e 10.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
Part 3
I	 Finally, let’s talk about Patricia Cornwell’s research. In her two 
thousand and two book Jack the Ripper – Case Closed, she said 
that she had identified the murderer and that she was convinced 
that Jack the Ripper was in fact Walter Sickert, the painter. What 
evidence did she put forward to support this claim?
M	 Well, she mainly used DNA analysis. She actually spent over two 
million pounds buying thirty-two paintings by Sickert. She cut up 
one of them to get the DNA from it – people in the art world were 
furious.
I	 I can imagine.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Hendrik de Jong, a sailor
e 10.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
I = interviewer, M = Inspector Morton
Part 1
I	 Good morning, and thank you for coming, Mr Morton – or should 
it be Inspector Morton? You were a detective with Scotland Yard, 
weren’t you?
M	 Yes, that’s right. For twenty-five years. I retired last year. 
I	 People today are still fascinated by the identity of Jack the 
Ripper, over one hundred and thirty years after the crimes were 
committed. It’s incredible, isn’t it?
M	 Well, it’s not really that surprising. People are always interested in 
unsolved murders – and Jack the Ripper has become a sort of cult 
horror figure. 
I	 So what can you tell us about some of the new theories about his 
identity?
M	 Well, a recent new theory was put forward by a crime historian 
called Jan Bondeson. He thinks that Jack the Ripper was a Dutch 
sailor called Hendrik de Jong.
I	 What evidence does he have?
M	 Well, de Jong was definitely a murderer. He killed four women 
in Holland and Belgium, including two of his ex-wives. He also 
travelled to London a lot, and he was there when the Jack the 
Ripper murders took place. He also matches the descriptions we 
have of Jack the Ripper.
I	 How credible is his theory? 
M	 Well, even Dr Bondeson says that it’s impossible to know for 
certain if de Jong was Jack the Ripper. I would say it’s possible, 
but there isn’t really enough conclusive evidence.
b	 Now focus on the chart and tell Sts they are going to 
listen to the interview again and this time they need to 
complete the first column.
	 Then play the audio again the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
what evidence there is  He had a history of violence against 
women, was in London when the murders took place, and he 
matches the descriptions of Jack the Ripper.
what Inspector Morton thinks  Inspector Morton thinks he 
could be the murderer, but there isn’t enough evidence.
c	 e 10.8, 10.9  Now tell Sts they are going to listen to 
Bruce Robinson’s theory (Part 2). The first time they listen, 
they must focus on the photos in a and write 2 in the 
box next to the person Bruce Robinson suspects, and 
complete his occupation.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2	 Michael Maybrick, a musician (a singer and a composer)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 138@@
138
10B
138
3	 Was he ever arrested?
4	 Do you think she’s right?
	 Finally, ask Sts what the difference is between direct 
questions and questions with question tags.
Question tags are used to check that a statement is correct.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.151. 
Grammar notes
Question tags are difficult for Sts to use because they 
need to use the correct auxiliary each time, depending 
on the tense or modal verb they are using. Getting the 
correct intonation can also be tricky. This lesson provides 
Sts with a gentle introduction and focuses on the 
most common use of question tags, which is to check 
information. 
This lesson doesn’t cover the question tag aren’t I? used 
with statements beginning I’m, e.g. I’m late, aren’t I? This 
form is irregular, and isn’t very common for checking 
information.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 10.11 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  I    ​2  E    ​3  A    ​4  F    ​5  C    ​6  H    ​7  K    ​8  D    ​9  B    ​10  J
b
1	 Your brother works at the police station, doesn’t he?
2	 They don’t have any proof, do they?
3	 That man isn’t the murderer, is he?
4	 You were a witness to the crime, weren’t you?
5	 The police have arrested someone, haven’t they?
6	 The woman wasn’t dead, was she?
7	 That girl took your handbag, didn’t she?
8	 He won’t go to prison, will he?
9	 You haven’t seen the suspect, have you?
10	  They couldn’t find enough evidence, could they?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  intonation 
in question tags
Pronunciation notes
The normal intonation for a question tag when we say 
something that we think is correct or true, and that we 
expect the other person to agree with, is a falling tone. 
Examples would include It’s hot today, isn’t it? You’re French, 
aren’t you? (= I’m almost sure you’re French). This is what is 
modelled on the audio in these exercises.
 !   Question tags can sometimes be used as real questions 
with rising intonation, normally to express surprise, or to 
check information that we are not very sure about. This 
use is not focused on here.
M	 And then she compared the DNA from the painting with DNA 
taken from the letters that Jack the Ripper sent to the police. 
Patricia Cornwell said that she was ninety-nine per cent certain 
that Walter Sickert was Jack the Ripper.
I	 And now she’s written a new book with more evidence.
M	 Yes, it’s called Ripper: the Secret Life of Walter Sickert. She says she’s 
found new evidence, including letters which were written by Jack 
the Ripper and by Walter Sickert on the same very unusual type 
of paper. She also points out that some of his paintings are very 
violent and frightening.
I	 But you don’t think she’s right, do you?
M	 Well, I think she might be right. She has a lot of evidence, 
although I don’t think it’s completely reliable. And a lot of people 
think she’s wrong!
I	 So, who do you think the murderer was?
M	 I can’t tell you, because I don’t know.
I	 Do you think we’ll ever solve the mystery?
M	 Yes, I think one day the mystery will be solved. Some new 
evidence will appear that proves one hundred per cent who Jack 
the Ripper was, and we’ll be able to say that the case is finally 
closed. But at the moment, it’s still a mystery, and people like a 
good mystery.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen again and this time 
they need to complete the third column in the chart in b.
	 Before playing the audio, read the definition of DNA in the 
Glossary.
	 Then play the audio again the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
what evidence there is  An analysis suggests that DNA from his 
paintings matches DNA from Jack the Ripper’s letters. Letters 
written by both men are on the same unusual paper. Sickert’s 
paintings are violent and frightening.
what Inspector Morton thinks  He thinks this theory might be 
correct, but he doesn’t know for sure.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as an open-class activity, making sure Sts know the 
meaning of credible /ˈkredəbl/ (= that can be believed).
3	GRAMMAR  question tags
a	 Focus on the instructions and questions 1–4. Give Sts time 
to complete them.
b	 e 10.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  weren’t you    ​2  isn’t it    ​3  was he    ​4  do you
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could elicit ideas first for what the 
two missing words are.
e 10.10
1	 You were a detective with Scotland Yard, weren’t you?
2	 It’s incredible, isn’t it?
3	 But he was never arrested, was he?
4	 But you don’t think she’s right, do you?
	 Now tell Sts to change them to direct questions.
	 Check answers.
1	 Were you a detective with Scotland Yard?
2	 Is it incredible?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 139@@
139
10B
EXTRA IDEA   Write the following gapped sentences on the 
board:
1	 YOU HAVE 
 BROTHERS AND SISTERS, 
 
?
2	 YOU’RE FROM 
, 
 
?
3	 YOU DON’T LIKE 
, 
 
?
4	 YOU’D LIKE TO GO TO 
, 
 
?
5	 YOU CAN’T 
, 
 
?
6	 YOU WENT TO 
 LAST WEEKEND, 
 
?
Put Sts in pairs and get them to try to complete the 
sentences for each other with the correct question tag.
They then read their sentences to each other, checking if the 
information is true.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback.
5	READING & LISTENING  understanding 	
	 referencing
a	 Get Sts to do this in pairs or as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback. If you have 
a favourite crime author, tell Sts who it is and why you 
like them.
b	 e 10.14  Tell Sts they are going to read and listen to a 
short story by Ruth Rendell (1930–2015), a very famous 
English author of thrillers and psychological murder 
mysteries. You might want to tell them that many of her 
novels have been made into TV series and films.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and read at the same time.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and give them time to look at the 
highlighted phrases in 1–5 and explain what they refer to. 
Tell Sts that they need to find each highlighted phrase in 
the story to work out what they refer to.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read and listen to Part 1 of the 
short story the first time, check whether you need to pre-
teach any vocabulary.
1	 was both = pretty and clever
2	 During that time = the time when May was engaged to 
Walter
3	 It was all very unfortunate = the fact that Walter fell in love 
with June and left May 
4	 ‘She’s ruined my life.’ = ‘I will never be happy again.’
5	 This thought = that perhaps Walter was sorry he had married 
June and not her
e 10.14
See Part 1 in Student’s Book on p.102
	 Finally, deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and 
drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 e 10.15  Tell Sts they are going to read and listen to 
Part 2 of the story. 
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–5. 
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through.
	 In pairs, Sts answer the questions.
a	 e 10.12  Focus on the task and the conversation, and 
elicit that the policeman probably already has the 
information and is just checking what he knows.
	 Now play the conversation once the whole way through 
for Sts just to listen. 
e 10.12
P = policeman, S = suspect
P	 Your surname’s Jones, isn’t it?
S	 Yes, it is.
P	 And you’re twenty-seven, aren’t you?
S	 Yes, that’s right.
P	 You weren’t at home last night at eight o’clock, were you?
S	 No, I wasn’t. I was at the theatre.
P	 But you don’t have any witnesses, do you?
S	 Yes, I do. My wife was with me.
P	 Your wife wasn’t with you, was she?
S	 How do you know?
P	 Because she was with me. At the police station. We arrested her 
yesterday.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to complete the question tags, and 
then play the audio again for them to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  isn’t it    ​2  aren’t you    ​3  were you    ​4  do you    ​5  was she
b	 e 10.13  Ask Sts if they think the intonation of the 
question tags goes up or down (demonstrate both ways), 
and elicit that it goes down. Point out that this is the 
normal intonation when you are checking information, 
not asking a new question. 
	 Play the audio, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat the 
policeman’s questions.
e 10.13
1	 Your surname’s Jones, isn’t it?
2	 And you’re twenty-seven, aren’t you?
3	 You weren’t at home last night at eight o’clock, were you?
4	 But you don’t have any witnesses, do you?
5	 Your wife wasn’t with you, was she?
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts extra practice by getting them to 
read the conversation in a in pairs.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication Just checking, A on p.110,  
B on p.114. If there is an odd number of Sts, you should 
take part in the activity yourself.
	 Go through the instructions. Make sure Sts are clear 
that first Sts A (as police inspector) will ask Sts B some 
questions and try to remember the answers, and then 
they will check them with question tags. Then Sts swap 
roles. Demonstrate the activity by taking A’s role and 
asking one student the questions, and then checking.
	 Monitor and help Sts to form the question tags correctly.
	 When both Sts have done their interviews, get feedback 
to find which ‘police inspectors’ had the best memory.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 140@@
140
10B
N	 One night, May woke up and heard a noise. 
M	 A burglar…
N	 she thought. She put on her dressing gown and went to June’s room. 
The bed was empty. She looked out of the window and saw a car 
parked outside the house, and a light in the living room window. 
Then she heard a cry and saw a man running out of the house, 
covered in blood. He got into the car and drove away.
	
May went into the living room. June was standing next to her desk. 
This was a desk which she always kept locked, so May had never been 
able to see what was in it. The desk was open now, and the contents 
were all over the room. There was broken glass on the floor, and a 
gun. May went up to her. 
M	 Are you all right?
J	 Yes, I’m fine. I threw a bottle at him and he ran away. He pointed  
a gun at me, but I wasn’t afraid. He only took a few pieces of silver. 
He heard you coming and he panicked.
N	 Suddenly, May saw a letter which was open in the desk. It was a letter 
to June from Walter, the last one he wrote to her when he was dying.
W	 My darling love, I want to tell you how happy I have been all these 
years with you. If I die, I want you to know that you are the only 
woman I have ever loved.
J	 Could you call the police, please, May?
N	 asked June. 
M	 Yes…
N	 said May. She picked up the gun.
	
The police arrived fifteen minutes later. They brought a doctor with 
them, but June was already dead.
P	 Don’t worry, Miss Thrace, we’ll catch the person who did this…
N	 said the inspector.
P	 But it’s a pity you touched the gun. I suppose you weren’t 
thinking.
M	 That’s right…
N	 said May.
M	 It was the shock. I’ve never had a shock like that, not since I was 
a girl.
g	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again to Part 3. Give them 
time to read questions 1–7. 
	 Play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   The script for the end of the story is not in 
the Student’s Book to make sure that Sts don’t read ahead.  
If you would like Sts to read and listen to the end of the 
story, we suggest you photocopy script 10.16.
1	 Because she thought Walter hadn’t really loved June, and she 
thought June had been punished for what she did.
2	 She thought they had been burgled.
3	 It was messy, with broken glass on the floor.
4	 She had thrown a bottle at the burglar.
5	 It made her angry. 
6	 She picked up the burglar’s gun and killed June.
7	 She said she hadn’t been thinking because of the shock.
h	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell the class 
who you feel sorry for and why.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read and listen to Part 2 of the 
short story the first time, check whether you need to pre-
teach any vocabulary.
1	 a  She refused to speak to her.    
​b  She was reconciled with her.
2	 Because they were both alone and May didn’t have very 
much money. June wanted to recompense May for marrying 
Walter.
3	 Possible answers: Because she hadn’t been very happy with 
Walter and it was painful for her OR She had been very happy 
with Walter and she didn’t want to hurt May.
4	 She was looking for proof that Walter hadn’t really loved June.
5	 Possible answer: Because she now believed that Walter had 
really loved her.
e 10.15
See Part 2 in Student’s Book on p.103
	 Finally, deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and 
drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all the 
words.
	 Give Sts time to find the words in both parts of the short 
story.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
1  changeable, wealthy    ​2  unfortunate, unknown    ​
3  extremely, passionately    ​4  death, marriage    ​ 
5  wedding ring, engagement ring
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
f	 e 10.16  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 3 of the 
story. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
check their ideas in e.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
May sees a letter from Walter to June, saying how much he loved 
her. May picks up a gun and kills June.
e 10.16
N = narrator, J = June, M = May, W = Walter, P = police
Part 3
N	 May never cried now, though June did. 
J	 I’m an old fool; I can’t help it. You’re strong, May, but I’m weak, and 
I miss Walter so.
M	 I missed him, too.
N	 said May.
J	 He was always fond of you…
N	 said June. 
J	 He often talked about you. You have forgiven me, haven’t  
you, May?
M	 As a matter of fact, I have…
N	 said May. 
M	 I think you’ve been punished for what you did. It was a marriage 
without love…
N	 she thought. 
M	 Walter probably talked constantly about me. 
N	 For the first time in forty years, she was happy. 
***
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 141@@
141
10B
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts that they are going to watch a video about two 
crime writers, Ruth Rendell (the author of May and June) 
and Agatha Christie. Focus on the photos and ask if they 
know who is who, and approximately when they lived.
	 Now focus on the questions. Play the video once the 
whole way through for Sts to watch and answer the 
questions.
	 Get Sts to discuss the questions with a partner, and then 
elicit opinions from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Possible answers
Ruth Rendell may have had a more interesting life because she 
worked as a journalist before becoming a writer – but Agatha 
Christie’s life had some interesting events, like her mysterious 
disappearance.
Ruth Rendell’s life may have been happier, as Agatha Christie 
had an unhappy first marriage..
Queens of crime
Crime fiction is loved all over the world: from British writers – like 
Arthur Conan Doyle and Val McDermid – to Americans – like 
Raymond Chandler and Patricia Highsmith  – to Scandinavian and 
European writers – like Henning Mankel and Georges Simenon. But 
two British novelists are called ‘Queens of Crime’ : Agatha Christie 
and Ruth Rendell.
Ruth Grasemann was born in London in 1930. Her father was English 
and her mother was Danish. After she left school, she became a 
journalist.  She married Don Rendell, who was also a journalist.
In 1964, Rendell published the first Inspector Wexford novel From 
Doon with Death. Wexford, a British policeman, who appeared in 
twenty-four novels and some short stories, is still Rendell’s best-
known character, over fifty years after his first appearance. 
In 1975, Ruth and Don Rendell got divorced, but they remarried in 
1977. Ruth Rendell continued to write and she also started to write 
under the pseudonym, Barbara Vine. The Barbara Vine novels are 
also crime novels, but they are much darker and more psychological.
Some of her novels have been made into films, not only in English, 
but in other languages too. The French film, La Cérémonie, was 
adapted from the novel, Judgement in Stone, and Pedro Almodóvar’s 
film, Carne Trémula, is also based on a Rendell novel, Live Flesh.
Ruth Rendell died in 2015. Today she is considered a Queen of Crime, 
but most people would probably agree that the original Queen of 
Crime is Agatha Christie.
Agatha Miller was born in Torquay in the south west of England in 
1890. Her father was American and her mother British. In 1914, she 
married Archie Christie, who was an army pilot.
Christie started to write and published her first novel in 1920, The 
Mysterious Affair at Styles, in which she created a Belgian private 
detective, Hercule Poirot.
In December 1926, Christie became the centre of her very own 
mystery, when she suddenly disappeared from the family home in 
Sunningdale near London. Her disappearance was big news in the 
UK and in the US. For eleven days, the police and the press searched 
for her.  The police also asked Arthur Conan Doyle – the creator of 
Sherlock Holmes – for help, but even he couldn’t solve the mystery. 
The police eventually found Christie in Harrogate in the north of 
England. She apparently couldn’t remember anything and the 
mystery of her disappearance was never solved. Soon afterwards, 
she and Archie divorced.
Agatha Christie continued to write. She also married again – to Max 
Mallowan, who was an archaeologist. This marriage was happy. She 
created another detective, Jane Marple. Miss Marple is a little old, 
English lady. She lives in a small village and solves crimes quietly 
and often without leaving her armchair. She is totally different from 
Hercule Poirot, who Christie described as ‘a complete egoist’. She 
also wrote more personal novels under the pseudonym of Mary 
Westmacott.
Agatha Christie died in 1976, but her books are still read all over the 
world, and watched in films – like Murder on the Orient Express – 
plays – like The Mousetrap –  and television series – like the Miss 
Marple series.
Ruth Rendell and Agatha Christie had many things in common. 
They were both very successful crime writers, and they both wrote 
different novels under pseudonyms.  They both divorced and 
remarried.  And they’re also both strongly associated with the 
detectives they created.
But their approaches were very different. Rendell was always more 
interested in characters, while Christie loved plots. And, while 
Agatha Christie’s readers will read to the end to find out who 
committed the murder, Ruth Rendell’s readers will also want to find 
out why.
b	 Focus on the chart. Give Sts time to make some notes in it 
based on what they remember from watching the video 
once. Remind Sts that they should just be writing notes, 
not full sentences.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their notes, and 
add to them. 
	 Then play the video again for Sts to complete their notes.
	 Check answers.
Ruth Rendell
her life
– born: in London in 1930
– parents: father was English, mother was Danish
– marriages: married twice to Don Rendell in 1950 and 1977
– other things: worked as a journalist, died 2015
her books
– first novel: published 1964, From Doon with Death
– detectives: Inspector Wexford
– pseudonyms: Barbara Vine
– films: La Cérémonie, Carne Trémula, and others
– approach to crime writing: interested in characters, and why 
murder is committed
Agatha Christie
her life
– born: in Torquay, south-west of England, in 1890
– parents: father was American, mother was English
– marriages: married Archie Christie 1914, married Max 
Mallowan 1930
– other things: disappeared for 11 days in 1926
her books
– first novel: published 1920, The Mysterious Affair at Styles
– two detectives: Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple
– pseudonyms: Mary Westmacott
– films: Murder on the Orient Express and others
– approach to crime writing: interested in plots, and who 
committed a murder
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
the video again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn't understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Ask Sts if they’ve read any books by Rendell or Christie, or 
if they’ve seen any TV series or films based on them.  
Open the discussion to other crime writers – you could 
tell Sts about any writers whose books you enjoy.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you would like to end the last lesson 
without the book, there is a Communicative revision 
photocopiable activity on p.198 (instructions p.175).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 142@@
142
Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    ​2  b    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  b
e 10.17
1
I = interviewer, S = Sean
I	 Have you ever helped a stranger or been helped by a stranger?
S	 Yes, a few months ago, I was, um, I was catching a train home 
from work and I went past, um, a little girl with her two 
grandparents, and she was crying and she was really unhappy 
and I thought ‘Oh dear!’ but there’s nothing I can do, um, so I 
went into the station and I went up the stairs, over the bridge, 
um, down the other side, and then on the floor I saw, um, a little 
toy panda, and immediately I knew that that was the little girl’s 
panda and that’s why she was crying. Um, so I ran back up the 
stairs, over the bridge, um, out of the station and I saw the family 
in the car park. I could still hear the, the little girl crying, and I ran 
up and said, ‘Is this yours?’ , um, and the little girl took it and the 
grandparents just said ‘Oh thank you, thank you, thank you’, so 
that was nice.
2
I = interviewer, A = Adrian 
I	 Do you think we rely too much on technology?
A	 Ah, absolutely. I think we really, especially our mobile phones. 
Once upon a, I’ve travelled a lot, so I used to rely on maps and I 
would, you know, the night before, when I’m travelling, I’d map 
out where I was going to go and have it all in my head ready to 
go. Now I just pull out my phone and use Google maps. 
I	 Are there any devices you just couldn’t live without?
A	 Er, yes, probably my mobile phone.
3
I = interviewer, N = Nick
I	 Do you like detective or mystery novels or TV series?
N	 Yeah, I have done, so I, um, I really like the Nordic noirs that were 
very popular a few years ago, so like The Killing and The Bridge 
especially I found really fascinating.
I	 Do you have a favourite author or detective?
N	 Er, yes but can I remember her name… It’s actually the one in The 
Bridge.
I	 Do you usually guess who the murderer is?
N	 Er, I’ll always try. Sometimes I get it, sometimes it’s too difficult, 
yeah.
4
I = interviewer, E = Emma
I	 Do you have a favourite designer?
E	 I’ve recently started wedding dress shopping and I really like the 
dresses by Maggie Sottero.
I	 Why do you like about her clothes?
E	 Er, the dresses are quite a vintage style, um, which is really 
flattering, and when I’ve tried them on, um, I think they’re 
probably the ones I’m going to go for.
5
I = interviewer, C = Coleen
I	 Do you think you are generally a lucky person?
C	 Yes, I do actually. I do think I’m lucky. 
I	 Can you think of a time when you’ve been really lucky?
C	 Um, I can think of an awful lot of times when I’ve been really, 
really lucky. Um, I had a car accident many, many years ago, and 
even the police didn’t know how I’d got out of it alive, so I think 
that really says it all.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test 
Progress Test Files 6–10 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  a    ​7  b    ​8  b    ​9  a    ​10  c    ​
11  a    ​12  a    ​13  b    ​14  c    ​15  a
VOCABULARY
a
1  luckily    ​2  careless    ​3  uncomfortable    ​4  unfortunately    ​
5  impatient
b
1  turned    ​2  set    ​3  unplug    ​4  turn    ​5  switch / turn
c
1  remote control    ​2  keyboard    ​3  adaptor    ​4  socket    ​
5  mouse 
d
1  book    ​2  child    ​3  lamp    ​4  song    ​5  box
e
1  detective    ​2  prove    ​3  victims    ​4  solve    ​5  suspect
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  caught /ɔː/    ​2  cough /ɒ/    ​3  enough /f/    ​4  solve /v/    ​
5  tough /ʌ/
d
1  comfortable    ​2  adaptor    ​3  cable    ​4  witness    ​5  evidence 
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
1  What    ​2  How    ​3  Who    ​4  Book
b
1	 T
2	 F (It’s a must-see attraction.)
3	 DS
4	 F (It takes 110 minutes to walk through the Dungeon.)
5	 T
6	 F (The recommended age is 12 and above.)
7	 DS
8	 T
	9&10	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 143@@
143
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
•	 When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
•	 If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
•	 These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
•	 You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
•	 All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
•	 Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
•	 change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
•	 change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
•	 change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
•	 reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
•	 There is a Grammar activity for each main (A and B) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Communicative activity for each main (A and 
B) lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
•	 There is also an ‘introductory’ worksheet for each section.
The photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC) and the Classroom 
Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display the 
worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. This 
will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the activities, 
and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
•	 Use the two Grammar Introduction worksheets as 
diagnostic tests for your class.
•	 The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
•	 All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
15
5A GRAMMAR past tenses: simple, continuous, perfect
  
Complete the story using the verbs in brackets in the past simple, past continuous, or past perfect. 
Write the answers in the column on the right.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the story. Read the story aloud with the 
verbs in the correct form.
This story 1 
 (happen) to me one really hot summer 
about five years ago. It’s probably the worst thing that’s 
ever happened to me while driving a car. I 2 
 (buy) 
my car the week before and I 3 
 (still feel) very excited 
about it. It 4 
 (not have) air conditioning, but that  
5 
 (not matter) to me because it was my first ever car! 
I 6 
 (know) that my best friend Penny 7 
 (always 
want) to visit a picturesque little village in the mountains 
about 150 kilometres from where we live, so I 8 
 (call) 
her and 9 
 (tell) her that I would take her there the 
following day.
It 10 
 (be) a perfect, hot summer day. The sun 11 
 
(shine) and the sky was blue. While I 12 
 (drive) and we 
13 
 (chat), I 14 
 (see) something out of the corner 
of my eye. It was a wasp which 15 
 (fly) into the car! 
Penny and I both 16 
 (try) to kill the wasp, which then 
17 
 (start) buzzing around inside the car. Suddenly 
the wasp 18 
 (disappear). Then I 19 
 (feel) a pain in 
my arm; the wasp 20 
 (sting) me! I forgot that I 21 
 
(drive), and…BANG! I 22 
 (crash) into the car in front of 
us. Nobody was hurt, but that was the end of our day out.
1happened 
 
2
  
3
  
4
  
5
  
6
     7
  
 
8
  
9
  
 
10
  11
  
12
  
13
  14
  
15
  
16
  
17
  
18
  19
  
20
  21
  
22
My car nightmare
39
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B COMMUNICATIVE How long have you been…?
OCCUPATION
Where do you work or study?
How long / work or study  
there?
Do you enjoy your work or studies? Why (not)?
What do you like most about your job or 
studies?
HOUSE
Do you live in a house or in a flat?
How long / live there?
What’s it like?
Would you like to move somewhere else? 
Where to?
INTERESTS
Do you have a special hobby?  
What is it?
How long / do it?
Where do you do it?
Do you need any special equipment? 
Do you do it alone, or with other people?
SPORT
Do you do any sport or exercise?  
What is it?
How long / do it?
Who do you do it with?
How often do you do it?
What do you like about it?
HOLIDAYS
Is there a place you often go  
to for a holiday?
How long / go there?
What’s special about this place?
Who do you normally go there with?
SOCIAL MEDIA
Are you on Facebook, Twitter,  
Instagram, Pinterest, or any  
other kind of social media?
How long / use it (or them)?
What do you like doing or sharing on social 
media?
How much time do you spend on social media 
sites or apps?
GIVING
Do you give money to a charity,  
e.g. Unicef, Greenpeace,  
Oxfam…?
How long / help them?
Have you ever done volunteer work? Did you 
enjoy it?
Would you consider volunteering for a charity? 
For what kind?
TV
Is there a TV (or online)  
programme or series you  
regularly watch?
How long / watch it?
What’s your favourite thing about it?
Have you recommended it to any of your 
friends / family?
MEETING FRIENDS 
Is there a special place  
(bar, restaurant) where you  
meet up with your friends?
How long / meet there? 
Where is it?
What’s special about it?
LEARNING
Are you learning anything new  
at the moment?
How long / learn it?
Why did you start learning it?
Do you enjoy it? Why (not)?
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
62
a pear
grapes
grilled salmon
an aubergine
prawns
mussels
peppers
a pizza
a cucumber
roast lamb
steamed rice
raw meat
boiled eggs
squid
(to) eat out
a peach
tinned fruit
frozen food
(to) cut down on
fried fish
fresh vegetables
raspberries
(to) cut out
cherries
1A VOCABULARY Food and cooking
Photocopiable activities
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 144@@
144
Grammar activity answers
2A  present perfect and past simple
a	 2  I’ve been    3  did you go    4  finished    5  I’ve been    
6  did you go    7  went
b	 1   2  had    3  did you meet    4  was    5  went    6  ’ve known    
7  got    8  were you    9  ’ve just met
	
2   1  did you go    2  didn’t leave    3  came    4  Have you finished   
5  sent    6  ’ve just made    7  ’ve already had
2B  present perfect + for / since, present 
perfect continuous
a	 2  She’s been playing the violin for two hours.
	
3  She hasn’t been feeling well since last week.
	
4	  They’ve been waiting for the bus for a long time.
	
5  It’s been raining all day.
	
6	  They’ve been watching TV since they got home.
b	 2  A  have the children been doing
	
      B  ’ve been doing, for
	
3  A  have you been going out
	
      B  ’ve been going out since
	
4  A  has Penny been
	
      B  ’s been single since
	
5  A  have you had
	
      B  ’ve had, for
	
6  A  has Pete been trying
	
      B  ’s been trying since
	
7  A  has your sister wanted
	
      B  ’s wanted, since
	
8  A  have you known
	
      B  ’ve known, for
3A  choosing between comparatives and 
superlatives
	
3  ✓
	
4  more comfortable than
	
5  younger than
	
6  ✓
	
7  ✓
	
8  more modern than
	
9  better than
 10  ✓
 11  the most beautiful beach I’ve ever been
 12  the worst actor
 13  ✓
 14  the best city in the world
 15  cheaper
 16  ✓
 17  hotter
 18  the same school as
 19  ✓
 20  ✓
3B  articles: a / an, the, no article
	
3  –    4  the    5  –    6  the    7  –    8  The    9  a    10  an    
 11  –    12  an    13  –    14  – / –    15  the / –    16  a / –    
 17  – / –    18  an / the    19  a / a / The / the    20  – / –
	 Introduction
   What do you remember?
	
2  a    3  b    4  c    5  c    6  a    7  b    8  c    9  a    10  a    11  a    
12  b    13  a    14  b    15  a    16  c    17  c    18  b    19  b    20  a
	 Introduction
   Don’t make these mistakes!
	
2  I was born
	
3  ’ve lived
	
4  wife’s name’s Emilia
	
5  We don’t have any children
	
6  get on with them
	
7  we’d like to have
	
8  We’re looking for a flat
	
9  Emilia is a translator
 10  work very hard
 11  don’t have to do
 12  they look after the house
 13  much free time
 14  enjoy doing
 15  I used to play
 16  I don’t have enough time
 17  I want to get
 18  I have to speak
 19  I often make mistakes
 20  I’m going to go
 21  to do
1A  present simple and continuous, action and 
non-action verbs
a	 2  I’m doing    3  do you come    4  do you have    5  It depends    
6  Do you know    7  Do you mean    8  I’m getting ready    
9  are you living    10  I’m staying    11  are you doing    12  want
b	 2  ’m buying    3  don’t like    4  depends    5  gets    6  do    
7  sounds    8  Do (you) have to    9  have    10  doesn’t work    
 11  meet    12  Do (you) want    13  need    14  is staying
1B  future forms: present continuous, be going to, 
will / won’t
	
2  ’re having (’re going to have’ also possible)
	
3  ’m going to look for 
	
4  ’m having / ’m going to have
	
5  ’m going to be / ’ll be
	
6  ’s going to fall / ’ll fall
	
7  won’t tell
	
8  ’ll check
	
9  ’s going to pass / ’ll
 10  ’re going (’re going to go’ also possible)
 11  Shall I turn
 12  won’t be
 13  ’m introducing / ’m going to introduce
 14  ’m going (’m going to go’ also possible)
 15  ’ll live / ’re going to live
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 145@@
145
6A  passive (all tenses)
a	 2  is watched
	
3  be shot
	
4  was being interviewed 
	
5  Has (the thief) been caught
	
6  Have (you ever) been told 
	
7  has been robbed
	
8  had already been made 
	
9  is being painted
 10  wasn’t offered
 11  be returned
 12  had been stolen
b	 2  is known
	
3  plays
	
4  was directed
	
5  is hit
	
6  lose
	
7  lands
	
8  is killed
	
9  are rescued
 10  believes
 11  received
 12  was nominated
6B  modals of deduction: might, can’t, must
a	 2  might
	
3  must
	
4  can’t
	
5  can’t
	
6  may
b	 1  can’t / might not, must
	
2  can’t, might, might, might
	
3  can’t, must / might, might
	
4  can’t, must
7A  first conditional and future time clauses + 
when, until, etc
	
2  ’ll have to    3  won’t be able to    4  rains    5  is    6  ’ll have    
7  don’t forget    8  get    9  ’ll call    10  arrive    11  goes    
 12  will you let    13  ’ll leave    14  finishes    15  send    16  ’re    
 17  Will you come    18  have    19  won’t come    20  ’s    21  leave    
 22  ’ll tidy    23  get    24  won’t be    25  looks
7B  second conditional, choosing between 
conditionals
a	 3  ’d have    4  lived    5  ’d have    6  came    7  brought    
	
8  ’d have    9  ’d be able to / could    10  was / were    11  moved   
	
 12  ’d take    13  went    14  wouldn’t take    15  ’d feel    
	
 16  didn’t have to    17  would laugh    18  asked
b	 2  ’d buy    3  goes    4  reduce    5  ’d take    6  gets    
	
7  weren’t / wasn’t    8  found    9  ’ll never finish    10  will be
8A  choosing between gerunds and infinitives
	
2  calling    3  to speak    4  not to buy    5  going    6  to look after  
7  do    8  Doing    9  to study    10  drawing    11  to work    
 12  to go    13  doing    14  to hear    15  studying    16  arriving    
 17  cooking    18  to like    19  Eating, sleep    20  to give
4A  obligation and prohibition: have to, must, 
should
a	 3  don’t have to 
	
4  ✓
	
5  have to
	
6  doesn’t have to 
	
7  mustn’t 
	
8  mustn’t 
	
9  should
 10  had to
 11  ✓
 12  shouldn’t
b	 2  mustn’t 
	
3  don’t have to 
	
4  must / have to
	
5  don’t have to 
	
6  must / have to 
	
7  mustn’t
	
8  must / have to
4B  ability and possibility: can, could, be able to
a	 2  be able to
	
3  both possible 
	
4  both possible
	
5  being able to 
	
6  both possible
b	 2  couldn’t 
	
3  be able to 
	
4  can 
	
5  been able to
	
6  couldn’t 
	
7  being able to 
	
8  can’t 
	
9  be able to
 10  be able to
 11  can’t
 12  Being able to
5A  past tenses: simple, continuous, perfect
	
2  ’d bought    3  was still feeling    4  didn’t have    
5  didn’t matter    6  knew    7  had always wanted    8  called    
9  told    10  was    11  was shining    12  was driving    
 13  were chatting    14  saw    15  had flown    16  tried    
 17  started    18  disappeared    19  felt    20  had stung    
 21  was driving    22  crashed
5B  past and present habits and states
	
2  They used to live in Paris, but now they live in Chicago.
	
3  They used to eat takeaway food, but now they (usually) eat 
home-made food.
	
4  They used to live in a house with friends, but now they live in  
a penthouse flat with their dog.
	
5  They used to go camping, but now they (usually) stay in  
five-star hotels.
	
6  They didn’t use to play sport. Now, they both cycle at the 
weekend and Thomas often plays golf.
	
7  They used to ride bikes, but now they drive a sports car.
	
8  They used to wear second-hand clothes, but now they (usually) 
wear designer clothes.
	
9  They used to get up late and go out at night with friends. Now, 
they (usually) stay in, cook, and watch TV.
 10  They used to have lots of friends, but now they have just a few 
close ones.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 146@@
146
8B  reported speech: sentences and questions
a	 2  was
	
3  had been 
	
4  hadn’t been 
	
5  had started
	
6  had enjoyed 
	
7  had loved 
	
8  had been able to
	
9  he was going to be 
 	
10  depended 
 	
11  would be
 	
12  had to
b	 2  if there was too much violence in films
	
3  who the most difficult actor he had ever worked with was / 
who was the most difficult actor he had ever worked with
	
4  what a young person who wanted to go into acting should do
	
5  when he was going to retire
9A  third conditional
a	 2  have missed the start of the film if you’d been here on time.
	
3  ’d seen the sign, they wouldn’t have sat down.
	
4	  have finished the race if she hadn’t fallen over.
	
5  ’d taken my umbrella, I wouldn’t have got wet.
	
6	  have crashed if he’d stopped at the red light.
b	 2  ’d known, ’d have taken
	
3  ’d have enjoyed, ’d gone
	
4  ’d been, wouldn’t have woken up
	
5  wouldn’t have opened, ’d known
	
6  Would you have gone, ’d invited
9B  quantifiers
	
2  much    3  loud enough    4  a few    5  any    6  less    
7  loads of    8  early enough    9  too    10  plenty of    
 11  very little    12  lots of    13  many    14  a lot    15  many    
 16  none    17  fewer    18  too    19  a few    20  no
10A  relative clauses: defining and non-defining
a	 2  which    3  which    4  which    5  which    6  who    7  which    
8  whose    9  who    10  which    11  where    12  which
b	 Sentences in which you could also use that: 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12. 
Sentences in which you could leave out who or which: 2, 3, 4, 5, 10
c	 2  	which many people think is the capital of Australia
	
3  where my grandmother used to work
	
4  whose best known painting is Guernica
	
5  which hit the city of New Orleans
	
6  who died when he was 35
10B  question tags
	
2  do you    3  weren’t we    4  was it    5  is he    6  do they    
7  have you    8  isn’t it    9  won’t you    10  isn’t she    
 11  does she    12  didn’t we    13  are you    14  have you    
 15  wouldn’t you
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 147@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
147
 	
Circle the correct answer, a, b, or c.
INTRODUCTION  GRAMMAR  What do you remember?
1	
My sister 
 a car.
	
a  hasn’t  b  don’t have  c  doesn’t have
2	
 Mr S Roberts live here?
	
a  Does  b  Is  c  Do
3	
My dad 
 at the university.
	
a  teachs  b  teaches  c  teach
4	
I 
 to the cinema with Katie tonight. 
I’ve bought the tickets.
	
a  go  b  ’m going go  c  ’m going
5	
I 
 back from New York this morning.
	
a  flied  b  flown  c  flew
6	
He didn’t 
 the holiday very much.
	
a  enjoy  b  enjoyed  c  enjoys
7	
I 
 a shower when the water stopped 
working.
	
a  had  b  was having  c  were having
8	
A  I’m thirsty.
	
B 
 get you a drink?
	
a  Will I  b  Am I going to  c  Shall I
9	
A  I have a new phone.
	
B  I’m sure you 
 it, just like your 
last one.
	
a  ’ll lose  b  ’re losing  c  lose
 
10	
A  Would you like something to eat?
	
B  No, thanks, 
 lunch.
	
a  I’ve already had  b  I already have had  
c  I’ve had already
 
11	
Have you ever 
 to Paris?
	
a  been  b  gone  c  went
 
12	
The traffic is 
 than it used to be.
	
a  badder  b  worse  c  more bad
 
13	
Apple juice isn’t as healthy 
 orange juice.
	
a  as  b  than  c  that
 
14	
What 
 you do if there was a snake in 
your room?
	
a  will  b  would  c  did
 
15	
I’ll catch the 6.00 train if I 
 work early.
	
a  finish  b  will finish  c  finished
 
16	
You drive much 
 than me.
	
a  slowly  b  slowlier  c  more slowly
 
17	
If I 
 you, I’d look for a new job.
	
a  be  b  am  c  were
 
18	
My bike 
 last week.
	
a  is stolen  b  was stolen  c  stole
 
19	
We were too late. When we arrived at the station, 
the train 
.
	
a  already left  b  had already left  
c  has already left
 
20	
Liam told Alice that he 
 her.
	
a  loved  b  love  c  was loving
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 148@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
148
ACTIVATION
Write a similar paragraph about yourself, where you live, your work and / or studies, your hobbies, and 
why you are learning English.
 	
Read about Roberto. Then look at the bold phrases and correct them. Use contractions where possible.
My name’s Roberto. 1 I have 32 years old and I’m from Chile.	
1 I’m 32 
2 I’m born in Santiago, which is a beautiful city, and	
2
I 3 live there all my life.	
3
I’m married. My 4 wife name’s Emilia. She’s from Santiago,	
4
too. 5 We don’t have some children. We live with Emilia’s	
5
parents in their flat, and I 6 get them on with very well, but	
6
7 we’d like having our own place with a spare room for friends	
7
to stay. 8 We look for a flat at the moment. I work for a	
8
financial company and 9 Emilia is translator. We both	
9
10 work very hardly, often ten hours a day, but luckily	
10
we 11 don’t have do any housework.	
11
Emilia’s parents are retired, so 12 they look the house after.	
12
I don’t have 13 many free time, but when I have the chance	
13
I 14 enjoy to do sport – I often go running in the park near the flat.	14
15 I use to play tennis, but now I have a full-time job,	
15
16 I don’t have time enough. I’m learning English because	
16
I need it for my job. My writing is OK, but 17 I want get	
17
better at speaking. 18 I have to speaking to a lot of clients in	
18
English and 19 I make often mistakes. Next summer	
19
20 I going to go to the UK, maybe to London or Edinburgh,	
20
21 for do a Business English course.	
21
INTRODUCTION  GRAMMAR  Don’t make these mistakes!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 149@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
149
1A  GRAMMAR  present simple and continuous, action and  
non-action verbs
 	
Circle the correct form of the verbs.
Pavel	
What 1 do you study / are you studying?
Elvira	 Humanities.
Pavel	
2 I do / I’m doing Fine Arts. Where  
3 do you come / are you coming from?
Elvira	 I’m from Salamanca, in Spain.
Pavel	
And how many hours of classes 4 do you have / 
are you having a week?
Elvira	
5 It depends / It’s depending on the week, 
but usually about 20 hours. 6 Do you know / 
Are you knowing about the party tonight?
Pavel	
7 Do you mean / Are you meaning the one  
for new students? I can’t go, because  
8 I get ready / I’m getting ready to move  
into my flat tomorrow.
Elvira	 Where 9 do you live / are you living at the 
moment?
Pavel	
10 I stay / I’m staying in a student hostel.
Elvira	 What 11 do you do / are you doing on Sunday 
afternoon? If you 12 want / are wanting, we 
could meet and look around the city.
Pavel	
I’m busy in the afternoon, but what about 
Sunday morning?
Elvira	 Fine. Where shall we meet?
 a
 	
Complete the conversation with the correct 
form of the verbs: present simple or present 
continuous.
Maggie	 Hello John, what a surprise! What 1 are you 
doing (do) here?
John	
The same as you probably! I 2 
 
(buy) a few things for dinner.
Maggie	 How are things? Are you still working at the 
same place?
John	
Yes, but I 3
 (not like) it very 
much. My boss 4
 (depend) on 
me for everything. The worst thing is that she 
always 5
 (get) the credit and I 
6
 (do) all the work!
Maggie	 That 7
 (sound) terrible.  
8
 you 
 (have 
to) go back to work this afternoon?
John	
No, I only work until lunchtime on Fridays 
because I always 9
 (have) 
lunch with my friend Paula. She  
10
 (not work) on Fridays, so 
we usually 11
 (meet) at that 
nice little Italian restaurant in town.  
12
 you 
 (want) to 
come?
Maggie	 I’d love to, but I 13
 (need) to 
get home. My sister 14
 (stay) 
with us for a few days. Some other time!
 b
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 150@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
150
1B  GRAMMAR  future forms: present continuous, be going to,  
will / won’t
 	
Complete the sentences using the verb in brackets + will, shall, or going to, or use the verb in 
the present continuous. Write the answers in the column on the right and use contractions where 
possible. Sometimes two answers are possible.
1	 A	 I can hardly lift this suitcase.
	
B	 Wait. I 
 you with it! (help)	
’ll help
2	 We 
 a party next Friday. Can you come? (have)	
3	 I’ve decided that I 
 a new job. (look for)	
4	 A	 Do you want to come to Dave’s on Thursday?
	
B	 I can’t. I 
 dinner with Sam. (have)	
5	 My sister’s having a baby, so I 
 an aunt in a couple of weeks. (be)	
6	 That little boy’s cycling too fast. He 
 off. (fall)	
7	 A	 Can I tell you a secret?
	
B	 Of course. I 
 anyone. (not tell)	
8	 A	 What time is their flight arriving?
	
B	 I’m not sure. I 
 online. (check)	
9	 Meg didn’t study for the exam, so she doesn’t think she 
 it. (pass)	
 
10	 Did I tell you that we 
 skiing in the Alps next week? (go)	
 
11	 A	 Is the air conditioning on? I’m freezing.
	
B	 Yes, I think so. 
 it off? (turn)	
 
12	 Let’s meet outside the theatre at 7.00. Promise me that you 
 late! (not be)	
 
13	 A	 Your girlfriend’s really nice.
	
B	 Yes, she is. I 
 her to my parents next week. (introduce)	
 
14	 Sorry, but I can’t help you now. I 
 shopping. (go)	
 
15	 Do you think you 
 in this town all your life? (live)	
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the verbs in the correct form.
	13–15	 Excellent. You can use different future forms very well.
	 9–12	 Quite good, but check the rules in the Grammar Bank p.133 for any questions 
that you got wrong.
	
0–8	 This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank p.133. Then ask 
your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 151@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
151
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations in a and b with a partner.
2A  GRAMMAR  present perfect and past simple
 	
Circle the correct verb.
Mike	
So, where shall we go for our honeymoon?
Gina	
I don’t know. Maybe somewhere in North Africa. Have you ever 1 been / gone to Morocco?
Mike	
Yes, 2 I’ve been / I went there.
Gina	
I didn’t know that. When 3 have you been / did you go there?
Mike	
The year after I 4 have finished / finished university.
Gina	
What about Egypt?
Mike	
5 I’ve been / I went there, too.
Gina	
Who 6 have you been / did you go with?
Mike	
With an ex-girlfriend. But we only 7 have been / went to Cairo. Let’s go there.
Gina	
No, let’s go somewhere else.
 	
Complete the conversations with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: past simple or  
present perfect. Use contractions where possible.
1	
Paul	
How long 1 have you been (you / be) married, James?
	
James 	 Twenty-two years! Maxine and I 2
 
(have) our wedding anniversary three weeks ago.
	
Paul	
Where 3
 (you / meet)? At university?
	
James	 No, it 4
 (be) long before that. Actually, 
we 5
 (go) to the same school. We  
6
 (know) each other for a long time. 
What about you?
	
Paul	
I’m divorced. I 7
 (get) divorced a  
year ago.
	
James	 How long 8
 (you / be) married?
	
Paul	
Just a couple of years.
	
James	 So, you’re on your own now?
	
Paul	
Yes, but I 9
 (just / meet) someone new 
and I really like her.
2	
Sophia	 You look exhausted, Jacob! What time  
1
 (you / go) home last night?
	
Jacob	
I 2
 (not leave) until 9.00 and  
I 3
 (come) back in at 7.00 this morning.
	
Sophia	 And what about the report for the boss?  
4
 (you / finish) it yet?
	
Jacob	
Yes, I 5
 (send) it to her a couple of 
minutes ago.
	
Sophia	 Great! You should take a break. I 6
  
(just / make) some coffee. Do you want some?
	
Jacob	
No, thanks. I 7
 (already / have) three 
cups this morning!
 a
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 152@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
152
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the pictures and remember the sentences.
2B  GRAMMAR  present perfect + for / since, present perfect 
continuous
 	
Look at the pictures. What has been 
happening? Use the present perfect 
continuous. Use contractions where possible.
1	 cook / all morning  
He’s been cooking all morning.
2	 play the violin / for two hours  
3	 not feel well / since last week  
4	 wait for the bus / for a long time  
5	 rain / all day  
6	 watch TV / since they got home  
 a
 	
Complete the questions and answers with the 
present perfect simple or the present perfect 
continuous and for or since. Use contractions 
where possible.
1	 A	 How long has he been waiting to speak to 
someone? (he / wait)
	
B	 He ’s been waiting for half an hour.
2	 A	 How long 
 their 
homework? (the children / do)
	
B	 They 
 it 
 more than two hours.
3	 A	 How long 
 with Rob? 
(you / go out)
	
B	 We 
 
we left school.
4	 A	 How long 
 single? 
(Penny / be)
	
B	 I think she 
 
she broke up with Scott.
5	 A	 How long 
 your 
driving licence? (you / have)
	
B	 I 
 it 
 
ten years.
6	 A	 How long 
 to find  
a job? (Pete / try)
	
B	 He  
 
he left university last year, but no luck!
7	 A	 How long 
 to be a 
doctor? (your sister / want)
	
B	 She 
 to be a doctor 
 she was seven years old.
8	 A	 How long 
 Terry? 
(you / know)
	
B	 I 
 him 
 
years. He’s an old friend of the family.
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 153@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
153
 	
Tick (✓) the sentences where the bold phrases are right and correct the wrong ones.  
Write the answers in the column on the right.
1	 I take the bus to work because it’s more quickly than going by car.	
quicker
2	 Olga drives more carefully than Bill.	
✓
3	 I prefer visiting Paris in winter. It’s less crowded than in summer.	
4	 Now I’ve tried them on, these shoes are more comfortable that 
	
I thought they were going to be.	
5	 In this photo, you look more young than your sister.	
6	 Black cabs in London are more expensive than other taxis.	
7	 Anne’s not as tall as Susie, but she’s thinner.	
8	 German trains are moderner than British ones.	
9	 I love riding my scooter, it’s more better than driving a car.	
 
10	 Can you say that again more slowly, please? I didn’t understand a word!	
 
11	 It’s the most beautiful beach I’ve never been to. The sea looks amazing.	
 
12	 Sean’s the worse actor in the group, but he’s the best singer.	
 
13	 What’s the nicest thing anyone’s ever said to you?	
 
14	 Personally, I think that Barcelona is the best city of the world.	
 
15	 Which sofa is more cheaper? The blue one or the red one?	
 
16	 I think we should take this case. It’s the biggest one that we have.	
 
17	 It’s usually hoter here in June than it is in May.	
 
18	 Did you go to the same school than your brother?	
 
19	 That restaurant over there is fantastic. It’s cheap and you can eat 
	
as much food as you like.	
 
20	 It took me ages to walk there. It was further than I thought.	
3A  GRAMMAR  choosing between comparatives and superlatives
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the correct comparative or superlative form.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 154@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
154
 	
Complete the sentences with a, an, the, or – (no article). Write the answers in the column  
on the right.
1	 Did you remember to lock 
 kitchen door before we left?	
the
2	 I shouldn’t drink 
 coffee. It keeps me awake at night.	
–––
3	 Jane is allergic to 
 cats. She starts sneezing when one comes near her.	
4	 Can you turn on 
 air conditioning? It’s boiling in here!	
5	 José and Charlotte are going away 
 next weekend.	
6	 Are these 
 keys you were looking for?	
7	 I wasn’t feeling very well yesterday, so I didn’t go to 
 work.	
8	
 river which runs through Paris is called the Seine.	
9	 What 
 beautiful day! I love it here.	
 
10	 It looks like it’s going to rain. Take 
 umbrella!	
 
11	 Hurry up! You’re going to be late for 
 school.	
 
12	 I have a friend who is 
 electrician. Do you want his phone number?	
 
13	 It’s cheaper to buy 
 books online than in a bookshop.	
 
14	 I don’t like 
 people who talk about 
 football all the time.	
 
 
15	 Luckily, 
 people who work in my office don’t talk about 
 sport at all.	
 
 
16	 My sister works in 
 restaurant. She gets home from 
 work late	
 
 
every evening.
 
17	 What’s your favourite meal of the day, 
 breakfast or 
 dinner?	
 
 
18	 That’s 
 easy question. I think I know 
 answer.	
 
 
19	 Audrey has two children, 
 boy and 
 girl.	
 
	
 boy’s ten and 
 girl’s two years younger.	
 
 
20	 I think 
 good health is more important than 
 money.	
 
3B  GRAMMAR  articles: a / an, the, no article
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the correct articles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 155@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
155
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in b. Look at the pictures and remember the sentences.
 	
Circle the correct verb. Tick (✓) if both are possible.
1	 No, thanks. I mustn’t / shouldn’t eat any more cake. I’m on a diet. ✓
2	 You mustn’t / don’t have to tell anyone what I’ve just told you. It’s a secret.
3	 Living at home is great. I mustn’t / don’t have to do anything because my mum does it all for me!
4	 You must / have to get a visa if you want to go to Cuba.
5	 You ought to / have to pay a fine if you don’t return your library books on time.
6	 Jerry doesn’t have to / mustn’t get up early this morning. He isn’t going to work.
7	 It’s Hannah’s birthday tomorrow. I mustn’t / shouldn’t forget to phone her.
8	 You mustn’t / don’t have to touch electrical things when your hands are wet. It’s very dangerous.
9	 I think you should / must go to bed early tonight. You look really tired.
 
10	 When I was a child, I had to / must tidy my room every weekend.
 
11	 If you’re late for class, you ought to / should say sorry to the teacher.
 
12	 He doesn’t have to / shouldn’t watch so much TV. It’s a waste of time.
 	
Complete the sentences with must, mustn’t, have to, or don’t have to. Sometimes two answers  
are possible.
 a
 b
1	 You have to pay for food and drinks separately.
2	 You 
 drive at more than 70 mph.
3	 Service is included, so you 
 leave a tip.
4	 You 
 wait here before showing your passport.
5	 You 
 pay on Sundays.
6	 You 
 fasten your seatbelt now.
7	 You 
 leave your bags unattended.
8	 You 
 leave your hotel room before 12 o’clock.
4A  GRAMMAR  obligation and prohibition: have to, must, should
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 156@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
156
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences about yourself.
1	 I’ve been able to 
 since 
.
2	 I used to be able to 
.
3	 I enjoy being able to 
.
 	
Circle the correct verb. Sometimes both verbs are possible.
 a
4B  GRAMMAR  ability and possibility: can, could, be able to
 	
Complete the sentences with can / can’t or could / couldn’t. If a form of can / could isn’t possible, 
complete the sentence with a form of be able to.
1	 At the end of the six-week course,  
you ’ll be able to design your own website.
2	 Masha called me yesterday because she 
 remember how to get to  
my house.
3	 Simon isn’t going to 
 finish 
the report by the end of the day.
4	 Pierre has passed his driving test, so now he 
 drive his father’s car.
5	 I haven’t 
 speak to Harry for 
over three weeks. He never answers his phone.
6	 The train was delayed, so I 
 
get to the meeting on time.
7	 Miriam hates not 
 play chess 
as well as Luke. He always beats her and she’s  
a really bad loser!
8	 Sometimes when you’re on Skype you 
 hear the other person 
very well.
9	 I’m afraid I won’t 
 go away 
this weekend. I’m too busy.
 
10	 You should 
 do this exercise 
without any help. It’s quite easy.
 
11	 We 
 park here; there are  
no spaces.
 
12	 
 do what you like is the best 
thing about a holiday.
 b
It’s never too late
My 78-year-old father 1 couldn’t / wasn’t able to 
even turn on a computer until about two years 
ago. All that changed when he decided that he 
wanted to 2 can / be able to use the internet 
and he did a course at his local Adult Education 
Centre. Although he really enjoyed the course, 
he 3 couldn’t / wasn’t able to put what he learnt 
in his classes into practice because he didn’t 
have a computer. So, for his birthday, I bought 
him his own laptop and that’s when he really 
started learning! Now, he 4 ’s able to / can use the 
internet really well and send emails. What he loves 
most is 5 can / being able to speak to and see his 
grandchildren on Skype at least once a week. We 
live in Australia, but he lives in the UK. If he didn’t 
have a computer, he 6 couldn’t / wouldn’t be 
able to keep in touch with us so much.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 157@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
157
5A  GRAMMAR  past tenses: simple, continuous, perfect
 	
Complete the story using the verbs in brackets in the past simple, past continuous, or past perfect. 
Write the answers in the column on the right.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the story. Read the story aloud with the 
verbs in the correct form.
This story 1 
 (happen) to me one really hot summer 
about five years ago. It’s probably the worst thing that’s 
ever happened to me while driving a car. I 2 
 (buy) 
my car the week before and I 3 
 (still feel) very excited 
about it. It 4 
 (not have) air conditioning, but that  
5 
 (not matter) to me because it was my first ever car! 
I 6 
 (know) that my best friend Penny 7 
 (always 
want) to visit a picturesque little village in the mountains 
about 150 kilometres from where we live, so I 8 
 (call) 
her and 9 
 (tell) her that I would take her there the 
following day.
It 10 
 (be) a perfect, hot summer day. The sun 11 
 
(shine) and the sky was blue. While I 12 
 (drive) and we 
13 
 (chat), I 14 
 (see) something out of the corner 
of my eye. It was a wasp which 15 
 (fly) into the car! 
Penny and I both 16 
 (try) to kill the wasp, which then 
17 
 (start) buzzing around inside the car. Suddenly 
the wasp 18 
 (disappear). Then I 19 
 (feel) a pain in 
my arm; the wasp 20 
 (sting) me! I forgot that I 21 
 
(drive), and…BANG! I 22 
 (crash) into the car in front of 
us. Nobody was hurt, but that was the end of our day out.
1happened 
 
2
  
3
  
4
  
5
  
6
     7
  
 
8
  
9
  
 
10
  11
  
12
  
13
  14
  
15
  
16
  
17
  
18
  19
  
20
  21
  
22
My car nightmare
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 158@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
158
5B  GRAMMAR  past and present habits and states
then
now
	 1	 Occupation
university students
Thomas: photographer, Lucie: journalist
	 2	 Home
Paris, France
Chicago, the USA
	 3	 Eating habits
takeaway food
home-made food
	 4	 House
a house with friends
a penthouse flat with their dog
	 5	 Holidays
go camping
stay in five-star hotels
	 6	 Sport
didn’t play sport
both cycle at the weekend,
Thomas often plays golf 
	 7	 Vehicle
bikes
a sports car
	 8	 Clothes
second-hand clothes
designer clothes
	 9	 Weekends
got up late, went out at night with friends
stay in, cook, and watch TV
	10	 Friends
lots of friends 
just a few close ones
 	
Look at the chart and make sentences with used to or the present simple (+ usually where 
appropriate).
1	 They used to be university students, but now he’s a photographer and she’s a journalist.
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
ACTIVATION
Cover the sentences and look at the chart. Make three sentences about Thomas and Lucie using used to 
and three sentences using usually.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 159@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
159
6A  GRAMMAR  passive (all tenses)
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct passive form of the verbs in brackets. Write the answers 
in the column on the right.
 a
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right in a and look at the sentences. Read the sentences 
aloud with the correct passive form.
1	 In Beauty and the Beast, the part of Belle 
 (play) by Emma Watson.	
was played
2	 Every year, the Academy Awards ceremony 
 (watch) by millions of people.	
3	 The scene had to 
 (shoot) in the studio because of bad weather.	
4	 I couldn’t speak to the director because he 
 (interview) by journalists 	
 
when I arrived.	
5	 A 
 the thief 
 (catch) yet?	
 
 
B  I don’t think so. The police are still looking for him.
6	
 you ever 
 (tell) a secret that you couldn’t keep?	
 
7	 This bank 
 (rob) twice since it opened last year.	
8	 When Jack arrived at the meeting, the decision 
 (already make).	
9	 Our flat 
 (paint) at the moment. Everything’s in a real mess!	
 
10	 Although Mark thought the interview had gone really well, he 
 (not offer) 	
 
the job.	
 
11	 When does this book have to 
 (return) to the library?	
 
12	 When we got back to the car park, our car wasn’t there. It 
 (steal)!	
 	
Circle the correct form, active or passive.
 b
The film Sully 1 bases / is based on the true story of US pilot Chesley Sullenberger, who  
2 knows / is known to his friends as Sully. Tom Hanks 3 plays / is played the part of Sully and the film 
4 directed / was directed by Clint Eastwood.
One freezing winter’s morning, Sully flies out of LaGuardia Airport in New York. A few minutes into 
the flight, however, the plane 5 hits / is hit by birds and both engines 6 lose / are lost power. Sully doesn’t 
think there is enough time to return to the airport, so he 7 lands / is landed the plane on the Hudson 
River near Midtown Manhattan. Amazingly, nobody 8 kills / is killed and all 155 people on board 
9 rescue / are rescued by nearby boats.
Afterwards, however, the National 
Transportation Safety Board 
10 believes / is believed the accident 
is due to the pilot’s mistake. The 
rest of the film focuses on Sully’s 
fight to clear his name.
The film 11 received / was received 
great reviews from critics and 
12 nominated / was nominated for 
an Oscar.
My favourite film: Sully
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 160@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
160
6B  GRAMMAR  modals of deduction: might, can’t, must
 	
Circle the correct verb.
A	Don’t look now, but isn’t that Karen Marshall over there?
B	 Where?
A	At that table by the window.
B	 No, it 1 must / can’t be. She went to live in Boston.
A	But I’m sure it’s Karen.
B	 Mmm, I suppose it 2 can / might be her. But if it is, she 
looks much thinner than she used to.
A	Well it 3 must / can’t be five years since we last saw her. 
Someone can change a lot in five years!
B	 You’re right, it is Karen. But who do you think the man 
is? He 4 can’t / might not be her husband, can he?
A	No, he 5 can’t / might not be. They broke up years ago 
and haven’t spoken to each other since.
B	 It 6 can / may be her new boyfriend – or her son!
A	Shall we go over and find out?
 	
Complete the conversations with must, might, might not, or can’t. 
Sometimes more than one answer is possible.
1	 A	 That’s the second phone that Stacey’s bought this year.
	
B	 She must have a lot of money then!
	
A	 She’s a student, so she 
 be that rich.
	
B	 She 
 have generous parents then.
2	 A	 Do you know where Charlie is?
	
B	 Well, he 
 be far away. His phone’s on the desk.
	
A	 Any idea where he 
 be?
	
B	 He 
 be talking to the boss, or he 
 be in the photocopying room.  
Do you want me to go and look for him?
3	 A	 I have a missed call and I don’t recognize the number.
	
B	 So, it 
 be from anyone you know.
	
A	 Ah, I know! It’s that company who interviewed me last week.  
They 
 be ringing to offer me the job. I’m not 
surprised. I did a really good interview.
	
B	 Well, don’t be too confident, because they 
  
be calling to say you didn’t get the job.
	
A	 There’s only one way to find out!
4	 A	 This steak 
 be for me. It looks medium-rare, 
and I asked for a well-done steak.
	
B	 It 
 be mine, then. I ordered a medium-rare steak.
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 161@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
161
7A  GRAMMAR  first conditional and future time clauses + when, 
until, etc
 	
Complete the conversations with the verbs in the correct form: present simple, imperative,  
or will + infinitive. Use contractions where possible.
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
1	 A	 Ugh! The weather’s terrible! Unless it 1 improves (improve) at the 
weekend, we 2
 (have to) cancel the party.
	
B	 What? We can’t cancel it!
	
A	 But we 3
 (not able to) have a barbecue if 
it 4
 (rain).
	
B	 Well, if the weather 5
 (be) still bad, we  
6
 (have) lunch inside instead.
3	 A	 What time will you be home later?
	
B	 Well, I have a meeting until about 6.00, but I 13
 
(leave) as soon as it 14
 (finish).
	
A	 OK, 15
 (send) me a text when you  
16
 (be) on the train and I’ll start making dinner.
	
B	 All right. See you later.
5	 A	 Your room’s a mess, Tom! 
	
B	 Don’t worry. I 22
 (tidy) it before 
Mum and Dad 23
 (get) home.
	
A	 Yes, because they 24
 (not be) 
very happy if it 25
 (look) like that!
2	 A	 So, 7
 (not forget) to phone me when 
you 8
 (get) there.
	
B	 Yes, Mum. I 9
 (call) you as soon as  
I 10
 (arrive).
	
A	 And if anything 11
 (go) wrong,  
12
 (you / let) me know straight away?
	
B	 Yes, Mum. Stop worrying! 
4	 A	 17
 (you / come) back to work after 
you 18
 (have) the baby, Jo? 
	
B	 Well, I probably 19
 (not come) back 
until he 20
 (be) at least a year old.
	
A	 Oh, we’ll really miss you here.
	
B	 Yes, I’ll miss you, too. Before I 21
 
(leave), we should all go out for dinner one evening.
	
A	 Yes, that’s a great idea.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 162@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
162
7B  GRAMMAR  second conditional, choosing between conditionals
 	
Complete the conversation with the correct form of the verbs in brackets to make second 
conditional sentences. Use contractions where possible.
 a
 	
Complete the sentences with a verb from the list in the first or second conditional. Write your 
answers in the column on the right. Use contractions where possible.
be  buy  find  get  go  never finish  not be  not hurry  reduce  take
1	 If they 
, they’ll miss the bus.	
don’t hurry
2	 If we had the money, we 
 a beautiful house in the country.	
3	 Lisa will have a lot of fun when she 
 to Germany to study next year.	
4	 Unless they 
 the price, they’ll never sell their house.	
5	 If I were you, I 
 the dress back to the shop. It just doesn’t suit you.	
6	 Annabel will look for a job as soon as she 
 her degree.	
7	 If it 
 so windy, we could go for a walk on the beach.	
8	 If you 
 some extra money in your bank account, would you spend it?	
9	 You 
 your homework if you keep chatting with your friends on Facebook.	
 
10	 Sarah 
 really upset if she doesn’t find her necklace. We must help her 	
	
look for it.	
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right in b and look at the sentences. Read the sentences 
aloud with the verbs in the correct form.
Lily	
This house looks nice and it’s just been built. If we 1 moved 
(move) in there, we 2 wouldn’t need (not need) to do any work.
Ben	 Yes, but it’s on a really busy road. We  
3
 (have) a lot of problems with  
noise if we 4
 (live) there.
Lily 	 Well, how about this one? It has three bedrooms, so we  
5
 (have) enough space if our friends 
or family 6
 (come) to stay.
Ben	 And the garden’s huge! If my sister 7
 
(bring) the kids, they 8
 (have) lots of room to play.
Lily 	 Yes, and we 9
 (can) have some great parties outside if the weather  
10
 (be) good. 
Ben	 So, where is it exactly?
Lily	
It’s just outside Oxford.
Ben	 Oxford? That’s nowhere near my work. If we 11
 (move) there,  
it 12
 (take) me over an hour to drive to the office.
Lily	
Yes, but if you 13
 (go) by train, it 14
 (not take) 
that long. And you 15
 (feel) much less stressed if you  
16
 (not have to) drive.
Ben	 Mm, I suppose so. How much is it?
Lily	
It says ‘offers over £595,000’. 
Ben	 Wow! I think the bank manager 17
 (laugh) at us if we  
18
 (ask) to borrow that much money.
Lily	
Yes, I guess it would be too expensive. I’ll keep looking for something cheaper.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 163@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
163
8A  GRAMMAR  choosing between gerunds and infinitives
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets. Use the gerund, the 
infinitive with to, or the infinitive without to. Write your answers in the column on the right.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the verbs in the correct form.
1	 I think it would be very stressful 
 your own business. (run)	
to run
2	 I’m really busy right now. Would you mind 
 me back in about five 	
 
minutes? (call)	
3	 My boss told me she wanted 
 to me in her office. (speak)	
4	 We decided 
 her a birthday present because we weren’t sure what she 	
	
wanted. We just gave her some money. (not buy)	
5	 Have you ever thought of 
 back to live in Edinburgh, or are you happy 	
	
in London? (go)	
6	 My neighbour offered 
 my children while I went shopping. (look after)	
7	 Emily’s parents aren’t strict enough with her. They let her 
 whatever  	
	
she likes. (do)	
8	
 overtime is exhausting. Last night, I finished work at 9.00 and I started  	
	
again this morning at 8.00. (do) 	
9	 My parents would like me 
 medicine. (study)	
 
10	 I think Jessica should study architecture. She’s very good at 
. (draw)	
 
11	 Do you think you’d like 
 with children, or would you find it too 	
 
stressful? (work)	
 
12	 If they can save enough money, they’re hoping 
 to Miami for their 	
	
honeymoon. (go)	
 
13	 Have you ever thought about 
 yoga or Pilates? They’re very good if  	
 
you have problems with your back. (do)	
 
14	 I was really surprised 
 that Lucy and Adam have separated. I thought   	
	
that they were very happy. (hear)	
 
15	 Are you going to go on 
 English here next year? (study)	
 
16	 Toby was sacked because he kept 
 late for work. (arrive)	
 
17	 I don’t really feel like 
 tonight. Let’s go out for dinner. (cook)	
 
18	 Josh pretended 
 the shirt his granny had bought him, but really he 	
	
thought it was horrible. (like)	
 
19	
 late at night always makes me 
 badly. (eat / sleep)	
 
 
20	 Angela asked her brother 
 her a lift into town. (give)	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 164@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
164
8B  GRAMMAR  reported speech: sentences and questions
 	
Read the interview. Then complete the journalist’s report below with the bold verbs from the 
interview in the correct tense.
 a
 	
Write the questions other journalists asked Matthew in reported speech.
 b
ACTIVATION
Cover the journalist’s report in a. Look at the interview and try to remember the journalist’s report.
Journalist	 Firstly Matthew, thank you very much for 
agreeing to this interview. I know you’re a busy 
man. You have the leading role in the latest Kathryn 
Westwood film. What is it like working with her?
Matthew	
You 1 can’t begin to imagine what a 
fantastic experience it 2 is. In fact, it 3 has been an 
honour to work with her. However, I have to say that 
it 4 wasn’t easy at first, because filming 5 started at 
7.00 a.m. every day for the first three weeks. I’m not 
a person who likes early starts!
Journalist	 Yes, I had heard that! What 6 did you enjoy 
most about working with her? 
Matthew	
I 7 loved the way that she 8 could get all the actors, including me, to do exactly what she 
wanted us to do.
Journalist	
9 Are you going to be in any more of her films in the near future?
Matthew	
It 10 depends on Kathryn, but I hope I 11 will be. I’m really sorry, but I 12 must go because  
I have a photo shoot at Vogue magazine.
Matthew told me that I 1 couldn’t begin to imagine what a fantastic experience working with Kathryn 
Westwood 2
. He also said that working with her 3
 an 
honour. However, he said that it 4
 easy at first, because filming  
5
 at 7.00 a.m. every day for the first three weeks. When I asked him what he  
6
 most about working with Kathryn Westwood, he told me that he  
7
 the way that she 8
 get all the actors to do exactly what 
she wanted. Finally, I asked Matthew if 9
 in any more of her films in the future.  
He said that it 10
 on Kathryn, but he hoped he 11
. We 
then finished the interview because Matthew said that he 12
 go because he had a 
photo shoot at Vogue magazine.
1	 The BBC asked Matthew what the most interesting role he had played was.
2	 Fox asked him 
	
.
3	 RTVE asked him 
	
.
4	 RAI asked him 
	
.
5	 ITV asked him 
	
.
What’s the most interesting 
role that you’ve played?
Is there too much violence  
in films?
Who’s the most difficult actor 
that you’ve ever worked with?
What should a young person 
who wants to go into acting do?
When are you going to retire?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 165@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
165
9A  GRAMMAR  third conditional
 	
Put the words in the correct order to complete the conditional sentences.
1	 would / scored / ’d / the match / they / have / won / the penalty
	
If he ’d scored the penalty, they would have won the match.
2	 missed / here / of / on time / if / the film / have / the start / been / you’d
	
We wouldn’t 
 
.
3	 seen / down / ’d / have / the sign / they / wouldn’t / sat
	
If they 
 
.
4	 finished / if / fallen / she / the race / have / over / hadn’t
	
Ella would 
 
.
5	 wet / have / taken / got / wouldn’t / ’d / my umbrella / I
	
If I 
 
.
6	 he’d / crashed / at / have / stopped / if / the red light
	
He wouldn’t 
 
.
 	
Put the verbs in brackets in the correct tense to make third conditional sentences. Use contractions 
where possible.
1	 We wouldn’t have met (not meet) if you hadn’t invited (not invite) us both to dinner that night.
2	 If I 
 (know) how cold it was going to be in London, I 
 
(take) warmer clothes.
3	 You 
 (enjoy) the party if you 
 (go).
4	 If you 
 (be) quieter, the baby 
 (not wake up).
5	 I 
 (not open) the attachment if I 
 (know) that it had a virus.
6	
 (you / go) to Katia’s wedding if she 
 (invite) you?
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the pictures and try to remember the sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 166@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
166
9B  GRAMMAR  quantifiers
 	
Circle the correct answers.
1	 A	 Sshh! You’re being 
 noisy. I’m trying to listen to the news.
	
B	 I’m not making 
 noise at all. Turn the TV up if  
it isn’t 
.
2	 A	 Jane! You’re back! How was your holiday? 
	
B	 Fantastic! I only got back 
 hours ago.
	
A	 Why didn’t you post 
 photos on Facebook? I kept looking.
	
B	 I decided to spend 
 time on social media while I was away. 
But I still took 
 photos!
3	 A	 I’ve set the alarm on my phone for 5.30 a.m. Do you think that’s 
 ?
	
B	 I think it’s 
 early! Set it for 6.00. That’ll give us 
 time to get there by 7.00.
	
A	 Yes, I guess you’re right. There should be 
 traffic at that 
time of the morning.
4	 A	 Have you seen my memory stick?
	
B	 You have 
 memory sticks. Which one?
	
A	 The red one. It doesn’t have 
 files on it, but they’re 
really important.
5	 A	 I’m updating my Twitter profile. Which photo do you think is 
better?
	
B	 I’m surprised you’re still on Twitter! Do you use it 
 ?
	
A	 Yes. Why? Don’t 
 of your friends use it anymore?
	
B	 No, 
.
	
A	 Mm, I suppose 
 young people use it nowadays. Anyway, 
tell me which photo you prefer.
6	 A	 I really want to buy the new Samsung smartphone, but it’s 
 expensive at the moment.
	
B	 Yes, but if you wait 
 months, it’ll be cheaper.
	
A	 I know, but I have 
 patience. I want it now!
	 1 too / too much
	 2 much / many
	 3 enough loud / loud enough
	 4 a few / a little
	 5 no / any
	 6 fewer / less
	 7 a lot / loads of
	 8 enough early / early enough
	 9 too / too much
	10 many / plenty of
	11 very little / very few
	12 lots of / loads
	13 many / any
	14 a lot / a lot of
	15 much / many
	16 any / none
	17 fewer / less
	18 too / too many
	19 a little / a few
	20 no / none
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right. Look at the conversations and try to remember the 
missing words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 167@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
167
10A  GRAMMAR  relative clauses: defining and non-defining
 	
Complete the article with who, which, where, or whose.
 a
 	
In which sentences could you also use that? In which sentences could you leave out who or which?
 	
Combine the two sentences using a non-defining relative clause.
1	 Our neighbours have lived next door to us for 15 years. They’re both teachers.
	
Our neighbours, who are both teachers, have lived next door to us for 15 years.
2	 Sydney is well known for its Opera House and Harbour Bridge. Many people think it’s the capital  
of Australia.
	
Sydney, 
, is well known for its Opera House and Harbour Bridge.
3	 Our local post office has closed down. My grandmother used to work there.
	
Our local post office, 
, has closed down.
4	 Pablo Picasso was one of the world’s most famous artists. His best known painting is Guernica.
	
Pablo Picasso, 
, was one of the world’s most famous artists.
5	 The hurricane was the worst storm for over a century. It hit the city of New Orleans.
	
The hurricane, 
, was the worst storm for over a century.
6	 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was an extremely talented composer. He died when he was 35.
	
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, 
, was an extremely talented composer.
 b
 c
ACTIVATION
Read the article in a again. Write a paragraph about your favourite things in life.
We asked students to tell us about their favourite things in life. 
This week, Elena, a student from Brazil, tells us about hers.
A place
My favourite place in the world is the town 1 where I was born. I’ve travelled all over  
the world, but it’s still the place 2
 I love the most. 
A song
A song…that’s an easy one! It’s Yellow by Coldplay, for two reasons. Firstly, it was the  
colour of the dress 3
 I was wearing the night I met my husband.  
Secondly, it was the song 4
 the DJ played as we danced.
A number
The number 5
 I’ve chosen is the number nine. My grandmother,  
6
 used to live with us when I was a child, always asked me to get her  
a lottery ticket with this number. I think that’s why I like it so much. 
A photo
I’ve chosen a black and white photo of my parents, 7
 I’ve had for  
about 20 years. Every time I look at it, I can see two happy people in their early twenties,  
8
 lives were about to change forever. Why? Well, because my  
mum was pregnant with me in the photo! 
A person
My English teacher at school was the woman 9
 inspired me to  
love languages. So, I’ve chosen her to be my favourite person. 
An animal
Animals? No question about it! The animals 10
 I like most are dogs.
A shop
The shop 11
 I could spend all day would be one selling perfumes and cosmetics. 
An object
Finally, an object 12
 is very special to me is my engagement ring,  
because it used to belong to my husband’s grandmother. It’s beautiful.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 168@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
168
10B  GRAMMAR  question tags
 	
Complete the conversations with question tags.
1	 A	 Hi. Your name’s Heather, 1 isn’t it ?
	
B	 Yes, it is. Do we know each other?
	
A	 You really don’t remember me, 2
?
	
B	 I’m afraid I don’t.
	
A	 It’s Jeff. Jeff Dawson.
	
B	 Oh my goodness! We were at school together,  
3
?
	
A	 That’s right!
2	 A	 Guess who called me this morning?
	
B	 It wasn’t your ex-boyfriend, 4
?
	
A	 Uh huh.
	
B	 He isn’t still calling you, 5
? What did 
he want?
	
A	 Just a chat, I think.
	
B	 But ex-boyfriends don’t just ring for a chat,  
6
?
3	 A	 You haven’t forgotten about your doctor’s appointment 
tomorrow, 7
?
	
B	 Tomorrow? But tomorrow’s Tuesday, 8
?  
I’m going to the doctor’s on Wednesday. 
	
A	 No, today’s Tuesday, Dad.
	
B	 Oh! Really? Anyway, you’ll ring me tomorrow to remind 
me, 9
?
	
A	 Yes, Dad.
4	 A	 Mrs Jones is really strict, 10
?
	
B	 I know! She never lets anyone talk in 
class, 11
?
	
A	 And she gives us so much homework. We got loads 
yesterday, 12
?
	
B	 Yes. It took me ages to finish it.
5	 A	 What’s wrong, darling?
	
B	 Nothing.
	
A	 You aren’t having problems with the other children at 
school, 13
?
	
B	 No, I’m not. Everything’s fine.
	
A	 And you haven’t had an argument with one of your 
friends, 14
?
	
B	 Of course not.
	
A	 You’d tell me if there was a problem, 15
?
	
B	 Yes, Mum. Now will you please leave me alone?
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 169@@
169
1B	Who is it?
A pairwork interview activity
Sts use question prompts to interview each other about 
somebody they know. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Question forms in the present and future
What does she do? When are you going to see her next?
 EXTRA SUPPORT   In pairs or individually, Sts write the 
complete form of each question. Remind Sts that ‘/’ means 
there is a word missing, or a change needs to be made to the 
verb. Elicit all the questions.
•	 Give out the worksheets, and focus on a. Give Sts a few 
minutes to think of someone they want to talk about. 
They can use the words at the top of the worksheet for 
ideas. They shouldn’t tell their partner anything about the 
person they are thinking about yet, except whether the 
person is male or female.
•	 Now tell Sts to focus on the question prompts and think 
about how to make and answer the questions.
•	 Focus on b and tell Sts that they’re going to ask each 
other about their mystery person to discover who they 
are. Demonstrate the activity by thinking of a person 
yourself. First, tell Sts if it’s a man or a woman, and then 
get Sts to ask you the questions until they guess who the 
person is. Insist on correct question forms.
•	 In pairs, A interviews B and then tries to guess what 
the relationship is between B and the person they are 
describing.
•	 Then Sts swap roles.
•	 When they’ve finished, get feedback by asking who each 
student described, and if their partner was able to guess 
the relationship.
1  Family
Where was he / she born? Where does he / she live? Who 
does he / she live with?
2  Occupation / Studies
What does he / she do? Where does he / she work or study? 
How long has he / she worked (studied) there? Does he / she 
like his / her job or studies?
3  Appearance and personality
What does he / she look like? What kind of clothes does he /  
she wear? What is he / she like? What is his / her best and 
worst quality?
4  Interests
What does he / she like doing in his / her free time? Does he 
/ she do any sport or exercise? What kind of music does he / 
she like? Does he / she speak foreign languages?
5  Your relationship with this person
How long have you known him / her? How often do you 
see each other? Do you get on well? What do you have in 
common? What do you do together? When are you seeing 
him / her next? Do you think you’ll know him / her in ten  
years’ time?
Getting to know you
A pairwork activity
This photocopiable ‘getting to know you’ activity can be 
used together with the introductory Grammar activities 
as a first-day class, especially if Sts don’t yet have the 
Student’s Book.
Sts write the information about themselves. They then swap 
with a partner and ask each other to explain the information. 
Copy and cut up one A worksheet and one B worksheet 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
General revision of Pre-intermediate grammar and 
vocabulary
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give each student the instructions and 
a chart (A or B).
•	 Give Sts five minutes to write answers in the appropriate 
place in the chart.
•	 Now get Sts to swap charts. Demonstrate the activity by 
taking a chart from a student and asking him / her Why 
did you write…? Ask follow-up questions to continue the 
conversation.
•	 Sts now do the activity in pairs. Make it clear to them that 
they had different instructions, and stress that they can 
ask about the information in any order. Monitor and help 
where necessary. Stop the activity when most Sts have 
asked about all their partner’s information.
1A	Describing a photo
A pairwork describing activity
Sts describe their photos to each other and then answer 
questions related to the topic together. Copy one worksheet 
per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Present simple and continuous, food vocabulary
In the restaurant, a family is sitting at a table. They’re smiling.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Explain that they both have different photos and have to 
describe them to each other. Demonstrate if you can with 
a photo from the Student’s Book, or one you have looked 
up online. Give Sts a minute to look at their photo and 
think about how they are going to describe it. Tell them 
to describe their photo in as much detail as they can. Sts 
A start. Set a time limit, e.g. two minutes. When time is up, 
Sts B describe their photo. Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Sts then look at the photos to see how well their partner 
has described it. 
•	 Finally, get Sts to answer questions 1–6. (They are the 
same for A and B.) Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
Communicative activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 170@@
170
Occupation How long have you been working or studying 
there?
House How long have you been living there?
Interests How long have you been doing it?
Sport How long have you been doing it?
Holidays How long have you been going there?
Social media How long have you been using it (or them)?
Giving How long have you been helping them?
TV How long have you been watching it?
Meeting friends How long have you been meeting there?
Learning How long have you been learning it?
•	 Get feedback for each card to find out who has been 
doing each activity the longest.
 EXTRA IDEA   Copy one worksheet per pair of Sts, and cut 
in half. Put Sts in pairs (preferably sitting face to face) and 
give them one half of the worksheet each. A asks B his / her 
questions. B answers, and then returns the questions, asking 
What about you? Then B asks A his / her questions. They find 
out between the two of them who has been doing each 
thing the longest.
3A	Questionnaire
A pairwork questionnaire
Sts revise comparatives and superlatives by completing a 
questionnaire with comparatives or superlatives and then 
asking and answering the questions. Copy one worksheet 
per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Comparatives and superlatives
Which is more practical, a laptop or a tablet?
Who in your family are you closest to?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and tell Sts to complete each question with 
the comparative or superlative of the adjective / adverb 
in brackets. Tell Sts that there may be two comparatives or 
two superlatives in each pair of questions – it’s not always 
one of each.
•	 Check answers by eliciting only the comparative or 
superlative, not the whole question.
A	 English 1 harder, 2 the most difficult; Travelling 1 the 
worst, 2 more often; Your life 1 more active, 2 unhealthiest; 
Friends and family 1 the best-looking (the most  
good-looking), 2 closest; Technology 1 the best, 2 more 
practical
B	 English 1 the most useful, 2 easier; Travelling 1 the 
longest, 2 more enjoyable; Your life 1 the most relaxing, 
2 more healthily; Friends and family 1 best, 2 the most 
fluent; Technology 1 more often, 2 the most expensive
•	 Now focus on b. Get Sts to sit face to face if possible to ask 
and answer their questions. They can either ask alternate 
questions, or A can interview B and they then swap roles. 
If there’s time, they could also return the questions, asking 
What about you?
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2A Are you a saver or a spender?
A pairwork quiz activity
Sts ask each other questions to find out if they are savers or 
spenders. Copy one worksheet per student or pair.
LANGUAGE
Question forms in the present simple and the present 
perfect, money vocabulary
What’s your attitude to saving money? 
Have you ever had a credit card?
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give each student or pair a worksheet.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to do a quiz about money. Read out 
the first question and the three options. Demonstrate the 
activity by choosing one option and explaining why you 
chose it. 
•	 Sts ask and answer the questions and make a note of their 
partner’s answers (a, b, or c) on their worksheets. If Sts are 
sharing a worksheet, they can use two different coloured 
pens. Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes, or stop the activity 
when most Sts have finished interviewing each other.
•	 When time is up, tell Sts to count their partner’s number 
of a, b, and c answers. The most common answer gives 
them their ‘type’ in the text below the test. Sts tell each 
other what their ‘score’ is. Give Sts time to read the relevant 
paragraph. 
•	 Get feedback to find out if Sts agree with the quiz or not.
2B	How long have you been…?
A group activity
Sts play a card game to practise the present perfect 
continuous. Copy and cut up one worksheet per group of 
three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect continuous
How long have you been living there?
•	 Write on the board: how long / to my class? (come). Ask Sts to 
complete this question (How long have you been coming to 
my class?). Get Sts to answer the question.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group 
a set of cards, face down. Pick up the first card and 
demonstrate the activity by asking a student the 
questions. If necessary, write the incomplete question  
on the board and demonstrate, making it clear Sts need  
to complete the question in bold using the present 
perfect continuous. 
•	 Set a time limit, e.g. ten minutes. Sts pick up a card and 
ask the questions to their group. When everyone has 
answered it, the next person picks up a card. Sts continue 
until they run out of cards or the time is up. Monitor to 
make sure the activity is being performed correctly.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 171@@
171
4B	Tell us about…
A group board game
Sts move around the board making sentences using have to, 
must, should. Copy one worksheet per group of three or four 
Sts. You also need one dice per group and one counter per 
student.
LANGUAGE
have to, must, should
You mustn’t text when you’re driving.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters.
 !   If you don’t have enough dice, give each group a coin. Sts 
toss the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Each player puts a counter on the START triangle.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to throw the 
dice and move their counter. When they land on a circle, 
they must make a sentence following the instruction. The 
rest of the group has to decide if the sentence is correct 
and makes sense. Be the final judge in case of dispute.
•	 If the sentence is wrong, Sts move back a circle. If it’s 
correct, they stay on the circle.
•	 The first student to reach the FINISH rectangle wins.
Possible answers
1	 You shouldn’t drink coffee / play on your computer / have a 
big dinner.
2	 I have to go to the library / revise for the test / do my 
homework / practise speaking English.
3	 You must print your boarding card / pack / check in / show 
your passport.
4	 You don’t have to work / go to classes / get up early /  
do anything.
5	 You shouldn’t go to bed late / worry / revise too much /  
eat a lot.
6	 You don’t have to pay cash / go to the shop / try things on / 
carry bags home with you.
7	 You must go at the right speed / stop at red traffic lights / 
let ambulances pass. You mustn’t lose your concentration / 
text / eat / drink. 
8	 You should think about the price / why you need one /  
if you need a new one / any special offers and contracts.
9	 I had to do my homework / set the table / share things 
with my brother or sister / go to school.
 10	 You have to get a job there / find somewhere to live / learn 
English.
 11	 You should find out about special customs / if you need a 
visa / changing currency.
 12	 You shouldn’t talk about religion / politics / money.
 13	 He (or she) has to correct homework / organize the 
classroom / prepare the class / prepare everything he  
(or she) needs.
 14	 You should be on time / bring a gift / thank your hosts for 
inviting you.
 15	 You shouldn’t do exercise / go swimming / get cold.
 16	 A good student has to participate in class / do homework / 
go to class / pass exams.
 17	 You have to check in / go through Security / go to your Gate.
 18	 You should take an aspirin / lie down / close your eyes / 
drink water.
 19	 You have to be punctual / be nice to your work colleagues 
or classmates / listen to your boss or teacher.
 20	 You should be punctual / have information about the job /  
look smart. You shouldn’t get there late / talk too much / 
wear casual clothes.
3B	Generally speaking
A group discussion
Sts practise generalizing by discussing topics in small 
groups. Copy one worksheet per group of three or four Sts 
and cut up into cards.
LANGUAGE
Not using the for generalizing
I think cats make the best pets because…
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Try to have a mixture 
of genders where possible, as this will help to promote 
disagreement. Give out one set of cards to each group 
and put them face down.
•	 Pick up the top card from one group and read it out. Say 
whether you agree or disagree and give a reason.
•	 Sts continue in groups. One student picks up a card and 
reads it out, says whether he / she agrees or not, giving 
reasons, and the others then say what they think. Monitor 
and correct any misuse of the definite article.
•	 Get some feedback to see whether, generally speaking, 
Sts agree or disagree with the statements.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write some useful expressions on 
the board for Sts to use, e.g. i agree / don’t agree, (personally,)  
i think…, in my opinion…, for example, … Remind Sts not to use 
the definite article when they generalize.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Give one worksheet to each pair or 
group and get them to discuss the statements one by one.
4A	Me and my opinions
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts complete sentences about themselves and their 
opinions and share them with a partner to compare ideas. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Different forms of can / be able to
I admire people who can play a musical instrument.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Focus on a and tell Sts to complete the eight sentences 
to make them true for them. The first four sentences are 
about themselves and the second four are about their 
opinions. Demonstrate if necessary, completing the 
first one to make it true for you. Set a time limit, e.g. five 
minutes. Monitor and help to make sure students are 
using the language correctly.
•	 Then focus on b and get Sts A to read their ABOUT ME 
sentences to Sts B. They should ask What about you? after 
each one. Sts then swap roles.
•	 Now Sts A and B read their MY OPINIONS sentences to 
each other, first A and then B. Sts should agree / disagree 
with their partner’s opinions and give reasons. Monitor 
and help.
•	 Get feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 172@@
172
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, some counters and a coin. Each player puts 
their counter on the START triangle.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to throw the 
coin and move one square for heads and two for tails. Sts 
answer the questions in the circles. Tell Sts that they have 
to give more information when answering each question.
•	 Sts play the game until the time runs out. Monitor and 
help. The first player to reach the FINISH square wins. If 
a group finishes very quickly, tell them to go around the 
board again.
6A	Film quiz
A pairwork quiz
Sts complete questions about cinema using the passive and 
then ask a partner the questions. Copy one worksheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Question forms in the passive
Which of these films was set in the future?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Tell Sts to complete their questions using the correct 
passive tense of the verb in brackets. Monitor and help. 
•	 Check answers by eliciting the verbs only, not the whole 
question. You could copy the key onto the board.
•	 Get Sts to sit face to face if possible. Explain that A should 
ask his / her partner the first question and read out the 
three alternative answers. Make sure that they don’t see 
each other’s worksheet. If B chooses the correct option 
(the one in bold), he / she gets a point. Then B should 
ask his / her first question in the same way, and then Sts 
continue until they have asked all the questions.
•	 When Sts have finished, ask each pair who got the most 
points.
Student A
1	 was directed
2	 is based
3	 was dubbed
4	 was made
5	 was chosen
6	 was nominated
7	 was played
8	 is set
Student B
1	 was, based
2	 was shot
3	 is, set
4	 were directed
5	 was based
6	 was, introduced
7	 has, been nominated
8	 was composed
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write some more quiz 
questions of their own.
6B	Who do you think they might 
be?
A pairwork activity
Sts have to match some people to their professions. Copy 
one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Modals of deduction
He / She can’t be… He / She might be… He / She 
must be…
She might be a yoga teacher because she‘s very slim.
 EXTRA IDEA   If Sts need more written practice using the 
verbs, you could do this as a written race. After you say 
Go!, Sts, in pairs, have ten minutes to complete as many 
sentences as possible, starting with number one. Get the pair 
who have completed most to read out their sentences. Other 
pairs should read theirs out, too, if they’re different. The pair 
with the most grammatically correct answers wins.
5A	Marathon cheats
A pairwork activity
Sts read a text, answer questions, and use their answers to 
retell the story to their partner. Copy one worksheet per pair 
and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Past tenses
They had changed places several times.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to read a story and answer some 
questions about it. Sts A and B have different stories. 
Give them time to read their stories in a and answer the 
questions in b. Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Sts then cover their stories and use their answers to retell 
their story to their partner. Monitor to make sure Sts are 
doing the activity correctly.
•	 Get feedback by asking Sts to retell the stories.
Example answers:
Student A
1	 The Comrades Marathon is an 89 km ultramarathon.
2	 On 16th June 1999, Sergio Motsoeneng finished ninth and 
won $1,000.
3	 Nick Bester complained because he said that Sergio hadn’t 
passed him.
4	 Sergio looked different in the two photos.
5	 Sergio and his brother had changed places several times 
during the race.
Student B
1	 On 10th October 2011, Rob Sloan finished third in the 
Kielder Marathon.
2	 The other runners were surprised because they hadn’t seen 
Rob pass them.
3	 The organizers thought it was suspicious that Rob had run 
the second half of the race quicker than the first half.
4	 Rob confessed that he had got on a bus to near the finish 
line and then jumped out of the crowd to run the final 
section of the race.
5	 Steve Cairns was angry because he felt that Rob had stolen 
his moment of glory.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to retell their partner’s story.
5B	Past and present
A group board game
Sts move around the board answering questions with used 
to and usually. Copy one worksheet per group of three or 
four students. You also need one coin per group and one 
counter per student.
LANGUAGE
used to / didn’t use to
We used to visit my grandparents a lot.
I didn’t use to get on with my brother.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 173@@
173
•	 Give out the worksheets.
•	 Go through the list of jobs in a and make sure that Sts can 
remember the meaning of all of them. Then focus on the 
photos. Tell Sts that they are all real people who do one 
of these jobs. Sts work on their own and think about who 
might do which job.
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Focus on b and photo 1 (Gloria del Piero). 
Get Sts to give you a sentence with a reason why she 
can’t be a boxer, e.g. She can’t be a boxer because she has 
long hair. Then, still focusing on photo 1, Sts do c and d. 
Remind Sts that they have to say why.
•	 Monitor and encourage them to use He / She can’t be / 
might be / must be, etc.
•	 When you think that Sts have had enough time, check 
they have made a final decision for each person.
•	 Elicit opinions and then give Sts the answers. Get 
feedback to see who got the most correct answers.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write We think he / she must be… 
on the board.
1	 Gloria de Piero is a British politician and journalist. She was 
first elected in 2010.
2	 Richard Ward is an award-winning hairdresser to Royals 
and celebrities.
3	 Sheku Kanneh-Mason is a musician and plays the cello. He 
won the BBC’s Young Musician of the Year award in 2016.
4	 Ina Menzer is a German boxer. She was a World Champion 
boxer from 2005 to 2010.
5	 Rachel Riley is a mathematician who studied at Oxford 
University. She’s also a TV presenter in a quiz show, 
Countdown, where she does complicated calculations  
very fast.
6	 John Cooper Clarke is a British poet, who performs his 
poems in front of an audience and even records them and 
sells them, just like a musician.
7	 Jessamyn Stanley is a yoga teacher who works to make 
yoga available to everyone.
8	 Terry Hollands is a model for clothes company Big Tall 
Order.
7A	Three in a row
A pairwork or group activity
Sts complete sentences using the first conditional to play 
Three in a row. Copy one worksheet per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
First conditional and future time clauses + when, 
until, etc.
I won’t move house until I get a promotion.
If I see Mark, I’ll tell him.
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Give each person in a pair, 
or each group, a symbol X or O. 
•	 Give out the worksheets. Tell Sts that they are going 
to take turns choosing a square and completing the 
sentences in the grids. If they complete it correctly so it 
makes sense, they can write their symbol in the square. 
The aim is to get three in a row. 
•	 Set a time limit. Sts play using all the grids until the 
time is up. Monitor to make sure that the game is being 
played correctly and to make the final judgement on Sts’ 
sentences.
•	 Tell Sts to use a pencil to write the symbols, so they can 
reuse the grids if they finish quickly.
Possible answers
GRID 1
I won’t move house until I find somewhere else to live.
When I finish this course, I’ll take an official exam.
You’ll never get better at football unless you practise more.
If I see Mark, I’ll tell him about the party.
Unless they get here quickly, they’ll miss the start of the film.
As soon as you finish your coffee, we’ll go home.
He won’t get that job if he doesn’t do well at the interview.
After he gets here, we’ll have supper.
Send me a text when you get home.
GRID 2
I’ll be at work until I finish this project.
Unless you work really hard, you won’t get a good grade.
I’ll ring her as soon as I know the results.
If you don’t stop looking at your phone, I’ll leave.
After we have dinner, we’ll go for a walk.
Tell her to send me an email when she finishes.
I won’t buy a new laptop unless my laptop breaks.
As soon as I get home this evening, we’ll sit down and talk.
If you don’t pick me up after class, I’ll get a taxi.
GRID 3
After we choose where to go on holiday, I’ll book the hotel.
If we don’t hurry, we’ll miss our train.
We’ll look at other hotels before we book one.
You won’t pass that exam unless you study hard this week.
They’ll lend us the money as soon as we give them the 
paperwork.
Give him my phone number if he asks for it.
I’ll probably go shopping after we go to the cinema.
If Sally doesn’t come soon, we’ll go without her.
I won’t leave until he’s asleep.
7B	If you had to choose…
A pairwork or group activity
Sts ask questions about preferences. Sts have to say which 
alternative they would prefer and why. Copy one worksheet 
per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
Second conditional
I’d prefer to have a holiday house on the coast, because if I 
had a house in the mountains, I’d miss the sea.
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and give out the 
worksheets.
•	 Demonstrate the activity by getting a student to ask 
you one of the questions. Answer in as much detail as 
possible. Sts then continue either asking their partner 
the question or asking all the people in the group. Tell 
the other student(s) to return the questions using What 
about you?
•	 While Sts are talking, go round and monitor, correcting 
any mistakes with conditionals.
•	 Get feedback from a few pairs or groups.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 174@@
174
8A	I think…
A pairwork activity
Sts complete sentences by guessing real information about 
their partner. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A 
and B.
LANGUAGE
Gerunds and infinitives
I think you’re really good at maths.
•	 Demonstrate the activity by writing on the board: when 
you go on holiday, you love… Elicit that Sts need to continue 
with a gerund. Then tell Sts to guess what you love doing 
on holiday. Elicit answers and then tell the class what you 
really love doing.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. They must not look at what their 
partner writes. Tell them to complete the sentences, 
trying to guess how their partner would complete each 
sentence. Point out that many of the sentence stems 
could be completed with a noun, but Sts must complete 
them with a verb or verb phrase in either the gerund 
or the infinitive. Monitor and check that Sts are using 
gerunds and infinitives correctly.
•	 When they are ready, Sts take turns to read their 
completed sentences to their partner, who tells them if 
they have guessed correctly or not. Encourage them to 
react by contradicting what their partner has said, and 
then giving the real answer if their guess is wrong, e.g. No, 
I don’t. I hate sunbathing! But I love walking / reading, etc.
•	 Get feedback from various pairs and find out who, in each 
pair, had more correct guesses.
 EXTRA IDEA   If you want to give more practice, get Sts to 
repeat the activity by swapping roles A and B as well as 
partners.
8B	I want to speak to the manager
A pairwork role-play activity
Sts role-play different situations. Copy one worksheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Reported speech
I asked the shop assistant if they would change it.
He said (that) there were no more in my size.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. Tell 
them they are going to role-play two situations. Tell them 
to read the first situation and prepare the information they 
will need, including what the person they spoke to told 
them. Give Sts time to do this and encourage them to 
write notes if they need to.
•	 Sts then role-play the first situation. Monitor to make sure 
Sts are doing the activity properly.
•	 When they have finished the first role-play, tell them to 
repeat the process for the second situation.
•	 Get feedback to find out who succeeded in their aims for 
the role-play.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If you have an odd number of Sts, they can 
help A or B with the complaint. Pairing strong and weaker 
Sts for this would work well.
9A	Sentence race
A pairwork or group activity
Sts complete sentences using the third conditional. Copy 
one worksheet per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
Third conditional
If I’d known you were coming, I’d have cooked dinner.
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and give out the 
worksheets.
•	 Set a time limit, e.g. 10 minutes, and tell Sts they have 
to complete as many sentences as possible in this time. 
Stress that the sentences must be grammatically correct 
and make sense. Demonstrate the activity with the first 
sentence if necessary. Monitor and help.
•	 Stop the activity when time is up, and elicit sentences 
from different pairs / groups. The pair / group with the 
most correct sentences is the winner of the race.
Possible answers
1	 We wouldn’t have been late if you hadn’t overslept.
2	 You would have slept better if you hadn’t watched TV until 
really late.
3	 If you’d told me you were vegan, I would have made you  
a salad.
4	 We would have seen the film if we had got to the cinema 
on time.
5	 If I’d had more money, I would have bought a better phone.
6	 We would have picked you up at the airport if we’d known 
when your flight arrived.
7	 If I hadn’t lost my wallet, I wouldn’t have had to renew my 
cards.
8	 If we’d missed our train, we would have phoned you.
9	 We wouldn’t have gone to that hotel if we’d read the 
reviews.
 10	 If our team had played better, we would have won.
 11	 If you’d used Google maps, you wouldn’t have got lost.
 12	 I wouldn’t have lent you that money if I’d needed it.
 13	 If you hadn’t left the door open, the cat wouldn’t have got 
out.
 14	 We would have bought that house if the bank had given us 
a mortgage.
 15	 If I’d known you were coming, I would have made a cake.
 16	 If you hadn’t reminded me of the appointment, I would 
have missed it.
 17	 We wouldn’t have been able to buy the car if we hadn’t 
asked my parents for a loan.
 18	 I would have left a tip at the restaurant if the waiter hadn’t 
been so unpleasant.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 175@@
175
9B	True or not?
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts read sentences and then say if they are true for them 
or not, providing more information. Copy one worksheet 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
Quantifiers
It’s too far for me to walk to school. I usually get the bus.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell Sts to 
read the sentences and say if they are true for them or not. 
Demonstrate the activity if necessary. Read out the first 
sentence on the worksheet, I usually drink plenty of water. 
Say if it’s true for you and give some extra information  
(I don’t really drink water because I prefer other drinks, like tea 
or Diet Coke.).
•	 Monitor to make sure Sts are doing the activity correctly. 
Encourage them to give more information. 
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
10A	Relative clauses quiz
A pairwork quiz
Sts complete questions using relative pronouns and then ask 
a partner the questions. Copy one worksheet per pair and 
cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Relative pronouns
Can you tell me the sport which is played at Wimbledon?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and give Sts time to complete the questions 
with a relative pronoun. 
•	 When all Sts have completed their questions, check 
answers either orally or by writing the pronouns on the 
board.
A	 Sport 1 which, 2 which; Art and literature 1 who,  
2 whose; Film and TV 1 who, 2 where; Geography 1 which, 
2 where; Technology 1 whose, 2 where
B	 Sport 1 where, 2 whose; Art and literature 1 whose,  
2 who; Film and TV 1 where, 2 who; Geography 1 where, 
2 which; Technology 1 where, 2 which
•	 Sts sit face to face if possible.
•	 Focus on b. Explain that first Sts must ask their partner the 
question without giving the three alternative answers. 
If their partner gets it right, he / she gets three points. If 
he / she gets it wrong, then they should give the three 
alternatives. If their partner chooses the correct option 
(the one in bold), he / she gets one point.
•	 When Sts have finished, ask each pair who got more 
points.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write some more quiz 
questions of their own.
10B	Four little mysteries
A pairwork activity
Sts read the mysteries and try to solve them. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Crime vocabulary
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Explain that 
they’re going to solve some mysteries. Give Sts time to 
read the four stories and answer the questions. 
•	 Monitor and help if necessary. 
•	 Elicit ideas from various pairs and then give the correct 
answers.
1	 They knew Sean was lying because he said he saw ’a 
guy come up behind him’, but the victim was shot in the 
stomach.
2	 It was the maid. She said she was getting the post, but 
there is no delivery on Sunday.
3	 The waitress had told him she served him on their only 
plain plate. When she brought his ‘new plate of food’, it was 
on the same plate.
4	 The assistant reminded the businesswoman that her key 
was safely locked inside the letterbox that it unlocks. After 
all, she posted it there.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write their own mysteries.
Revision
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts ask each other questions about key vocabulary areas, 
using a range of tenses and verb forms from the Student’s 
Book. This could either be used as a final ‘pre-test’ revision or 
as an oral exam. Copy and cut up one set of cards per pair.
LANGUAGE
Grammar and vocabulary of the book
I’ve known Joe for 12 years.
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give each pair a set of cards face down.  
Sts take turns to pick up the top card and talk to their 
partner about the topic on the card, using the prompts.
•	 Tell Sts to keep their cards and then if there is time, to 
swap cards with their partner.
•	 Encourage Sts to ask follow-up questions.
•	 Monitor, help, and correct if necessary.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Make one copy per pair. Give Sts 
a few moments to read through the cards. Sts A choose a 
number for Sts B, who then talk about what’s on the card for 
that number. Sts continue taking turns to choose a topic for 
their partner to talk about.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 176@@
176
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
COMMUNICATIVE  Getting to know you
Student A
  instructions
 	
Read your instructions and write your answers in the correct place in the chart.
In the star, write your first name and surname.
In square 1, write the year you started learning English.
In circle 2, write two things you really like doing when you have some free time.
In square 3, write the number of the month when you were born (e.g. October = 10).
In circle 4, write the name of a famous person you admire.
In square 5, write the name of the last film you saw at home or at the cinema.
In circle 6, write the name of the most beautiful place you’ve ever been to.
In square 7, write the names of two sports you think are really boring (or interesting) to watch.
In circle 8, write the name of the person you get on with best in your family.
In square 9, write the name of a famous group or singer you really like (or don’t like).
In circle 10, write the name of a TV programme you often watch.
	
Swap charts with B. Ask B to explain the information in his / her chart. Try to find out as much  
as you can.
Why did you write ‘3’? 
Because it’s how many brothers and sisters I have.
What are their names? 
 	
Explain your answers to B.
 a
 b
 c
1
2
4
6
8
10
3
5
7
9
Student A
  chart
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 177@@
177
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
COMMUNICATIVE  Getting to know you
Student B
  instructions
 	
Read your instructions and write your answers in the correct place in the chart.
In the star, write your first name and surname.
In square 1, write the number of brothers and sisters you have.
In circle 2, write two things you don’t like doing at weekends.
In square 3, write the number of the house or flat where you live.
In circle 4, write the name of a really good friend.
In square 5, write the name of the place where you spent your last holiday.
In circle 6, write the name of a place you’d like to visit.
In square 7, write the name of a subject you really loved (or love) at school.
In circle 8, write the name of two kinds of music you really like.
In square 9, write an animal you have or would like to have as a pet.
In circle 10, write the name of a TV personality you really like (or don’t like).
	
Swap charts with A. Ask A to explain the information in his / her chart. Try to find out as much  
as you can.
Why did you write ‘Sebastian’? 
Because it’s the name of the person I get on with best in my family.
Who is Sebastian? 
 	
Explain your answers to A.
 a
 b
 c
1
2
4
6
8
10
3
5
7
9
Student B
  chart
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 178@@
178
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A  COMMUNICATIVE  Describing a photo
Student A
 	
Look at your photo for a 
minute. Describe it to B.
	
Listen to B’s description.
 	
Look at both photos 
together. Is B’s like you 
imagined?
	
Answer these questions 
with your partner.
1	 Do you prefer a 
home-cooked meal or 
restaurant food? Why?
2	 Do you think children 
should learn how to 
cook? At what age? Why?
3	 When you want to celebrate something, do you go out, or do you cook? Why?
4	 What’s your favourite restaurant? What things do you like about it?
5	 Do you enjoy cooking, or do you hate it? Why? What’s the most complicated dish you can make?
6	 When was the last time you ate out? What did you have?
 a
 b
 c
 d
 	
Look at your photo for a 
minute. Now listen to A’s 
description.
	
Describe your photo to A.
 	
Look at both photos 
together. Is A’s like you 
imagined?
	
Answer these questions 
with your partner.
1	 Do you prefer a 
home-cooked meal or 
restaurant food? Why?
2	 Do you think children 
should learn how to 
cook? At what age? Why?
3	 When you want to celebrate something, do you go out, or do you cook? Why?
4	 What’s your favourite restaurant? What things do you like about it?
5	 Do you enjoy cooking, or do you hate it? Why? What’s the most complicated dish you can make?
6	 When was the last time you ate out? What did you have?
 a
 b
 c
 d
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 179@@
179
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B  COMMUNICATIVE  Who is it?
 	
You’re going to tell your partner about someone in your family, or someone you know very well. 
Look at the question prompts in the chart and think of your answers to the questions.
	
Student A: Ask B about his or her person. Use the questions in the chart, but ask for more 
information, too. Try to guess who the person is: a parent, their boyfriend or girlfriend, their best 
friend, a work colleague, etc. 
Student B: Answer A’s questions. Give as much information as possible about him / her, but don’t 
tell A who he / she is.
 	
Swap roles.
 a
 b
 c
a parent
a stepmother / stepfather
a grandparent
a brother / sister
a nephew / niece
your boyfriend / girlfriend
your husband / wife
your best friend
a work colleague
5
Person’s first name 
	
Family
Where / born?
Where / live?
Who / live with?
	
Interests
What / like doing in / free time?
/ do any sport or exercise? Which?
What kind / music / like?
/ speak foreign languages? Which?
	
Occupation / Studies
What / do?
Where / work or study?
How long / worked (or studied) there?
/ like / job or studies? Why (not)?
	
Your relationship with this person
How long / you known him (or her)?
How often / see each other?
/ get on well?
What / have in common?
What / do together?
When / you / see him (or her) next?
Do you think / know him (or her) / ten years’ 
time?
	
Appearance and personality
What / look like?
What kind / clothes / wear?
What / like?
What / best and worst quality?
1
2
3
4
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 180@@
180
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2A  COMMUNICATIVE  Are you a saver or a spender?
MOSTLY a – You’re a SPENDER! You enjoy spending money and having new things. You aren’t very good at 
keeping track of your money, or saving. You’re probably very generous and like giving gifts to other people. 
You should probably try to plan a bit more for the future. Try saving a small amount every week and put it in a 
bank account. You’ll see results in no time!
MOSTLY b – You’re not a spender or a saver, you’re somewhere in the middle! You know that saving is 
important and you do what you can to make sure you save money, but you don’t spend too much time thinking 
about it. You don’t have a problem spending money on holidays or things that you think are important, but 
maybe you’re also afraid of taking risks with money. 
MOSTLY c – You’re a SAVER! You know exactly how much money you have in your bank account and you’re 
very careful with how you spend it. You want to make sure you have money for emergencies and in the future. 
You may know a lot about investments and which banks give you a good deal. Sometimes, though, it’s nice to 
spend money on gifts or holidays. You can afford them!
1	
Do you normally have cash in your wallet?
	
a	 No, I always use my debit card. It’s so easy now with contactless payments; I can  
even pay for things with my phone.
	
b	 A little, yes. I’ve been in situations where I needed money and couldn’t use my cards.
	
c	 Always. I don’t like paying with cards; it’s much harder to know how much you’ve spent.
2	
You’ve seen something you really love in a shop, but it’s expensive. What do you do?
	
a	 I buy it without thinking about where I’ll get the money for it.
	
b	 I use some of the money I’ve saved and I buy it.
	
c	 I go home and see if I can find it on the internet for less money. If I can’t, I don’t buy it.
3	
If you won or inherited money, what would you spend it on?
	
a	 I would spend it all on things I want, including gifts for others.
	
b	 I would spend some of the money and I would put the rest in the bank.
	
c	 I would think of ways to invest it to get as much interest as possible.
4	
What do you want your money situation to be in the future?
	
a	 I don’t really know. I never think about money.
	
b	 I want to have enough money to live on and make sure that I can buy whatever I want.
	
c	 I don’t want to have to worry about money when I’m older, so I’m saving now.
5	
What’s your attitude to saving money?
	
a	 I think saving money is a bad idea. It’s better to spend it now! 
	
b	 I know I should save money, but I haven’t always found saving easy. I do try, though!
	
c	 I save money without thinking about it. I am regular and consistent about it.
6	
Have you ever borrowed money from friends or family?
	
a	 I’ve borrowed money quite often. I think it’s good to ask for help when you need it.
	
b	 I try not to borrow money because it’s easy to forget to pay it back. I hate owing people money.
	
c	 I hardly ever borrow money, because I always have enough saved for emergencies.
7	
How do you feel about lending money?
	
a	 I’m pretty generous and don’t worry too much about getting it back.
	
b	 I try never to lend money, especially to friends or family. It’s always ended badly for me.
	
c	 I don’t mind lending money at a good interest rate, if I get repaid on time.
8	
Have you ever had a credit card?
	
a	 I use credit cards a lot. I never have enough money to pay for everything I want.
	
b	 Yes, I think they’re really useful. I don’t like being in debt, but if I can pay it back quickly, it’s OK.
	
c	 I don’t like using credit cards, so I don’t have one. I prefer paying by debit card or in cash.
9	
When would you apply for a bank loan?
	
a	 If I wanted to go on holiday, or to buy something I really wanted.
	
b	 If there was a real emergency. 
	
c	 If I had the chance to invest in a business, or some other investment opportunity,  
as long as it was safe.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 181@@
181
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  How long have you been…?
OCCUPATION
Where do you work or study?
How long / work or study  
there?
Do you enjoy your work or studies? Why (not)?
What do you like most about your job or 
studies?
HOUSE
Do you live in a house or in a flat?
How long / live there?
What’s it like?
Would you like to move somewhere else? 
Where to?
INTERESTS
Do you have a special hobby?  
What is it?
How long / do it?
Where do you do it?
Do you need any special equipment? 
Do you do it alone, or with other people?
SPORT
Do you do any sport or exercise?  
What is it?
How long / do it?
Who do you do it with?
How often do you do it?
What do you like about it?
HOLIDAYS
Is there a place you often go  
to for a holiday?
How long / go there?
What’s special about this place?
Who do you normally go there with?
SOCIAL MEDIA
Are you on Facebook, Twitter,  
Instagram, Pinterest, or any  
other kind of social media?
How long / use it (or them)?
What do you like doing or sharing on social 
media?
How much time do you spend on social media 
sites or apps?
GIVING
Do you give money to a charity,  
e.g. Unicef, Greenpeace,  
Oxfam…?
How long / help them?
Have you ever done volunteer work? Did you 
enjoy it?
Would you consider volunteering for a charity? 
For what kind?
TV
Is there a TV (or online)  
programme or series you  
regularly watch?
How long / watch it?
What’s your favourite thing about it?
Have you recommended it to any of your 
friends / family?
MEETING FRIENDS 
Is there a special place  
(bar, restaurant) where you  
meet up with your friends?
How long / meet there? 
Where is it?
What’s special about it?
LEARNING
Are you learning anything new  
at the moment?
How long / learn it?
Why did you start learning it?
Do you enjoy it? Why (not)?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 182@@
182
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3A  COMMUNICATIVE  Questionnaire
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the questions with a comparative or superlative form of the word in brackets.
 a
 	
Complete the questions with a comparative or superlative form of the word in brackets.
 a
 	
Ask B your questions. Ask for more information.
 b
 	
Ask A your questions. Ask for more information.
 b
English
1  Which do you think is 
 to learn, your own language or English? (hard)
2  What’s 
 thing about studying English? (difficult)
Travelling
1  What’s 
 holiday you’ve ever had? (bad)
2  Which do you use 
, public transport or a car? (often)
Your life
1  During a typical day, are you 
 in the morning or in the afternoon? (active)
2  What’s your 
 habit? (unhealthy)
Friends and family
1  Who’s 
 person in your family? (good-looking)
2  Who in your family are you 
 to? (close)
Technology
1  If you have a technical problem, who’s 
 person you know to help you? (good)
2  Which do you think is 
 , a laptop or a tablet? (practical)
English
1  Apart from English, what do you think is 
 foreign language to learn? (useful)
2  Do you find listening is 
 than speaking? (easy)
Travelling
1  What’s 
 journey you’ve ever been on? (long)
2  Do you think travelling alone is 
 than travelling with friends or family? (enjoyable)
Your life
1  Which part of the day is 
 for you? (relaxing)
2  Do you eat 
 than in the past? (healthily)
Friends and family
1  What’s your 
 friend like? (good)
2  Who’s 
 English speaker in your family? (fluent)
Technology
1  Which do you replace 
, your phone or your laptop / tablet? (often)
2  What’s 
 gadget you’ve ever bought? (expensive)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 183@@
183
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
3B  COMMUNICATIVE  Generally speaking
Women have a better sense of colour than men.
People who spend a long time on 
social media have no social skills.
Cyclists should pass a test before riding a bike.
Vegetarians are healthier than 
people who eat meat.
Young people today have easier lives 
than their parents.
Exercise is only good for you if it hurts.
School friends are for life.
Brothers and sisters don’t usually get on well.
Designer clothes are a waste of money.
People who have a sports car are 
usually fast, aggressive drivers.
Food that tastes good is usually bad for you.
Cats make the best pets.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 184@@
184
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4A  COMMUNICATIVE  Me and my opinions
Student A
 	
Complete the sentences to make them true for you.
 a
	
Read your ABOUT ME sentences to B. Ask What about you? after each sentence. Then listen to B’s 
ABOUT ME sentences and tell him / her about you.
 	
Read your MY OPINIONS sentences to B. Does he / she agree? Then listen to his / her MY OPINIONS. 
Do you agree? Give your reasons.
 b
 c
Student B
 	
Complete the sentences to make them true for you.
 a
	
Listen to A’s ABOUT ME sentences and tell him / her about you. Then read your ABOUT ME 
sentences to A. Ask What about you? after each sentence.
 	
Listen to A’s MY OPINIONS sentences. Do you agree? Give your reasons. Then read your  
MY OPINIONS sentences to A. Does he / she agree?
 b
 c
ABOUT ME
1	 I like people who can 
.
2	 My main reason for learning English is that I want to be 
able to 
.
3	 I’ve always wanted to be able to 
.
4	 I can 
 well because I’ve practised a lot.
MY OPINIONS
1	 A politician should be able to 
.
2	 In a relationship, it’s important to be able to 
.
3	 In the future, people will be able to 
 much better.
4	 If you want to improve your English, you can 
.
ABOUT ME
1	 I couldn’t 
 when I was little.
2	 I can 
 in English, but I can’t 
.
3	 I get stressed when I can’t 
.
4	 When I finish this course, I want to be able to 
.
MY OPINIONS
1	 Teenagers should be able to 
.
2	 Humans will never be able to 
.
3	 I admire people who can 
.
4	 To be successful in life, you have to be able to 
.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 185@@
185
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
4B  COMMUNICATIVE  Tell us about…
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Tell us  
about…
START
Two things 
you shouldn’t 
do before you 
go to bed.
Two things 
you have to 
do after class 
today.
Two things 
you must do 
before you 
catch a plane.
Three things 
you don’t 
have to do 
when you’re on 
holiday.
Two things you 
shouldn’t do 
the night before 
an exam.
Two things  
you don’t have 
to do if you  
shop online.
One thing you 
must do and  
one thing you 
mustn’t do when 
you’re driving.
Two things  
you should think 
about before  
you buy a new 
phone.
One thing you  
had to do when 
you were a child 
that you really 
disliked.
Two things  
you have to do if 
you want to live 
and work in an 
English-speaking 
country.
Two things  
you should find 
out about a 
country before 
you visit it.
Two things  
you shouldn’t 
talk about with 
strangers.
Two things  
a teacher has 
to do before  
a class.
Two things 
 you should  
do if you’ve  
been invited  
for dinner.
Two things 
you shouldn’t 
do if you  
have flu.
Two things  
you have to  
do at work / 
 in class.
Three things a 
good student has 
to do to improve 
their English.
Two things  
you have to do  
in an airport.
One thing  
you should do  
if you have a 
headache.
Two things you 
should do and 
two things you 
shouldn’t do when 
you have a job 
interview.
6
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 186@@
186
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5A  COMMUNICATIVE  Marathon cheats
Student A
Student B
 	
Read the story.
	
Now answer these questions.
1	 What is the Comrades Marathon?
2	 What happened on 16th June 1999?
3	 Why did Nick Bester complain?
4	 What was wrong with the photos  
of Sergio?
5	 Why were the brothers disqualified?
 	
Cover the text and look at your 
questions and answers. Tell B  
your story.
 	
Now listen to B’s story.
 a
 b
 c
 d
 	
Read the story.
	
Now answer these questions.
1	 What happened on  
10th October 2011?
2	 Why were the other runners 
surprised? 
3	 What did the organizers think was 
suspicious?
4	 What did Rob Sloan confess?
5	 Why was Steve Cairns angry?
 	
Listen to A’s story.
 	
Now cover the text and look at  
your questions and answers.  
Tell A your story.
 a
 b
 c
 d
Seeing double
The Comrades 
Marathon is an 
ultramarathon in 
which people run  
89 km. It takes 
place in South 
Africa and it’s 
the oldest and 
most famous 
ultramarathon. 
People who run 
it can win a lot of 
money, so a lot of people compete every year. On 16th June 1999, 
a young man called Sergio Motsoeneng finished ninth and he got 
$1,000 prize money. But Nick Bester, who finished in 15th place, 
said that he hadn’t seen Sergio pass him. The officials checked 
that Sergio had been at all the stops and lots of people had 
seen him. It seemed that everything was OK, until a newspaper 
published two photos of Sergio. In the first photo, Sergio was 
wearing a yellow watch on his left wrist, but in the second photo 
he was wearing a pink watch on his right wrist. His legs looked 
different, too. Sergio had gone to a toilet after 45 minutes of 
running and changed places with his brother, Fika, who was 
waiting for him inside. They had changed places several times 
during the marathon. Both brothers were disqualified.
The bus ride
On 10th October 2011, Rob 
Sloan won third place at 
the Kielder Marathon. He 
completed the 26.2 mile race 
in an impressive time of two 
hours and 51 minutes. The 
other runners were surprised 
because they didn’t remember 
seeing Rob pass them, 
especially Steve Cairns, who 
had finished in fourth place. 
When they asked Rob, he was 
very angry and said that he 
had run the whole marathon. The organizers checked the times 
and realized that Rob had run the second half of the marathon 
quicker than the first half. This was really suspicious. Some 
spectators also said that they had seen Rob get off a bus near the 
finish line. Rob confessed that he had decided to leave the race 
after 20 miles, because he was feeling very tired. But then he had 
seen a bus that was taking tourists to the finish line and got on 
it. He then jumped out of the crowd near the finish line and ran 
the final section of the marathon. The marathon organizers took 
his medal away and gave it to Steve Cairns, the real third place 
winner. Steve Cairns was still really angry, because he felt that 
Rob Sloan had stolen his moment of glory.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 187@@
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Past and present
START
FINISH
Have 
another 
go!
What things 
do you usually 
prefer doing with 
your friends?
Was there a  
song you used to 
love as a child?
What things  
did you use to do 
with your parents, 
but don’t do 
anymore?
How often do  
you usually see 
your extended 
family (aunts, 
cousins, etc.)?
Did you use  
to behave  
badly at school? 
What kind of 
things did you do?
What used to  
be your favourite 
thing to eat  
as a child?
Are there any 
family members 
you used to  
visit a lot?
Are there  
any books you 
used to love when 
you were little?
How did  
you use to get in 
touch with your 
friends when you 
were a child?
What special 
places do you 
usually go to with 
your family?
Did you use  
to get on with your  
brothers / sisters / 
cousins when you  
were little?
Are there any  
films you used to 
love, but don’t  
like anymore?
How do you 
usually get in 
touch with your 
friends?
Who do you usually 
phone when you 
have a problem?
Who do you  
usually go out with 
at weekends?
What do you 
usually do on 
Sundays?
Did you  
have a best 
friend at primary 
school?
1
18
2
17
3
16
4
15
5
14
6
13
7
12
8
11
9
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 188@@
188
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  Film quiz
Student A
Student B
1	 Which series of books 
 the film Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find 
Them 
 (base) on?
	
a  Harry Potter    b  Lord of the Rings    c  The Hunger Games
2	 Which of these films 
 (shoot) in London?
	
a  Notting Hill    b  Braveheart    c  Deadpool
3	 Which historical period 
 the film Dunkirk 
 (set) in?
	
a  World War I    b  World War II    c  The Napoleonic Wars
4	 How many of the Star Wars films 
 (direct) by George Lucas?
	
a  2    b  3    c  4
5	 Which of these films 
 (base) on a novel by Stephen King?
	
a  Friday the 13th    b  It    c  The Exorcist
6	 In what year 
 the Oscar for Best Special Effects 
 (introduce)?
	
a  1939    b  1949    c  1959
7	 How many times 
 Meryl Streep 
 (nominate) for an Oscar?
	
a  over 10    b  over 20    c  over 30
8	 Which film’s soundtrack 
 (composed) by Hans Zimmer?
	
a  Rogue One    b  Kung Fu Panda    c  Avatar
1	 Which of these films 
 (direct) by Steven Spielberg?
	
a  Jurassic World    b  The Return of the Jedi    
c  Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
2	 Which of these films 
 (base) on a true event?
	
a  Battle of the Sexes    b  Murder on the Orient Express    c  La La Land
3	 Which film had a character 
 (dub) in Chinese by the actor 
Jackie Chan?
	
a  Mulan    b  Hercules    c  Toy Story
4	 Which of these films 
 (make) in 3D?
	
a  Star Wars: The Force Awakens    b  X-Men: Apocalypse    c  Doctor Strange
5	 Which actress 
 (choose) to play Wonder Woman?
	
a  Emma Stone    b  Lupita Nyong’o    c  Gal Gadot
6	 Which animation film 
 (nominate) for an Oscar for  
Best Picture?
	
a  Beauty and the Beast    b  Tarzan    c  Aladdin
7	 Which famous person 
 (play) by Tom Hanks in Saving Mr Banks?
	
a  John McEnroe    b  Walt Disney    c  Bill Clinton
8	 Which of these films 
 (set) in the future?
	
a  Star Wars    b  Star Trek    c  E.T. – The Extra-Terrestrial
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 189@@
189
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
6B  COMMUNICATIVE  Who do you think they might be?
 	
Look at the people in the photos and the list of jobs below. Each person does one of the jobs  
from the list. Individually, think about which person might do which job.
boxer  hairdresser  mathematician  model  musician  poet  politician  yoga teacher
	
Now discuss each person with your partner. Eliminate the jobs you think are impossible for that 
person. Use He / She can’t be a… and say why.
The woman in photo 1 can’t be a boxer because… 
 	
Now say which jobs you think are possible. Use He / She might be…
She might be a musician or a yoga teacher… 
	
Now make a final choice for each person. Use He / She must be… and say why. Your teacher will 
give you the answers.
She must be a …because… 
 a
 b
 c
 d
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 190@@
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
O
O
O
O
X
X
X
X
After we 
choose where 
to go on 
holiday…
You won’t  
pass that  
exam unless…
I’ll probably 
go shopping 
after…
If we don’t 
hurry…
They’ll lend  
us the money 
as soon as…
If Sally doesn’t 
come soon…
We’ll look at 
other hotels 
before…
Give him  
my phone 
number if…
I won’t  
leave until…
I’ll be at  
work until…
If you  
don’t stop 
looking at 
your phone…
I won’t buy  
a new laptop 
unless…
Unless you 
work really 
hard…
After we  
have dinner…
As soon as  
I get home  
this evening…
I’ll ring her  
as soon as…
Tell her to  
send me an 
email when…
If you don’t 
pick me up 
after class…
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  Three in a row
I won’t move 
house until…
If I see Mark…
He won’t get 
that job if…
When I finish 
this course…
Unless they 
get here 
quickly…
After he  
gets here…
You’ll never 
get better 
at football 
unless…
As soon as  
you finish  
your coffee…
Send me a  
text when…
1
3
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 191@@
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
7B  COMMUNICATIVE  If you had to choose…
 	
Talk to a partner. Explain your answers.
I’d prefer to live in a new flat,  
because if I lived in an old flat, I’d have 
to do a lot of work on it.
If you had to choose…
Would you prefer to live in 
a new flat, or in an old flat 
which you could renovate 
yourself?
Would you prefer to have a 
holiday house on the coast or 
in the mountains?
Would you prefer to have 
a house with solar energy 
or a house with traditional 
electricity?
If you had space in your 
house, would you prefer to 
have a gym or a games room?
Would you prefer to live in a 
four-bedroom house in the 
country or a one-bedroom 
flat in the city centre?
Would you prefer to live 
in a house next to a 
primary school or next to a 
restaurant?
Would you prefer to live in a 
modern, spacious apartment 
or in an old, cosy house?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 192@@
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8A  COMMUNICATIVE  I think…
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the sentences for your partner with a verb (phrase) in the gerund or infinitive.
1	 When you go on holiday, you love 
.
2	 When you were young, your parents didn’t use to let 
you 
.
3	 A job in the house you don’t mind 
doing is 
.
4	 You would like to learn 
.
5	 You’re not very good at 
.
6	 When you’re on your own, you enjoy 
.
7	 When you leave the house in the morning, you never 
forget 
.
8	 When you were younger, you wanted 
.
9	 This evening, you’d like 
.
 
10	 When you’re with your friends, you spend a lot of 
time 
.
	
Read your sentences to B. He / She will tell you 
if 
they are true or not.
I think when you go on holiday, you love… 
 a
 b
 	
Complete the sentences for your partner with a verb (phrase) in the gerund or infinitive.
1	 On Sunday mornings, you really 
like 
.
2	 You’re really good at 
.
3	 In class, you enjoy 
.
4	 When you were a child, your parents used to make 
you 
.
5	 This weekend, you’re planning 
.
6	 You’re really looking forward to 
.
7	 In the future, you hope 
.
8	 Something that makes you feel good  
is 
.
9	 On Saturdays, you hate 
.
 
10	 You are learning English to 
.
	
Read your sentences to A. He / She will tell you 
if 
they are true or not.
I think on Sunday mornings, you really like… 
 a
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 193@@
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  I want to speak to the manager
Student A
Student B
 	
Look at the situations. Spend a few minutes preparing what you’re going to say.
 a
 	
Look at the situations. Spend a few minutes preparing what you’re going to say.
 a
	
Role-play situation 1. You start.
Excuse me, I bought… 
 	
Now role-play situation 2. B will start.
 b
 c
	
Role-play situation 1. A will start.
 	
Now role-play situation 2. You start.
Good evening. Are you the manager? 
 b
 c
Situation 1
You’re a customer in a 
clothes shop.
You bought something in a clothes shop 
in the sales yesterday (decide what) and 
there’s a problem (decide what). 
Go back to the shop. You’ve spoken to 
a shop assistant, but she didn’t help 
you (decide what she said). B is the 
manager. You’d like to change your 
item for another identical one. If you 
can’t, you’d like a refund. You should 
also complain about what the shop 
assistant told you.
Situation 1
You’re the manager of  
a clothes shop.
A is a customer. He / She is going to 
come to you with a problem with 
something he / she bought in the 
sales yesterday. A has spoken to a 
shop assistant. You can’t change A’s 
item for an identical one because 
there are no more in his / her size.
Try to persuade A to change it for 
something else, because you don’t 
usually give refunds during the sales.
Situation 2
You’re the manager of  
a restaurant.
Your normal chef is off this week  
and you have a temporary chef  
who is not very good. One of 
the waiters has a problem with a 
customer, who would like to speak 
to you. When customers complain, 
you usually offer them a free drink or 
a coffee. If it’s absolutely necessary, 
you might give a 10% discount on 
their bill, but you would prefer not 
to. B is the customer.
Situation 2
You’re a customer in  
a restaurant.
You’ve just finished your meal 
(decide what you had) and you 
didn’t enjoy it at all (decide what was 
wrong with it). You’ve complained 
to the waiter, but he didn’t solve 
the problem (decide what he said). 
You’ve asked the waiter to call the 
manager. Try to get at least a 50% 
discount on your meal. You should 
also complain about what the waiter 
told you. A is the manager.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 194@@
194
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
I would have left a tip at the restaurant if 
.
18
We wouldn’t have been able to buy the car if we 
.
17
If you hadn’t reminded me of the appointment,  
I 
.
16
If I’d known you were coming, I 
.
15
We would have bought that house if 
.
14
If you hadn’t left the door open, 
.
13
I wouldn’t have lent you that money if 
.
12
If you’d used Google maps, you 
 
.
11
9A  COMMUNICATIVE  Sentence race
If our team had played better, 
 
.
10
We wouldn’t have gone to that hotel if 
.
9
If we’d missed our train, we 
.
8
If I hadn’t lost my wallet, I 
.
7
We would have picked you up at the airport if 
.
6
If I’d had more money, I 
.
5
We would have seen the film if 
.
4
If you’d told me you were vegan, I 
 
.
3
You would have slept better if 
 
.
2
We wouldn’t have been late if 
 
.
1
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 195@@
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
9B  COMMUNICATIVE  True or not?
 	
Are these things true for you? Talk about them.
I usually drink plenty of water.
I have plenty of 
different hobbies.
I take lots of selfies.
I spend lots of time with my family.
I have lots of apps on my phone that I never use.
I always have too many 
things to do at the weekend.
I only have a few really close friends.
I post loads of photos 
on social media sites.
I always eat plenty of fruit and vegetables.
I have no time to do English 
homework in the evenings.
I never wake up 
early enough 
during the week.
I should probably spend 
less time on my phone.
I think maybe I eat out too much.
I don’t have enough space  
in my room for all my things.
I spend very little time outdoors.
It’s too far for me to walk to work / school.
I worry too 
much about my 
appearance.
I eat very few sweet 
things, except on 
special occasions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 196@@
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10A  COMMUNICATIVE  Relative clauses quiz
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the questions with who, which, 
where, or whose.
	
Ask B the questions. (Begin with Can you 
tell me…?)
	
If B knows the answer, he / she gets  
three points.
	
If B doesn’t know the answer, give him / her 
the three options.
	
If B gets it right, he / she gets one point.
 a
 b
 	
Complete the questions with who, which, 
where, or whose.
	
Ask A the questions. (Begin with Can you 
tell me…?)
	
If A knows the answer, he / she gets  
three points.
	
If A doesn’t know the answer, give him / her 
the three options.
	
If A gets it right, he / she gets one point.
 a
 b
Sport
1	 the sport 
 is played at Wimbledon 
a  cricket
b  polo  c  tennis
2	 the name of the item 
 is used as a 
ball in ice hockey 
a  ball  b  puck  c  disk
Art and literature
1	 the name of the singer / songwriter 
 
won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2016 
a  Leonard Cohen  b  Ed Sheeran  c  Bob Dylan
2	 the name of the artist 
 most 
famous work was the Mona Lisa 
a  Caravaggio  b  Leonardo da Vinci  
c  Michelangelo
Film and TV
1	 the name of the actor 
 plays Luke 
Skywalker in the Star Wars films 
a  Mark Hamill  b  Harrison Ford  c  Alec Guinness
2	 the city 
 Leonardo DiCaprio was born 
a  Florence  b  Los Angeles  c  Munich
Geography
1	 the continent 
 has the largest 
population 
a  Africa  b  Asia  c  South America
2	 the city 
 you can find the Spanish 
Steps 
a  Buenos Aires  b  Moscow  c  Rome
Technology
1	 the name of the company 
 logo is a 
piece of fruit 
a  Apple  b  Cherry  c  Raspberry
2	 the university 
 Facebook was invented 
a  Harvard  b  Stanford  c  Yale
Sport
1	 the name of the city 
 the 2016 
Olympic Games took place 
a  Rio de Janeiro  b  London  c  Tokyo
2	 the sports company 
 slogan is ‘Just do it’ 
a  Adidas  b  Nike  c  Reebok
Art and literature
1	 the name of the painter 
 works of 
art included a can of soup 
a  David Hockney  b  Damien Hirst  c  Andy Warhol
2	 the name of the writer 
 wrote the 
James Bond books 
a  Raymond Chandler  b  Ian Fleming  
c  John Le Carré
Film and TV
1	 the planet 
 Superman comes from 
a  Arrakis  b  Galileo  c  Krypton
2	 the name of the actress 
 is married 
to Javier Bardem 
a  Penélope Cruz  b  Cameron Diaz  
c  Salma Hayek
Geography
1	 the European city 
 Greenpeace has 
its headquarters 
a  Amsterdam  b  Dublin  c  Stockholm
2	 two countries 
 have a border with 
the Netherlands 
a  France and Germany  b  Germany and Switzerland  
c  Germany and Belgium
Technology
1	 the country 
 Samsung is based 
a  Japan  b  South Korea  c  China
2	 the other products 
 the car 
company Tesla makes 
a  batteries and computer screens 
b  solar panels and phone screens  
c  batteries and solar panels
Can you tell me…?
Can you tell me…?
Can you tell me…?
Can you tell me…?
Can you tell me…?
Can you tell me…?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 197@@
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
10B  COMMUNICATIVE  Four little mysteries
 	
Read the four mysteries. With your partner, try to answer the questions. Give your reasons.
A man was eating at a restaurant. When his food came, his waitress told him that they had 
run out of their usual elegant dinner plates and had to serve his meal on their only plain 
plate. The man didn’t mind, but there was an insect in his food. The waitress took it away 
and said she would bring him a new plate of food. When she came back, the man knew 
she had only thrown away the insect. How did he know?
There’s an insect on my plate!
There’s an insect on my plate!
3
A crime happened in Freemont Street. The main suspect is a man named Sean Baker.  
A man had been walking along the street when somebody shot him in the stomach. The 
suspect had brown hair, blue eyes, and wore a baggy suit, just like Sean Baker’s.
Sean was asked to tell the story right from the beginning. ‘Well,’ said Sean, ‘I was just 
hanging around the park when I saw this man walking along the street. Suddenly, a guy 
came up behind him and shot him! I ran home as fast as I could.’
The policemen asked him to give a description of the murderer. Sean said, ‘He had a red 
moustache and red hair, and he was wearing a baggy Armani suit.’
‘I think this man is telling a lie,’ said one of the policemen. How did he know?
Baggy suit
Baggy suit
1
A man was found murdered on Sunday morning. His wife immediately called the police.  
The police questioned the wife and staff and got these answers:
The wife said she was sleeping. The cook said she was preparing breakfast. The gardener 
said he was gathering vegetables. The maid said she was getting the post.
The police instantly arrested the murderer. Who did it and how did they know?
Sunday murder
2 Sunday murder
A businesswoman went away on a long business trip. Before she left, she asked her 
assistant to forward all of her post. However, she forgot to give the assistant the key to her 
letterbox. When she realized her mistake, she posted the key to her office, so the assistant 
could send her post to her. But the assistant never did. The businesswoman got angry 
and phoned her office, planning to fire her assistant. However, the assistant was able to 
explain why she hadn’t sent the post. The businesswoman quickly realized her mistake 
and apologized. What did the assistant say to make the businesswoman apologize?
You have mail
4 You have mail
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 198@@
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
COMMUNICATIVE  REVISION
	
Food and cooking
Talk for one minute about what and where you eat.
•	 Do you think you have a healthy diet? Why (not)?
•	 Are you trying to cut down on anything at the 
moment?
•	 Do you prefer eating out or eating at home? Why?
•	 What’s your favourite dish when you eat out?
2	 Family and friends
Describe a member of your family.
•	 What does he / she look like?
•	 What is he / she like? (Give two positive and two 
negative characteristics.)
•	 In what ways are you similar or different?
•	 How well do you get on with this person?
	
Money
Tell your partner about your attitude to money.
•	 Are you careful with money? How?
•	 Do you usually leave tips in bars, taxis, or 
restaurants? Why (not)?
•	 Is there anything you don’t like spending money on?  
Why (not?)
•	 Do you think credit cards are a good thing? Why (not?)
4	 Transport
Talk to your partner about transport in your town.
•	 What’s your favourite form of transport? Why?
•	 What’s the best and worst way to get around your 
town / city?
•	 How do you get to the place where you work / study?
•	 If you could change one thing about transport in your 
town, what would it be?
	
Sport
Tell your partner about…
•	 a sport you really like watching or doing.
•	 a sport you used to do and why you stopped.
•	 a team you support. How long have you been 
supporting them? Do you go and see them play?
•	 the sporting event you most remember.
6	 Relationships
Tell your partner about a good friend of yours.
•	 How long have you known each other?
•	 How and where did you meet?
•	 Why do you get on well together?
•	 Have you ever had a serious argument?
•	 How often do you see each other?
	
The cinema
Think of a film (but don’t say the name). Describe it for 
your partner to guess.
•	 Where is it set?
•	 Is it based on a book?
•	 Who is it directed by?
•	 Who is in it?
•	 What is it about?
8	 Your education
Tell your partner about your secondary school (or 
primary school if you are still at school).
•	 Did you use to wear a uniform?
•	 What subjects were you good at / bad at?
•	 Did you use to have a favourite teacher?
•	 Were there any teachers you didn’t like? Why (not)?
	
Your home
Talk about your home.
•	 Where do you live?
•	 How long have you lived there?
•	 What kind of house or flat is it? Can you describe it?
•	 What do you like about it and the area where you live? 
What don’t you like?
10	Work
Think of a friend or family member who has a job. Tell 
your partner about the good and bad side of his / her 
job. Talk about…
•	 the salary.
•	 the hours.
•	 the holidays.
•	 the best and worst thing about the job.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 199@@
199
Introduction Classroom language
	 	
A revision activity
Sts revise classroom language. Copy one worksheet per 
student.
LANGUAGE
Phrases and questions to use in class
•	 Give each student a worksheet. Focus on each section and 
elicit / explain the meaning and drill the pronunciation of 
each question.
•	 If Sts wish, they can write a translation of each line 
alongside it. You could get Sts to test themselves or each 
other by covering each line and looking at the translation.
•	 Tell Sts that these are questions that you expect Sts to 
always use in English, and be strict about not letting them 
say them in their L1.
 EXTRA IDEA   You could copy and enlarge this sheet and put 
it up in the classroom to help Sts.
1A	Food and cooking
	 	
A card game
Sts define words / phrases for other Sts to guess. Copy and 
cut up one set of cards per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with food and cooking
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Give each pair / group a 
set of cards face down, or in an envelope.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Choose another word (not one 
of the ones on the cards) from the Vocabulary Bank 
Food and cooking p.152. Describe it, e.g. It’s meat which 
comes from a cow, until a student guesses the word (beef ). 
Highlight that Sts are not allowed to use the word(s) on 
the card in their definition.
•	 Sts put the cards face down. They play the game, taking 
turns to pick up a card and describe the word / phrase. 
Sts describing the word / phrase mustn’t let their partners 
see what’s on the card. Tell Sts to wait until their partner 
has finished his / her description before trying to guess 
the word.
 EXTRA IDEA   If Sts are playing in groups, the student who 
correctly guesses the word first gets the card. The student 
with the most cards at the end of the game wins.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Put Sts in pairs. Copy one sheet per 
pair and fold it down the middle. Sts look at one half each, 
and take turns to describe the words / phrases to their 
partners until they guess the correct answer.
1B	Personality
	 	
An information gap activity
Sts define words to help their partner complete a crossword. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Personality adjectives
•	 Put Sts in pairs, ideally face to face, and give out the 
crosswords. Make sure that Sts can’t see each other’s 
worksheets. Explain that A and B have the same 
crossword, but with different words missing. They have to 
define words to each other to complete their crosswords.
•	 Give Sts a minute to read their instructions. If Sts 
don’t know what a word means, they can look it up in 
Vocabulary Bank Personality p.153. Make sure Sts 
understand the difference between across and down. 
Remind them that they can’t use any part of the word in 
their definition.
•	 Sts take turns to ask each other for their missing words 
(e.g. What’s 1 down? What’s 3 across?). Their partner must 
define / describe the word until the other student is able 
to write it in his / her crossword. Sts should help each 
other with clues if necessary.
•	 When Sts have finished, they should compare their 
crosswords to make sure they have the same words and 
have spelled them correctly.
•	 Focus on Activation. Sts tell each other the definitions of 
the words they wrote in their crossword. Monitor and help.
2A	Money
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts complete sentences. Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with money
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Focus on the 
instructions. Tell Sts that they have to complete as many 
gaps as they can in three minutes. Tell them to write in the 
MISSING WORDS column.
•	 Check answers. The first pair to complete all the phrases 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
2  worth    3  live off    4  pay (very much) for    5  earn   
6  pay back    7  note    8  from    9  wasting    10  save   
 11  pay by    12  lend    13  debt     14  bill    15  inherited   
 16  charge    17  cash machines    18  mortgage   
 19  tax    20  account
•	 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the MISSING 
WORDS column and read out the sentences with the 
missing words. They can test each other or themselves.
 EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to do the exercise individually 
and compare their answers with a partner. Then check answers.
Vocabulary activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 200@@
200
•	 Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the column on the 
right and see if they can remember the missing words.
 EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (looking at the 
worksheet) read clues 1–10 to Sts B (worksheet covered) 
who say the word. Sts then swap roles for clues 11–20.
5B	Relationships
	 	
A gapfill activity
Sts complete three texts about relationships in the past 
simple tense. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with relationships, past simple
•	 Give Sts time to read the stories and complete them with 
the past simple of the verbs in each of the lists.
•	 Monitor and check that they are completing the stories 
correctly.
•	 Check answers, eliciting the verbs onto the board.
My best friend at school
2  felt    3  became    4  got on    5  were    6  lost touch   
7  left    8  got in touch
My parents
9  saw    10  fell in love with    11  got to know    12  went out 
together    13  proposed    14  got married    15  celebrated
My disastrous date
16  introduced    17  fancied    18  asked    19  gave    
20  asked (me) out    21  didn’t get on    22  had
6A	Cinema
	 	
A gapfill activity
Sts complete film reviews. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with the cinema
•	 Give out the worksheets. Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes. 
Tell Sts they have to read the film reviews and complete 
them with the correct noun or compound noun in either 
the singular or plural. Point out that the first letter or two is 
given.
•	 Monitor to make sure they are completing the film 
reviews correctly.
•	 Check answers.
2  extras    3  star    4  soundtrack    5  plot    6  trailer   
7  action film    8  special effects    9  script    10  scene   
 11  sequel    12  subtitles    13  dubbed    14  comedy   
 15  drama    16  set
•	 Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
answer the question. 
•	 Get feedback.
3A	Transport
	 	
A gapfill activity
Sts look at pictures and write the words. Copy one 
worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with transport
•	 Give each student a worksheet and ask them to write the 
noun or compound noun for the things they see in the 
pictures. 
•	 Check answers.
2  cycle lane    3  platform    4  car crash    5  tram   
6  seat belt    7  ferry    8  zebra crossing    9  taxi rank   
 10  scooter    11  petrol station    12  coach    13  speed camera  
 14  parking fine    15  van    16  speed limit    17  lorry   
 18  roadworks    19  motorway    20  the Underground
•	 Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the words and 
look at the pictures. Can they remember the nouns and 
compound nouns?
3B	Dependent prepositions
	 	
A vocabulary race
Sts complete sentences with dependent prepositions. Copy 
one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Dependent prepositions
•	 Give out the worksheets. Tell Sts that they have to write as 
many prepositions in the PREPOSITION column as they 
can in three minutes. 
•	 Check answers.
2  about    3  to    4  with    5  to    6  in    7  about    8  of   
9  to    10  on    11  for    12  between    13  about    14  to, for   
 15  in    16  to    17  with, about    18  to    19  for    20  of
•	 Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the PREPOSITION 
column on the right and say the sentences with the 
correct preposition.
5A	Sport
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts read a series of clues and write the words. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with sport
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Set a time 
limit. Tell Sts that they have to write as many words as they 
can in the time limit.
•	 Check answers. The first pair to complete all the words 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
2  circuit    3  court    4  spectators    5  hockey    6  warm up   
7  get injured    8  stadium    9  draw    10  referee    11  diving  
 12  golf    13  work out    14  train    15  lose    16  players   
 17  kick    18  coach    19  fan    20  sports hall
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 201@@
201
Cheat is to act in a dishonest way in order to gain an 
advantage in an exam.
Misbehave is to behave badly.
A state school is run by the government and is usually free.
You have to pay to go to a private school.
A head teacher is a person who is in charge of a school.
A teacher teaches in any school apart from university.
Make somebody study something is to force somebody to 
study.
Let somebody study something is to give somebody 
permission to study.
A graduate is a person who has a university degree.
A student is a person who studies at university or college.
A nursery school is a school for children between the ages of 
two and four in the UK. It is not compulsory.
A primary school is a school for children between the ages 
of five and eleven in the UK. It is compulsory.
History is a subject at school or university which is the study 
of past events.
A story is a description of events and people that a writer has 
invented in order to entertain.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Put Sts in pairs. Copy one worksheet 
per pair. Set a time limit, e.g. ten minutes, and Sts take turns 
to ask each other, What’s the difference between…?, choosing 
words at random. Sts decide if the explanation is correct. 
Finally, check answers with the whole class.
7B	Houses
	 	
A gapfill activity
Sts complete the descriptions of three different homes.  
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with houses
•	 Give out the worksheets. Set a time limit, e.g. three 
minutes. Tell Sts to read the house descriptions and 
complete them with the correct words. Point out that the 
first letter or two is given.
•	 Monitor to make sure they are completing the 
descriptions correctly.
•	 Check answers.
2  second floor    3  balcony    4  entrance    5  wall    6  gate   
7  roof    8  chimney    9  outskirts    10  path    11  terrace   
 12  steps    13  ground floor    14  top floor    15  basement
•	 Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
tell each other which home they prefer and why. Get 
feedback.
6B	The body
	 	
A gapfill activity
Sts write the verb and name the part(s) of the body shown in 
each photo. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Verbs associated with the body
•	 Give each student a worksheet and ask them to write  
next to each photo the verb and the noun (singular or 
plural) for the part of the body marked with an arrow. 
Check answers.
2  throw, back    3  clap, hand    4  whistle, lips    5  stare, eye
6  bite, teeth    7  kick, leg    8  taste, tongue    9  smile, mouth  
 10  point, finger    11  touch, thumb    12  smell, nose
•	 Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to say 
what other parts of the body they can see in the photos 
(e.g. shoulder, knee, etc.).
•	 Get some feedback.
7A	Education
	 	
A team game
Sts explain the difference between two words / phrases. 
Copy and cut up one set of cards.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with education
•	 Divide the class into two teams (or more if you have a lot 
of Sts).
•	 Give a card to each team. Give Sts a minute to decide 
what the difference is between the two words or phrases.
•	 Write the two words or phrases on each team’s card on 
the board.
•	 A spokesperson from each team takes turns to explain 
the difference to the rest of the class. If the explanation is 
correct, the team gets a point. If it isn’t correct, the other 
team can try to win an extra point by explaining the 
difference correctly before having their own turn.
•	 Then give each team another card.
•	 Keep a record of each team’s points on the board. The 
team with the most points wins.
A high school is for children aged between 11–18 years in 
the USA.
A secondary school is for children aged between 11–18 
years in the UK.
A pupil studies in a primary / secondary school.
A student studies at a university, college, or evening class.
A term is one of the three periods of the year during which 
classes are held in schools and universities.
A semester is the two periods that the school / college year is 
divided into, especially in the USA.
Pass an exam is to achieve the required standard in an exam 
or test.
Fail an exam is the opposite.
Be punished is to be made to suffer because you’ve done 
something bad or wrong.
Be expelled is to officially have to leave school because 
you’ve done something wrong.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 202@@
202
Phrasal verbs
A vocabulary race
Sts read the sentences and write the phrasal verbs. Copy one 
worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Phrasal verbs (revision)
•	 Give out the worksheets. Set a time limit, e.g. three 
minutes. Tell Sts that they have to read the sentences 
and write as many of the phrasal verbs as they can in the 
PHRASAL VERB column in the time limit. Point out that 
the first letter is given.
•	 Check answers. The first student to write all the phrasal 
verbs correctly wins, or the student with the most correct 
answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  set    3  plug    4  cut    5  eat    6  cut    7  pay    8  pick   
9  sent    10  break    11  live    12  set    13  work    14  take   
 15  look    16  fall    17  look    18  run    19  Watch    20  turn
•	 Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the PHRASAL VERB  
column, read the sentences, and see if they can remember 
the missing words
8A	Work
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts read a series of clues and write the words. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Words associated with work
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Set a time 
limit. Tell Sts that they have to write as many words as they 
can in the time limit. Each word begins with (or, in the 
case of X, includes) a different letter of the alphabet. 
•	 Check answers. The first pair to complete all the words 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
boss    charge    do    employees    freelance    gardener   
hairdresser    interview    job    kitchen    look for    made   
night    overtime    part-time    quit    retire    self-employed  
temporary    up    vet    work    extra    year
9A	Word-building
	 	
A word-building race
Sts complete the sentences with the correct noun, adjective, 
or adverb from the given words. Copy one worksheet per 
student.
LANGUAGE
Verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs
•	 Give out the worksheets. Set a time limit, e.g. three 
minutes. Tell Sts that they have to complete the sentences 
with the correct form of the words in bold. They must 
write as many words as they can in the column on the 
right in the time limit. 
•	 Check answers. The first student to write all the words 
correctly wins, or the student with the most correct 
answers at the end of the time limit wins.
The missing words in sentences 1–13 are nouns, which 
can be revised in the first part of Vocabulary Bank 
Word-building p.164. The missing words in sentences 
14–20 are positive or negative adjectives and adverbs, 
which can be revised in the second part of the same 
Vocabulary Bank.
2  compensation    3  argument    4  delivery    5  success   
6  achievement    7  explanation    8  attachment   
9  agreement    10  demonstration    11  payment    12  loss   
 13  sale    14  uncomfortable    15  comfortable    16  impatient  
 17  unlucky    18  careful    19  carelessly    20  Unfortunately
•	 Focus on Activation. Tell Sts to cover the column on the 
right and read the sentences. Can they remember the 
missing words?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 203@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
203
INTRODUCTION  VOCABULARY  Classroom language
Asking for help
Excuse me.	
Can / Could you say that again, please?	
Can you help me, please?	
Can I have a copy, please?	
Can you explain something, please?	
Is this right (or wrong)?	
What does 
 mean?	
How do you say 
 in English?	
How do you spell it?	
How do you pronounce it?	
Where’s the stress?	
What’s the opposite of fast?	
What’s the past tense of eat?	
What’s the difference between meet and know?	
Apologizing / Giving reasons
Sorry I’m late.	
I couldn’t come to class yesterday (or on Thursday). I was ill.	
I couldn’t do the homework because…	
I won’t be able to come next Monday (or next week) because…	
I have to leave early today because…	
Working in pairs / groups
What do we have to do?	
What did he / she say?	
We haven’t finished (yet).	
Whose turn is it?	
It’s my (or your, his, her, our, their) turn.	
What do you think?	
Do you agree?	
I agree / don’t agree (with you).	
Leaving
A See you on Monday (or next Wednesday)!  B Yes, see you!	
A Have a good weekend!  B You too. / The same to you.	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 204@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
204
a pear
grapes
grilled salmon
an aubergine
prawns
mussels
peppers
a pizza
a cucumber
roast lamb
steamed rice
raw meat
boiled eggs
squid
(to) eat out
a peach
tinned fruit
frozen food
(to) cut down on
fried fish
fresh vegetables
raspberries
(to) cut out
cherries
1A  VOCABULARY  Food and cooking
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 205@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
205
1B  VOCABULARY  Personality
Student A
Student B
 	
Look at your crossword and make 
sure you know the meaning of all  
the words you have.
 	
Now ask B to define a word for you. 
Ask, for example, What’s 1 down? 
What’s 4 across? Write the word in.
 	
Now B will ask you to define a word.
ACTIVATION
Look at the words you wrote in your 
crossword. Can you remember their 
definitions?
 a
 b
 c
 	
Look at your crossword and make 
sure you know the meaning of all  
the words you have.
 	
Now A will ask you to define a word.
 	
Now ask A to define a word for you. 
Ask, for example, What’s 3 across? 
What’s 5 down? Write the word in.
ACTIVATION
Look at the words you wrote in your 
crossword. Can you remember their 
definitions?
 a
 b
 c
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20 
O
U
T
G
O
I
N
G
D
A
I
F
S
P
O
I
L
T
S
E
L
F
I
S
H
H
E
C
O
C
O
N
T
M
E
R
S
I
P
S
E
E
O
E
T
B
N
N
T
E
S
Y M P
A
T
H
E
T
I
C
L
I
T
T
L
B
E
I
I
L
V
O
E
U
N
F
R
I
E
N
D
L
Y
U
S
U
S
N
E
K
N
I
T
I
D
Y
S
I
M P
A
T
I
E
N
T
I
N
D
T
S
I
E
B
O
S
S
Y
V
C
T
E
C
U
U
H
I
R
R
E
S
P
O
N
S
I
B
L
E
A
E
B
R
O
M
R
I
N
N
R
E
L
I
A
B
L
E
G
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 206@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
206
2A  VOCABULARY  Money
What’s the word?
 	
Work with a partner. You have three minutes to complete the sentences. Write your answers in the 	
MISSING WORDS column.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the MISSING WORDS column on the right. Read the sentences aloud with 
the correct words.
1	 We can’t 
 to go on holiday this year, so we’re staying at home.	
 
 
 
 
 
2	 That ring can’t be 
 €20,000. It looks like plastic!	
 
 
 
 
3	 Pete doesn’t have any money, so he has to 
 
 his parents.	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They pay for absolutely everything.	
4	 My brother didn’t 
 very much 
 his car. It was second hand.	
 
 
 
 
 
5	 How much do you think you’ll 
 every month in your new job?	
 
 
 
6	 Sorry, but I can’t 
 
 the money I owe you until the end of 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the month.	
7	 Do you have any change for the supermarket trolley? I only have  
a €10 
.	
 
 
 
8	 Some people think it’s a really bad idea to borrow money 
  	
 
 
 
 
a close friend.	
9	 Why are you 
 your money on things you don’t really need?	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10	 I used to have a money box when I was young. That’s how I learnt  
to 
 money.	
 
 
 
 
11	 Can I 
 
 credit card?	
 
 
 
 
 
12	 Did the bank 
 you the money to buy a new car?	
 
 
 
 
13	 Diana started spending a lot more money than she had in the bank.  
She got into 
 after six months.	
 
 
 
 
14	 Our gas 
 was really high this month because we had the central 	
 
 
 
 
heating on all the time.	
 
15	 Our neighbour 
 a beautiful house in the country when her 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aunt Jane died.	
 
16	 How can the electrician 
 us £200 for ten minutes’ work?	
 
 
 
 
 
 
17	 My grandmother’s afraid of using 
 
 in the street. 	
 
 
 
 
She prefers to go into the bank to get money.	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18	 I’ve asked my bank for a 
 because I want to buy a flat.	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19	 The government is going to put up 
 on cigarettes and alcohol.	
 
 
 
20	 If you open an 
 with this bank, you get an interest-free 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
credit card for a year.	
a
f
f
o
r
d
MISSING WORDS
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 207@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
207
3A  VOCABULARY  Transport
 	
Look at the pictures and write the words below.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the words and look at the pictures. Can you remember the words?
1
5
9
13
17
2
6
10
14
18
3
7
11
15
19
4
8
12
16
20
traffic
light
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 208@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
208
3B  VOCABULARY  Dependent prepositions
 	
Complete each sentence with a preposition. Write your answers in the column on the right.  
You have three minutes.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PREPOSITION column on the right. Read the sentences aloud with the 
correct prepositions.
1	 I’m really tired 
 listening to my sister. She complains about her boyfriend all 	
of 
the time.	
2	 Katy’s worried 
 her end-of-year exams. She thinks she’s going to fail.	
3	 The waiter was so rude 
 us that we didn’t leave a tip.	
4	 They’re not very pleased 
 their new car. It’s broken down three times in 	
 
one month!	
5	 My mum’s been married 
 my stepfather for 20 years.	
6	 Tom’s interested 
 joining the army because he wants to see the world.	
7	 Are you excited 
 moving house next year?	
8	 That man over there reminds me 
 my first boyfriend.	
9	 Are you looking forward 
 meeting him?	
 
10	 I’d like to go with you on holiday, but it depends 
 how much it will cost.	
 
11	 Recent research shows that drinking mango juice is good 
 your immune system.	
 
12	 You’ll have to choose 
 this one and that one. You can’t have both.	
 
13	 My sister and I get on really well and hardly ever argue 
 anything.	
 
14	 I apologized 
 the teacher 
 being late.	
 / 
 
15	 What time does your plane arrive 
 Brussels?	
 
16	 Who does this book belong 
 ? Is it yours, Sarah?	
 
17	 Is Carl still angry 
 Monica 
 what happened at the party?	
 / 
 
18	 You should be kinder 
 your brother. After all, you are the oldest!	
 
19	 I never have to ask anybody 
 directions any more, now that I have a satnav.	
 
20	 He’s the first person in his family to go to university, so his parents are really 
proud 
 him.	
PREPOSITION
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 209@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
209
5A  VOCABULARY  Sport
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right. Read the sentences and say the words.
1	 The leader of a sports team.	
C
A
P
N
A
I
T
2	 It’s a track used for Formula 1 racing, or motorcycling.	
3	 You can play tennis and basketball on this.	
4	 The people who go and watch a sports event.	
5	 It’s a sport you can play on ice or grass.	
6	 Before you do any kind of exercise, it’s very important to  
do this.	
  
7	 When this happens to you, you may have to see a doctor.	
  
8	 Camp Nou, the Maracanã, and Old Trafford are all famous  
examples of this type of building.	
9	 It’s a verb which describes when two teams have the same  
score at the end of a match.	
 
10	 It’s the person who shows a red card in a football match.	
 
11	 It’s a sport where you jump, head first, into a pool.	
 
12	 In this sport, you go around a course of nine or 18 holes.	
 
13	 It’s a phrasal verb which means ‘go to a gym and do exercise’.	
  
 
14	 It’s what professional athletes have to do every day.	
 
15	 It’s the opposite of ‘win’.	
 
16	 There are 30 on the pitch in a rugby match, but only 22 in 
a football match.	
 
17	 It means to hit, e.g. a ball, with your foot.	
 
18	 It’s the name of the person who gives instructions to the  
members of a team, but who doesn’t play.	
 
19	 It’s a person who supports a team.	
 
20	 It’s where you play indoor sports.	
  
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 210@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
210
5B  VOCABULARY  Relationships
 	
Read the stories and complete them with the correct form of the verbs from the lists.  
Remember to use the past simple.
My best friend at school
be  become  feel  get in touch  get on  leave  lose touch  meet
I first 1met Ruth on my first day at primary school. 
We both 2
 very lost and afraid, 
but we soon 3
 best friends. 
We 4
 very well from the start 
because we liked playing the same games together. 
We 5
 best friends for over 15 
years at both primary and secondary school, but 
unfortunately, we 6
 when we  
7
 school to go to university. 
Recently, I found her on Facebook and I sent 
her a message. She 8
, and we’re 
going to meet up again after all these years!
My parents
My disastrous date
celebrate  fall in love with  get married  get to know  
go out together  propose  see
My dad says that as soon as he 9
  
my mum, he 10
 her. My mum says 
that after a couple of months, when she’d  
11
 my dad, she felt the same. I  
don’t know if that’s true or not, but what I do know  
is that they 12
 for seven months 
before he 13
 to her at the Santiago 
Bernabéu football stadium, while they were  
watching a match! My mum said ‘yes’ and they  
14
 in 1967 in Madrid. They  
15
 their golden wedding anniversary 
last year and are still incredibly happy together.
ask  ask out  fancy  not get on  
give  have  introduce
In the summer of 2015, I’d just split up with my 
boyfriend, and a colleague 16
 me to 
Paul, his flatmate, at a bar. He was very good-looking 
and I really 17
 him. At the end of 
the evening, he 18
 me for my phone 
number, so I 19
 it to him. I was 
really happy when he got in touch with me the next 
day and 20
 me 
 
for dinner. Unfortunately, the date was a bit of a 
disaster because although he was attractive, we really 
21
. During the meal, I found out 
that we 22
 absolutely nothing in 
common! Of course, we never had a second date.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 211@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
211
6A  VOCABULARY  Cinema
 	
Read the film reviews and complete them with the correct words.
ACTIVATION
Which of the films would you prefer to watch? Why?
Bill’s Film Reviews
Classic Film Fan
Seven Samurai
I had read only good things from critics about Akira Kurosawa’s classic 
film Seven Samurai, so I was very excited to finally watch it. I watched it in Japanese 
with English 12 s 
 because I don’t think it has been 13 d 
 into 
English. I was very surprised by this film. It isn’t a 14 c 
, but it has some 
very funny moments. I think I imagined it was going to be a boring 15 d 
 
and instead it was moving and beautiful. Seven Samurai is 16 s 
 in Japan 
in 1586, and tells the story of seven warriors who decide to defend a village against 
thieves. At first, they do it for money, but then they get to know the people in the 
village and they really care about them. Each character is very different, but they all 
become good friends and the cast do a really good job of showing you the change 
in their relationships. Even if you don’t like old films, or films in black and white,  
I think this is one of those special films that everyone should watch.
CINEMA
LOVER
Bill’s Film Reviews
Dunkirk
Dunkirk is a 1 war film directed by Christopher Nolan, set in World 
War II during a particularly difficult battle and rescue mission. Nolan has used a lot of 
actors and 2 e 
 to make this a story about many different people, so there 
isn’t one 3 s 
 here. That being said, my favourite performance is definitely 
Tom Hardy’s, as a pilot who doesn’t give up even when his plane has crashed. It’s a  
very exciting film, scary at times and definitely violent, so I wouldn’t recommend it for  
all ages. The 4 s 
, composed by Hans Zimmer, is really intense, and Zimmer 
has done an amazing job of making the music the perfect background for all the 
different stories. I will say that having so many characters made the 5 pl 
 
very complicated, and that made Dunkirk very difficult to follow. All in all, I enjoyed 
Dunkirk and I would definitely recommend it!!
Wonder Woman
I’d been looking forward to Wonder Woman since I saw the 6 t 
 earlier 
this year. It didn’t disappoint me! One of the big problems with an 7 a 
  
f 
 is that normally there are a lot of 8 s 
 e 
 and  
all the digital stuff can make films look a bit silly and unreal. In this case, however, 
the 9 sc 
 is so well written that even the explosions and the superhero 
costumes didn’t annoy me. Gal Gadot plays Diana (they never call her Wonder 
Woman), a heroine who leaves her perfect island to help humans during World  
War II. Here, Wonder Woman becomes more of a historical film and Diana finds the 
way men treat her very strange. This creates a lot of funny moments; my favourite 
10 sc 
 is one in which Diana complains about long skirts being really 
impractical to fight in! Diana tries to be both strong and kind, as she and her friends 
search for Ares, the God of War. The film studio has confirmed that there will be a  
11 s 
 to Wonder Woman and I can’t wait to see it!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 212@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
212
6B  VOCABULARY  The body
 	
Look at the photos. Write the correct verb and label the part of the body for each one.
ACTIVATION
What other parts of the body can you see in the photos?
3	
5	
7	
9	
 
11	
1	 nod
head
4	
6	
8	
 
10	
 
12	
2	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 213@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
213
7A  VOCABULARY  Education
a high school
a secondary 
school
AND
a term
a semester
AND
be punished
be expelled
AND
a state  
school
a private  
school
AND
make  
somebody 
study 
something
let somebody 
study 
something
AND
a nursery 
school
a primary 
school
AND
a pupil
a student
AND
pass an exam
fail an exam
AND
cheat
misbehave
AND
a head  
teacher
a teacher
AND
a graduate
a student
AND
history
a story
AND
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 214@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
214
ACTIVATION
Look at the three homes and talk with your partner. Which one would you like to live in? Why?
7B  VOCABULARY  Houses
 	
Read the texts and complete the descriptions with the correct words.
TO RENT
Large and sunny flat in Deansgate,  
a lovely 
1  suburb of Manchester.
This modern and spacious flat is very near the 
city centre and only a 10-minute walk away from 
Deansgate station.
The flat is on the 2  s 
 fl 
, 
with a 3 b 
 that looks onto the block’s 
shared garden space.
FOR SALE
Designer house on the 9 o 
 of Oxford. The property has a 
low-maintenance front garden with a practical 10 p 
 to the 
front door. This attractive and modern home has a 11 t 
 
with amazing views of the surrounding countryside and  
12 st 
 down to a swimming pool. The 13 gr 
   
 fl 
 consists of a large living room, a spacious kitchen with 
room for a dining table, and a small toilet. The two bedrooms and 
the luxurious bathroom are on the 14 t 
  fl 
.  
There is also a large 15 b 
 downstairs, for all your 
storage needs. Booking a viewing is strongly recommended, as 
we think it will be sold quickly!
OPPORTUNITY!
Lovely cottage in the country for sale.
It’s near Bodmin Moor, Cornwall, surrounded  
by fields and farms. There’s a front garden leading to 
the 4 e
  of this amazing old home. The front 
garden has a low 5 w
 and the property is 
accessed through a wooden 6 g
 . The  
property has many original features, including an open 
fire in the living room and wooden ceilings. It has three 
bedrooms and one bathroom. The 7 r
 is in need 
of repairs and the 8 ch
 will need some work 
before the fire can be used. Viewing is highly recommended!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 215@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
215
8A  VOCABULARY  Work
I’m going to apply for 
that job I saw online.
My company has  
more than 90,000 
 
around the world.
You usually have  
an 
 
before a company 
decides if you get a 
job with them.
Do you know  
anyone who’s been 
 
redundant recently?
Another way of 
saying ‘resign’. 
He decided to set 
  
his own business  
last year.
The person who 
tells you what to 
do at work is your 
.
My husband is a 
 
journalist and  
works from home.
It’s what you don’t  
have if you’re 
unemployed. 
My partner works 
shifts: he works at 
 one 
week, then during the 
day the next.
A verb which means 
when people stop 
working after the 
ages of 65 or 70. 
An animal doctor. 
My brother is 
in his second 
 of 
university, and he 
loves it.
I’m in  
  
of the  
Sales department.
A person who  
grows plants and 
flowers is a  
.
Chefs work in here. 
If you work more 
than your normal 
hours, you do 
.
A person who works 
for him / herself is 
 - 
.
I 
 
for an international 
company in  
central London.
A person who works 
in a zoo and takes 
care of the animals. 
zookeeper
We 
 
training courses  
twice a year.
A 
 
cuts your hair.
A phrasal verb which 
means the same  
as ‘search for’. 
It’s an alternative to 
working full-time, but 
you work fewer hours. 
 - 
It’s the opposite of 
a permanent job. 
A small, non–speaking 
job in a film has 
this letter in it! 
A
E
I
M
Q
U
B
F
J
N
R
V
Y
C
G
K
O
S
W
Z
D
H
L
P
T
X
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 216@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
216
9A  VOCABULARY  Word-building
Change the word!
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the words in bold. You can make nouns, positive 
or negative adjectives, and adverbs. Write your answers in the column on the right.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right. Read the sentences aloud with the correct form of 
the words in bold.
1	 I wrote a letter of 
 to the hotel manager, as I wasn’t happy with the service. 	
complaint 
COMPLAIN	
2	 The airline didn’t offer us any 
 for the ten-hour delay. COMPENSATE	
3	 Listen! The neighbours next door are having another 
. ARGUE	
4	 If you buy the washing machine today, we can guarantee next-day 
. DELIVER	
5	 The dinner party wasn’t a 
 because Joe was rude to Richard. SUCCEED	
6	 My mum learnt to swim when she was 67. I think that’s a real 
. ACHIEVE	
7	 What 
 did Anna give you for not finishing her report? EXPLAIN	
8	 I got Tony’s email, but he forgot to send the 
. ATTACH	
9	 We have an 
 at home that if my husband cooks, I do the washing-up. AGREE	
 
10	 The shop assistant gave me a very good 
 of how the gadget worked. 	
	
DEMONSTRATE	
 
11	 PayPal is a safe way of making a 
 online. PAY	
 
12	 The company made a 
 for five years and eventually it had to close down. LOSE	
 
13	 The house next door is for 
. I’d love to buy it! SELL	
 
14	 The bed was so 
 that I wasn’t able to sleep. COMFORT	
 
15	 These sandals are so 
. It feels as if I’m not wearing anything on my feet. COMFORT	
 
16	 Having to wait for people makes me really 
. PATIENT	
 
17	 Nick’s 
 in love. His partners always leave him! LUCK	
 
18	 Be 
 not to break your leg on the first day of your skiing holiday! CARE	
 
19	 Paolo won’t pass his English exam. He writes very 
 and doesn’t check for mistakes. 	
 
CARE	
 
20	
 , it rained on our wedding day, but we had a great day anyway. FORTUNE	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 217@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
217
VOCABULARY REVISION  Phrasal verbs
 	
How many of these phrasal verbs can you remember?
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PHRASAL VERB column. Read the sentences aloud with the correct 
phrasal verbs.
1	 You need to 
 up before you do any exercise.	
w 
 
 
2	 My father got a loan from the bank to help 
 up the business.	
s 
 
3	 To charge your phone, attach it to the charger, 
 it in to the socket, and 	
p 
 
 
 
wait until it is completely charged.	
4	 I think I need to 
 down on Diet Coke – I drink too much.	
c 
 
5	 We often 
 out, as neither of us likes cooking.	
e 
 
6	 My doctor told me I had to 
 out dairy products because I have an allergy.	
c 
 
7	 I need to 
 back the money my father lent me.	
p 
 
8	 I’ll come and 
 you up in the car at six o’clock. We can go to the 	
p 
 
 
 
party together.	
9	 The goalkeeper was 
 off for a bad foul.	
s 
 
 
 
10	 You seemed so happy together. Why did you 
 up?	
b 
 
 
 
 
11	 I need to get a better job. My salary isn’t enough to 
 on.	
l 
 
 
 
12	 We need to be at the airport by 11.00, so we should 
 off at about 10.00.	
s 
 
 
13	 I like to keep fit, so I 
 out four or five times a week.	
w 
 
 
 
14	 I need to go to the cash machine and 
 out some money before we get 	
t 
 
 
 
the train.	
 
15	 I really 
 forward to my weekly dance class. It’s fun!	
l 
 
 
 
16	 My brother and sister often 
 out with each other. Sometimes they don’t 	
f 
 
 
 
speak to each other for days!	
 
17	 If you want to find a job, you could 
 for one on the internet or in the 	
l 
 
 
 
newspapers.	
 
18	 We’ve 
 out of milk. Can you get some on your way home tonight?	
r 
 
 
19	
 out! You might get hit by a car.	
W 
 
 
 
 
20	 Can you 
 up the music? I can’t hear it.	
t 
 
 
a
r
m
PHRASAL VERB
© Copyright Oxford University Press
