@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Kate Chomacki
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 
Intermediate Plus
Teacher’s Guide
@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2020
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2020 
2023  2022  2021  2020
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly 
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford 
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for 
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked 
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers 
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach. 
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this 
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403914 7	
Teacher’s Guide
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world 
whose feedback has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both 
in Oxford and around the world) and the design team who have contributed 
their skills and ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and 
from Christina to Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina 
would also like to thank her children Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their 
constant inspiration.
The publisher would like to thank the following for their permission to reproduce 
photographs: Getty Images pp.160 (drinks/Claire Cordier), 162 (visa/
PaulCowan), 165 (Adele/Kevin Winter), 165 (Croatia v England/Anadolu 
Agency), 209 (safari/nicolamargaret); Oxford University Press pp.158 (Globe 
theatre/Kamira), 188 (brunette woman/Yulia Durova), 188 (young woman/
Image Source), 195 (audience/Syda Productions), 196 (photographer/George 
Dolgikh), 210 (batteries/Tatiana Popova), 216 (painting/Warren Goldswain); 
Shutterstock pp.158 (ice cream/Diana Taliun), 158 (cold man/Andrey_Popov), 
10 (using phone/siamionau pavel), 158 (beach/icemanphotos), 158 (pizza/
bestv), 160 (colleagues/Monkey Business Images), 160 (argument/SpeedKingz), 
162 (house/Monkey Business Images), 162 (teapot/Alekseykolotvin), 
162 (napkins/Madlen), 162 (laptop/Rawpixel.com), 162 (camera/Akugasahagy), 
165 (theatre/Willy Barton), 165 (Scrabble/katerina_Minaeva), 167 (30 St Mary 
Axe/Celso Diniz), 167 (The Chrysler Building/Songquan Deng), 170 (girl on 
phone/Antonio Guillem), 170 (woman on phone/Asier Romero), 181 (washing 
hair/JL-Pfeifer), 181 (woman with lugagge/mimagephotography), 181 (friends/
wavebreakmedia), 33 (wedding/Halfpoint), 186 (recycle bin/Mike Flippo), 
186 (pollution/Mr.anaked), 187 (studying/ESB Professional), 187 (graduate/
michaeljung), 187 (office/Monkey Business Images), 187 (handshake/Shift 
Drive), 188 (woman/goodluz), 188 (man/Tuzemka), 188 (girl/sweetOlli), 
188 (young man/Nicholas Piccillo), 188 (tween/Lopolo), 188 (man at home/
stockfour), 195 (girl with burger/ViChizh), 195 (two friends/XiXinXing), 
195 (playing violin/Martin Novak), 196 (photo session/Yuganov Konstantin), 
201 (hiking/EB Adventure Photography), 201 (couple at beach/fokke baarssen), 
209 (paparazzi/Andrea Raffin), 210 (bins/S M Wilkins), 210 (drinks can/
RTimages), 210 (grocery bag/sumire8), 210 (plastic bottles/Elnur), 210 (honey/
Alp Aksoy), 210 (biscuits/arrell Evans), 218 (businesswoman/WAYHOME 
studio).
Illustrations by: Paul Boston/Meiklejohn Illustration pp.156, 214; Bess Harding 
pp.154, 207, 215; John Haslam pp.153, 155, 159, 161, 180; Peter Hudspith 
pp.163, 182; Anna Hymas/New Division pp.154, 169; Sophie Joyce p.215; 
Joanna Kerr p.213; Adam Larkham/Illustration Ltd. pp.152, 168; Joe McClaren 
p.194; Roger Penwill pp.157, 164; Gavin Reece pp.191, 192; Colin Shelbourn 
p.166.
Grammar photocopiable activities written by: Amanda Begg
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Intermediate Plus students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 1
p.27
File 2 A–B	
1&2 Revise and Check
p.40
File 3 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 2
p.55
File 4 A–B	
3&4 Revise and Check
p.69
File 5 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 3
p.83
File 6 A–B	
5&6 Revise and Check
p.96
File 7 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 4
p.109
File 8 A–B	
7&8 Revise and Check
p.123
File 9 A–B	
Practical English  Episode 5
p.137
File 10 A–B	
9&10 Revise and Check
p.149
Photocopiable activities
p.149
Introduction
p.150
Grammar activity answers
p.152
Grammar activity masters
p.172
Communicative activity instructions
p.179
Communicative activity masters
p.202
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.206
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A	Why did they call you 
that?
pronouns
names
vowel sounds
10
B	 Life in colour
adjectives
adjective suffixes
word stress
14
Practical English Episode 14
reporting lost luggage
2
16
A	Get ready! Get set! Go!
present tenses
packing
/s/, /z/, and /ɪz/
20
B	 Go to checkout
possessive
shops and services
r and final -r
24
Revise and Check 1&2
3
26
A	A Grow up!
past simple, past 
continuous, or used to?
stages of life
-ed endings, sentence 
rhythm
30
B	 Photo albums
prepositions
photography
word stress
34
Practical English Episode 24
renting a car
4
36
A	Don’t throw it away!
future forms: will / shall and 
be going to
rubbish and recycling
/aɪ/ and /eɪ/
40
B	 Put it on your CV
first and second 
conditionals
study and work
word stress
44
Revise and Check 3&4
5
46
A	Screen time
present perfect simple
television
/w/, /v/, and /b/
50
B	 A quiet life?
present perfect continuous
the country
vowel sounds, sentence 
rhythm
54
Practical English Episode 34
making a police report
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
talking about names, brand names, 
making suggestions
four people talking about their names, 
understanding proper names
checking hypotheses
talking about results, describing  
a room
listening for extra information
scanning for information
How good are you at preparing for  
a holiday?, expressing preferences
understanding advice
understanding linkers / cohesive 
devices
showing interest
recognizing positive / negative 
comments
predicting content from visual clues
What do you think is the best age 
for…?, events in your life
listening for detail
read and retell
taking photos, talking about an 
interesting photo
understanding advice
understanding the main point in  
a paragraph
zero waste, responding to plans and 
predictions
listening and taking notes
reading to check assumptions
agreeing / disagreeing and giving 
opinions, talking about work and 
studies
listening for factual information
focusing on key information
expressing enthusiasm
understanding answers
speculating based on visual clues
discussing problems and solutions
listening for point of view
understanding problems and solutions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
6
56
A	What the waiter really 
thinks
obligation, necessity, 
prohibition, advice
at a restaurant
word pairs with and
60
B	 Do it yourself
can, could, and be able to
DIY and repairs, 
paraphrasing
consonant clusters
64
Revise and Check 5&6
7
66
A	Take your cash
phrasal verbs
cash machines, phrasal 
verbs
linking
70
B	 Shall we go out or  
stay in?
verb patterns
live entertainment
homographs
74
Practical English Episode 4	
talking about house rules
8
76
A	Treat yourself
have something done
looking after yourself
sentence stress
80
B	 Sites and sights
the passive, defining and 
non-defining relative clauses
historic buildings, wars and 
battles
silent consonants
84
Revise and Check 7&8
9
86
A	Total recall
reported speech
word building
word stress
90
B	 Here comes the bride
third conditional and other 
uses of the past perfect, 
adverbs
weddings
sentence stress
94
Practical English Episode 54
giving directions in a building
10
96
A	The land of the free?
be, do, and have: auxiliary 
and main verbs
British and American English
stress on be, do, and have
100
B	 Please turn over your 
papers
revision of verb forms
exams
revision of sounds
104
Revise and Check 9&10
106
Communication
115
Writing
124
Listening
132
Grammar Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
talking about bad service in 
restaurants, talking about tipping
listening for content words
understanding the main point in a 
paragraph
responding to other people’s 
suggestions, paraphrasing,  
describing a process
understanding an anecdote
checking hypotheses
cash machines, raising money  
for charity
listening for news facts
understanding the conclusions of 
research
talking about entertainment and live 
events, What do you like doing with 
friends in your free time?
predicting the outcome of a story
understanding descriptions of games
looking after yourself, presenting  
a campaign
understanding interview questions
understanding whether people are 
being positive or negative
historical sites, role-play between  
a local and a tourist
understanding a guided tour –  
note-taking
understanding historical events
giving examples, stories and 
anecdotes
linking dates and events
understanding a theory
agreeing and disagreeing
understanding anecdotes
understanding a short story
Americanization
understanding examples – note-taking
working out vocabulary from context
exams, an exam task
exam skill – multiple-choice listening
exam skill – T / F reading
152
Vocabulary Bank
164
Appendix
165
Irregular verbs
166
Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 8@@
8
	 	
Course overview
Vocabulary
•	 Systematic expansion of topic-based lexical areas
•	 Work on collocations, phrasal verbs, and word building
•	 Opportunities to put new vocabulary into practice
Many lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which 
help present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an 
audio model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
•	 Practice in pronouncing sounds, words, and connected 
speech clearly
•	 Continue to develop their instinct for rules and patterns
•	 Focus on word and sentence stress
Clear, intelligible pronunciation (not perfection) should be the 
goal of students at this level. There is a pronunciation focus 
in every lesson, which integrates clear pronunciation into 
grammar and vocabulary practice. There is an emphasis on 
the sounds most useful for communication, on word stress, 
and on sentence rhythm. Online Practice contains the 
Sound Bank videos which show students the mouth positions 
to make English vowels and consonants. They can also review 
the pronunciation from the lesson at their own speed.  There 
is more practice of pronunciation in the Workbook, with 
audio, which can be found on Online Practice.
Speaking
•	 Motivating and accessible topics
•	 The key words and phrases necessary to discuss a topic
•	 Confidence that their language is clear and intelligible
•	 Practice in more extended speaking
•	 Increase in the range of language they can produce
•	 Improvement in accuracy as well as further development 
of their fluency
Lack of self-confidence can be a barrier to successful 
speaking at this level. Each speaking task is supported by 
the necessary Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation and 
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A and B Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
•	 videos that can be used in class in every File: Practical 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
•	 Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, an End-of-course Test, and an Entry Test, which you 
can use at the beginning of the course
•	 photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities for 
every A and B lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Intermediate Plus 
students need? 
Intermediate Plus students need to practise their existing 
language skills in new and challenging contexts. They 
need motivating material and challenging tasks which 
will thoroughly revise the grammar and lexis they have 
learnt at Intermediate level, so that they can use these with 
confidence. To carry on expanding their vocabulary they also 
need a steady input of high frequency words and phrases 
and plenty of opportunities to speak and build oral fluency 
and accuracy.
 Grammar
•	 Consolidation and extension of main grammatical 
structures
•	 Practice in using a range of tenses and forms accurately
•	 Practice in discriminating between different tenses 
and forms
•	 Encouragement to use the grammar they know 
with confidence
We have tried to provide contexts for new language that 
will engage students, using real-life stories and situations, 
humour, and suspense. The Grammar Banks give students 
a single, easy-to-access grammar reference section, with 
example sentences on audio, clear rules, and common 
errors. There are at least two practice exercises for each 
grammar point. Students can look again at the grammar 
presented in the lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook 
provides a variety of practice exercises and the opportunity 
for students to use the new grammar to express their  
own ideas.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 9@@
9
It is often difficult to motivate students to write at this 
level. In English File Intermediate Plus each guided writing 
activity flows out of a main lesson to ensure that students 
have plenty of ideas to start with and focuses on key areas of 
language, style, and organization to help break the writing 
process down into a series of achievable tasks.
Students can use Online Practice to develop their 
writing skills further. The Discussion board also provides 
opportunities for informal written interaction.
Practical English
•	 Consolidation and extension of functional language
•	 Knowing what to say in typical social situations
•	 Getting used to listening to faster, more colloquial speech
The five Practical English lessons revise and extend common 
situations such as giving directions, and introduce and practise 
the language for new situations, like renting a car. The story line 
involving the two main characters, Jenny and Rob, continues 
from where it left off in English File Intermediate but it is self-
standing, so it can be used equally with students who did not 
use the previous level. The lessons also highlight other key 
‘Social English’ phrases, for example I wish you were here and 
Thanks for letting me stay. On Online Practice, students can 
use the interactive video to record themselves and hear their 
own voice in the complete conversation. They can also listen 
and record the Social English phrases. The Workbook provides 
practice of all the language from the Practical English lessons.
Revision
•	 Regular review
•	 Motivating reference and practice material
•	 A sense of progress
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a  
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page revises 
the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of each File. The 
right-hand page provides a series of skills-based challenges, 
including street interviews, and helps students to measure their 
progress in terms of competence. These pages are designed 
to be used flexibly according to the needs of your students. 
On Online Practice, for each 
File, there are three Check your 
progress activities. The first is 
a multiple choice activity for 
students to test themselves on 
the Grammar and Vocabulary 
from the File. The second is a 
dictation related to the topic 
and the language of the File for 
students to practise the new 
language in context. Finally, 
there is a Challenge activity, 
which involves a mini-research 
project based on a topic from 
the File. After every two Files, 
the Workbook contains a Can 
you remember...? page, which 
provides a cumulative review of 
language students have covered 
in the Student’s Book.
designed to help students to feel a sense of progress and 
to show that the number of situations in which they can 
communicate effectively is growing. 
Listening
•	 Confidence-building, achievable tasks
•	 Practice in `getting the gist’ and listening for detail
•	 Practice in dealing with authentic spoken language
•	 Interesting, integrated, listening material
At Intermediate Plus level students need confidence-
building tasks which are progressively more challenging 
in terms of speed, length, and language difficulty, but are 
always achievable. Longer listenings are broken into separate 
parts with different tasks, to avoid memory overload. 
Students are exposed to a wide variety of accents, including 
some non-native speakers of English. On Online Practice, for 
each File students can find further listening practice related 
to the topic. They can also access the listening activities from 
every lesson, to practise in their own time, and to read the 
script to check anything that they have found difficult.
Reading
•	 Engaging topics and stimulating material
•	 Exposure to a wide variety of authentic text types
•	 Challenging tasks which help them read more skillfully
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to provide material where 
they feel there is a reason to read and tasks which help them 
to get the most out of a text. This level contains a variety 
of readings from real sources (the British press, magazines, 
websites, forums, infographics) and have been chosen for 
their intrinsic interest and potential to generate a reaction. The 
opinions expressed in these texts do not necessarily reflect the 
view of the English File authors or of Oxford University Press.
Writing
•	 Clear models for a variety of text types
•	 An awareness of register, structure, and fixed phrases
•	 A focus on ‘micro’ writing skills
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 10@@
10
	 	
Course overview
Workbook 
For language practice after class.
•	 All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Practical English
•	 Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
•	 Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
•	 Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 10 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A and B lessons
Each File contains two four-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the B lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Practical English
Every two Files (starting from File 1) there is a two-page lesson which 
teaches high-frequency, everyday English (e.g. language for asking for 
permission and making requests) and social English (useful phrases like 
I’m sorry I can’t take your call at the moment and It’s all such a mess). 
The video is in the form of a drama, featuring the two main characters, 
Rob and Jenny. The lessons have a storyline which runs through the level.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, Listening, 
Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and  
Sound Bank. 
The Student’s Book is also available as  
an eBook.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or 
catch up on a class they have missed.
•	 Look again: students can review the language from  
every lesson.
•	 Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, 
Writing, Listening, and Speaking practice.
•	 Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main 
language from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an 
extra challenge.
•	 Interactive video to practise the language from the Practical  
English lessons.
•	 Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
•	 Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, 
dyslexia-friendly texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It: English pronunciation app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
•	 Individual sounds
•	 Sounds in key words
•	 Speak and record  
functionality
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
•	 an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
•	 Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
•	 Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
•	 Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 50 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 150– 171
•	 An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp.172 – 201
•	 Extra speaking practice for every A and B lesson
Vocabulary
see pp.202 – 217
•	 An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 149 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
•	 All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
•	 Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 Answer keys
•	 All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
•	 All the Workbook audio files and scripts
•	 Tests and assessment material, including: an Entry Test; 
Progress Tests; an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every 
File; and complete test for every File. There are A and B 
versions of all the main tests and audio files for all the 
Listening tests
•	 CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
•	 The complete Student’s Book
•	 Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
•	 Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
•	 Dyslexia-friendly texts
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
•	 Short documentary, interviews, 
or animation for students at the 
end of even-numbered  
B lessons (2B, 4B, 6B, etc.)
Practical English
•	 A unique series of videos that 
goes with the Practical English 
lessons in the Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
•	 Street interviews filmed in 
London, New York, and Oxford 
to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for the 
Student’s Book can be found on 
the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, 
Online Practice, Student’s eBook, 
and the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 12@@
1A
12
	1A	 Why did they call you that?
1	VOCABULARY  names
Vocabulary notes
Surname, family name, and last name are all synonyms, 
and Sts may see any of them on forms.
Pseudonym is normally used for a writer who writes 
under a different name. When an actor or singer uses a 
different name professionally, this is usually referred to as 
a stage name.
a	 Books open. Focus on the eight photos and ask Sts if 
they know any of the people. Don’t worry if they don’t 
recognize anyone.
	 Tell Sts to read about the people and then match them to 
their photo. Tell them to guess if they don’t know. Point 
out that the first one (1H) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Then get Sts, in their pairs, to try to work out the meaning 
of the bold words and phrases.
b	 e 1.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Find out if any Sts got all the answers 
correct. You may want to tell them that J.K. (Rowling) 
stands for Joanne Kathleen and J.R.R. (Tolkien) stands for 
John Ronald Reuel.
2  C    3  A    4  F    5  E    6  B    7  D    8  G
e 1.2
See texts in Student’s Book on p.6
	 Now elicit the meaning of the words and phrases in bold 
in 1–8, either explaining in English, translating into Sts’ L1, 
or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. Model and drill 
pronunciation. Point out the silent p in pseudonym. Model 
and drill its pronunciation.
1	 full name /fʊl neɪm/ = the first name, any middle names, and 
last name of a person 
is short for /ɪz ʃɔːt fə/ = being a shorter form of a name
2	 initials /ɪˈnɪʃlz/ = the first letters of all of a person’s names
3	 maiden name /ˈmeɪdn neɪm/ = a woman’s family name 
before marriage 
married name /ˈmærid neɪm/ = when a person takes the 
last name of his / her spouse
4	 nickname /ˈnɪkneɪm/ = an informal, often humorous, name 
for a person that is connected with their real name, their 
personality or appearance, or with sth they have done 
changed her name /tʃeɪndʒd hə neɪm/ = got a different 
name
5	 pseudonym /ˈsuːdənɪm/ = a name used by sb, especially a 
writer, instead of their real name
6	 is named after /ɪz neɪmd ˈɑːftə/ = to be given the name of 
a person or place
7	 first name /ˈfɜːst neɪm/ = a name that was given to you 
when you were born, that comes before your family name 
middle name /mɪdl ˈneɪm/ = a name that comes between 
your first name and your family name
8	 ’s called /z kɔːld/ = having a particular name 
for short /fə ʃɔːt/ = being a shorter form of a name
 G   pronouns
 V   names
 P   vowel sounds
Lesson plan
In this first lesson, the topic of names provides a context for 
Sts to get to know each other, revise sounds, and practise 
basic reading and listening skills. The vocabulary focus is on 
working out meaning from context, and the grammar focus 
is on pronouns.
Sts begin by looking at some information about the names of 
famous people, and focus on words and phrases used when 
talking about names, e.g. maiden name, pseudonym, etc.  
Sts then use these terms to talk about someone they know. 
This is followed by a pronunciation focus on vowel sounds 
through common British names. The pronunciation focus 
can also be used to introduce the sound−picture system to 
Sts who have not previously used English File. Sts then read 
an article about naming customs around the world. The first 
part of the lesson ends with Listening & Speaking, where 
Sts listen to four speakers talking about their names, and Sts 
finally talk about their own names.
The second half of the lesson is about popular brand names. 
The grammar of pronouns is presented through a short text 
about the Amazon Kindle eBook reader. Sts then listen to a 
radio programme and find out the origin of some common 
brand names. The lesson ends with a speaking activity in 
which Sts read descriptions of new inventions and together 
come up with names for the products.
There is an Entry Test on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, which 
you can give the Sts before starting the course.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  pronouns p.152 
Communicative  Talk for a minute p.179  
(instructions p.172)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Entry Test
For students
Workbook  1A
Online Practice  1A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write your full name on the board, e.g. JOHN PHILIP SMITH, and 
elicit that this is your full name. Then elicit that: 
•	 JOHN is your first name 
•	 PHILIP is your middle name 
•	 SMITH is your surname (or also family name or last name)
If you don’t have a middle name, you could either invent one 
or use a celebrity’s name.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 13@@
13
1A
	 Check answers, and each time ask Sts if the name is short 
for something. You may want to tell them that Toni with 
an i is short for Antonia, and Jo (without an e) is short for 
Joanna / Josephine.
1	 Chris B (short for Christopher M or Christina / Christine W),  
Bill M (short for William), Linda W, Diana W
2	 Peter M, Steve M (short for Stephen / Steven), Emily W, Eve W
3	 Alex B (short for Alexander M or Alexandra W), Amy W, 
Andrew M, Anna W
4	 George M, Paula W, Charlotte W, Sean M
5	 Adele W, Edward M, Leo M (short for Leonard / Leonardo), 
Jessica W
6	 Sam B (short for Samuel M or Samantha W), Grace W,  
James M, Kate W (short for Catherine / Katherine)
7	 Tony M (short for Anthony), Joe M (short for Joseph), 
Nicole W, Sophie W
8	 Caroline W, Mia W, Mike M (short for Michael), Simon M
c	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Middle names quiz on 
p.106.
	 Make sure Sts understand the task and give them time, in 
pairs, to do the quiz.
	 Check answers. You could elicit the names of films these 
actors have been in or whether Sts like them.
1  Ashton /æʃtən/    2  Reese /riːs/    3  Brad /bræd/    
4  Jude /dʒuːd/    5  Dakota /dəkəʊtə/    6  Bruce /bruːs/    
7  Sean /ʃɔːn/    8  Rihanna /riːænə/    9  Hugh /huː/    
10  Warren /wɒrən/
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
3	READING  checking hypotheses
a	 Get Sts to cover the article and focus on the instructions. 
Put Sts in pairs to answer the questions.
	 Elicit some opinions, and encourage Sts to give reasons if 
they can, but don’t tell them if they are correct.
b	 Tell Sts to uncover the article and focus on the title. 
Elicit / Explain the meaning of customs /ˈkʌstəmz/ (= an 
accepted way of behaving or of doing things in a society 
or a community). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Now tell Sts to read the article to check their answers to a 
and to make a note whether the first names in the list are 
male or female.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Yeon Seok: Korean male first name 
Rakhmaninov: Russian (male) surname
López Ramírez: Spanish-speaking country surname
Aarushi: Indian female first name
Li: Chinese surname
Abdul Ahad: Afghan (Arabic) male first name
Jones: British surname
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and answer questions 1–6.
	 Check answers.
1  Korea and China    2  Afghanistan    3  Spanish-speaking 
countries    4  Russia    5  the UK    6  India
c	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs.
	 Give Sts time to ask and answer the questions. Encourage 
them to ask for extra information.
	 Elicit some answers for each question.
2	PRONUNCIATION  vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
Many Sts find it difficult to pronounce common British 
names, often because of vowel sounds which don’t exist 
in their L1.
This exercise will remind Sts who have used English File 
before of the sound−picture system. If your Sts are new to 
the series, you will need to explain that the sound pictures 
show the phonetic symbols, and give a clear example of a 
word with the target sound to help them remember the 
pronunciation of the symbol.
a	 e 1.3  Focus on the eight sound pictures and elicit the 
words and sounds. Tell / Remind Sts that two dots in the 
phonetic symbol show a long sound, and two symbols 
together show a diphthong.
1  fish /ɪ/    2  tree /iː/    3  cat /æ/    4  horse /ɔː/    5  egg /e/    
6  train /eɪ/    7  phone /əʊ/    8  bike /aɪ/
	 Now focus on the instructions and the first names. Point 
out that the sound that is being focused on is that of the 
pink letters in the names. Play the audio, pausing after 
each group to give Sts time to find the odd one out.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Give Sts time, in pairs, to find the odd 
one out in each set of four names. Remind them that this 
kind of exercise is easier if they say the words aloud to 
themselves. Then elicit answers and play the audio for Sts to 
listen and check.
	 Play the audio again if necessary, and then check answers.
1  Diana    2  Emily    3  Amy    4  Charlotte    5  Leo    6  Sam    
7  Nicole    8  Mia
e 1.3
1	 fish /ɪ/  Chris, Bill, Linda, Diana
2	 tree /iː/  Peter, Steve, Emily, Eve
3	 cat /æ/  Alex, Amy, Andrew, Anna
4	 horse /ɔː/  George, Paula, Charlotte, Sean
5	 egg /e/  Adele, Edward, Leo, Jessica
6	 train /eɪ/  Sam, Grace, James, Kate
7	 phone /əʊ/  Tony, Joe, Nicole, Sophie
8	 bike /aɪ/  Caroline, Mia, Mike, Simon
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to decide the sound of 
the pink letter in the names they have circled. Then check 
answers.
1  Diana /aɪ/    2  Emily /e/    3  Amy /eɪ/    4  Charlotte /ɑː/    
5  Leo /iː/    6  Sam /æ/    7  Nicole /ɒ/    8  Mia /iː/
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Give Sts a few minutes in 
pairs to decide which are men’s names, women’s names, 
or both.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 14@@
1A
14
3
I	 What’s your name?
K	 Khari.
I	 How do you spell it?
K	 K-H-A-R-I.
I	 Sorry, K-A-H…?
K	 No, K-H-A-R-I.
I	 Why did your parents call you that?
K	 It was my mum’s idea. When she was young, she went travelling 
in the Himalayas and she stayed at a monastery in Nepal called 
‘Khari’ – I think she said it was also the name of the lama.
I	 Lama?
K	 Yeah, the head priest there. You know, like the Dalai Lama. 
Apparently, Khari means ‘the precious one’.
I	 Oh, OK! Thanks – that’s really interesting. Do you have a 
nickname?
K	 No, I don’t.
I	 Are you happy with your name?
K	 Yeah.
I	 Would you like to change it?
K	 No, no way. My name’s unique; I’m proud of it.
4
I	 What’s your name?
A	 It’s Anya, A-N-Y-A.
I	 Why did your parents call you that?
A	 Well, my dad’s half Polish, and my parents wanted a Polish name. 
My mum originally wanted to call me Agnieszka, but my dad 
thought it would be too hard to spell, so they decided on Anya.
I	 Do you have a nickname?
A	 I do, but I don’t want to tell you what it is – it’s too embarrassing.
I	 Are you happy with your name?
A	 Yes, I am – it’s quite an unusual name in the UK. I only know one 
other Anya. I think it’s more common in Poland, but there it’s spelt 
A-N-I-A.
I	 Would you like to change your name?
A	 No, I really like it. I often get compliments about it.
b	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen again and need to 
answer the three questions. Give Sts time to read them.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play each speaker again, pausing to check 
the answers before playing the next speaker.
Speaker 1	 1  He was named after Sean Connery.
	
2  At school he was nicknamed ‘Gibbo’ because of his 
surname, Gibson.
	
3  He wouldn’t like to change it.
Speaker 2	 1  She was named after a hospital in New Jersey.
	
2  No, but people call her Debbie or Deb for short.
	
3  She doesn’t know.
Speaker 3	 1  His mum called him after a place – a monastery 
in Nepal. It was also the name of the lama / head 
priest there.
	
2  He doesn’t have a nickname.
	
3  He wouldn’t like to change his name because it’s 
unique and he’s proud of it.
Speaker 4	 1  Because her dad is half Polish and her parents 
wanted a Polish name.
	
2  She has a nickname, but she doesn’t want to say 
what it is.
	
3  She wouldn’t like to change it.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
	 You may want to explain that in Spanish-speaking 
countries a child gets both their father’s and their 
mother’s first surname, so if Juan López Garcia and Ana 
Ramírez Soler have a daughter Maria José, her full name 
will be Maria José López Ramírez.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand 
them. If your Sts come from the same country, you could 
do this as a whole-class activity. If not, put Sts in pairs to 
discuss the questions, and then get some feedback from 
the class.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING
a	 e 1.4  Focus on the instructions. Now play the audio for 
Sts to listen, write the name of each person, and add a tick 
if the people like their name.
	 Check answers by eliciting the names onto the board, 
getting Sts to spell them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  Sean f    2  Deborah    3  Khari f    4  Anya f
e 1.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
I = interviewer, S = Sean, D = Deborah, K = Khari, A = Anya
1
I	 Excuse me. I’m doing a survey. Can I ask you some questions 
about your name?
S	 OK.
I	 So, what’s your name?
S	 Sean Gibson.
I	 Is that S-E-A-N or S-H-A-U-N?
S	 S-E-A-N.
I	 Why did your parents call you that?
S	 I think I’m named after the actor Sean Connery, who played  
James Bond in the sixties. He was still very famous at the time 
when I was born.
I	 Do you have a nickname?
S	 Yes, at school they used to call me ‘Gibbo’ because of my surname, 
Gibson. I didn’t really mind it because most people were called by 
some nickname or other.
I	 And are you happy with your first name?
S	 Mmm, I like it. I was usually the only Sean at school, which I think 
was quite a good thing. But people find it quite difficult to spell, 
especially as there are two possible spellings, and most foreign 
people find it really difficult to pronounce.
I	 Would you like to change it?
S	 No, no, I definitely wouldn’t change it.
2
I	 So, what’s your name?
D	 Deborah.
I	 Is that with an h at the end? 
D	 Yes, D-E-B-O-R-A-H.
I	 Why did your parents call you that?
D	 Ah, I’m actually named after the hospital where I was born, 
Deborah Hospital in New Jersey – near New York. My dad thought 
of that.
I	 Do you have a nickname?
D	 No, but everyone calls me Debbie or Deb for short.
I	 Are you happy with your name?
D	 Not really.
I	 Would you like to change it?
D	 I don’t know. When I was little, I started calling myself April, and 
then Caroline, but now I don’t like those names, either.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 15@@
1A
15
The Grammar Bank rules section usually begins with 
Revise the basics, showing what Sts should already 
know – in this case, the forms of all pronouns, and 
basic rules.
The examples on the audio and the rules are grammar 
which is either completely new (as in this case), or 
grammar which is complex in form or use and needs 
thorough recycling.
Pronouns
At this level, Sts will have met all of the pronoun forms, 
but may not have revised them since Elementary level.
It is also an area where many common errors persist, 
especially confusing the third person pronouns he /she /  
they, and mixing up subject and object pronouns or 
possessive adjectives and pronouns.
Remind Sts that pronouns are not usually stressed in 
sentences except for emphasis.
Direct / indirect object pronouns and word order
•	 Rule 1: Emphasize that when the direct object is a 
noun, we usually put the indirect object (without a 
pronoun) directly after the verb, and then the direct 
object, e.g. I gave Jack / him my address (address is the 
direct object and Jack or him is the indirect object) NOT 
I gave to Jack / him my address.
	 However, we can also say I gave my address to Jack / him  
(= verb, direct object, to or for + indirect object), but 
highlight that the indirect object usually answers the 
question ‘to whom?’, e.g. I gave it to him. The direct 
object answers ‘what?’, e.g. I gave my address to him / I 
gave it to him.
•	 Rule 2: Emphasize that when the direct object is a 
pronoun, the only possible order is verb + direct object 
+ to or for + indirect object, e.g. I gave it to Jack / him.
	 You may want to write a few more sentences on the 
board with indirect objects and elicit the different 
possibilities, e.g.
	 They showed Jane the flat.
	 They showed the flat to her.
	 They showed it to her.
	 Focus on the first section, Revise the basics. Go through 
the examples and elicit the rules, e.g. I always being 
a capital letter in 1, the difference between a subject 
pronoun and an object pronoun in 2, etc. Then focus 
on the chart showing all the pronouns and possessive 
adjectives.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for direct / indirect 
object pronouns and word order and play audio e 1.5 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm.
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  He, his    2  your, mine    3  their, hers    4  her, me    
5  them, theirs    6  our, ours    7  your, mine    8  us, her    
9  him, his    10  It’s, its
c	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them 
to answer the questions about their names. You could 
demonstrate the activity by answering some of the 
questions yourself.
	 Get feedback from different pairs, and use this as an 
opportunity to learn Sts’ names.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they know what their name is in 
English, and if they like it more or less than in their language.
5	GRAMMAR  pronouns
a	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts know what 
a brand name is (= the name given to a product by the 
company that produces it). Now put Sts in pairs to discuss 
the questions.
	 Elicit some answers.
b	 Focus on the image and find out if any Sts have a Kindle or 
a Kindle app. Then ask if they know how the Kindle got its 
name. Don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
	 Now focus on the instructions, and then give Sts time to 
read the text.
	 To check comprehension, ask Sts how the Kindle got 
its name.
The designer Michael Cronan chose kindle because its meaning 
reminded him of the feeling people get when reading. Also, 
Victor Hugo, the French novelist, wrote ‘to read is to light a fire’.
	 Now elicit Sts’ opinions of the name. You may want to 
tell Sts that Jeff Bezos wanted a name for his company 
starting with A and chose Amazon because it’s the biggest 
river in the world, and he wanted his company to be the 
biggest in the world.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to read the text again and 
decide what the highlighted pronouns refer to. You might 
want to remind Sts what a pronoun is (= a word that is 
used instead of a noun or noun phrase).
	 Check answers.
them = Kindle eBook readers  it = Kindle eBook reader  
him = Michael Cronan  he = Jeff Bezos  it = the word kindle  
their = people
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.132. If your Sts 
have not used the English File series before, explain that 
all the grammar rules and exercises are in this part of 
the book.
Grammar notes
The Grammar notes in this Teacher’s Guide aim to 
add more information to the notes and rules on the 
Grammar Bank pages in the Intermediate Plus Student’s 
Book where necessary. There is a direct link between 
the number of each rule in the Teacher’s Guide and the 
Student’s Book. If there is no extra information about 
a rule in the Teacher’s Guide, this is either because we 
assume that Sts at this level should already know it, or 
because all the information needed is on the Student’s 
Book page.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 16@@
1A
16
6	LISTENING  understanding proper names
a	 Focus on the photos of the brands and the task. Do the 
questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs or 
small groups to discuss the questions and then get some 
feedback.
b	 e 1.7  Play the audio for Sts to listen to how each name 
is pronounced. Then elicit what kind of company they are 
and which ones are pronounced differently in your Sts’ L1.
A	 Burberry /ˈbɜːbəri/ fashion items, e.g. raincoats, scarves, etc.
B	 Ferrari /feˈrɑːriː/ cars and related merchandising
C	 Vodafone /ˈvəʊdəfəʊn/ mobile phone networks 
D	 Samsung /ˈsæmsʌŋ/ electronic products
E	 Nivea /nɪˈviːə/ cosmetics
F	 Nike /ˈnaɪkiː/ sportswear
G	 Starbucks /ˈstɑːbʌks/ coffee and coffee shops
H	 Bluetooth /ˈbluːtuːθ/ wi-fi technology 
e 1.7
A	 Burberry
B	 Ferrari
C	 Vodafone
D	 Samsung
E	 Nivea
F	 Nike
G	 Starbucks
H	 Bluetooth
c	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to think which brand 
name A–H has which meaning 1–7. You may want to 
point out that 7 has two answers. Tell them not to write 
their answers.
	 Elicit some answers from various pairs, but don’t tell them 
if they are correct.
d	 e 1.8  Tell Sts they are going to listen to a radio 
programme about the brands they have just discussed 
and they should now match the brands (A–H) to their 
meanings in c. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare answers with their partner, and then 
play the audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers. Find out how many Sts had guessed 
correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  D    2  E    3  C    4  G    5  H    6  F    7  A, B
e 1.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
I = interviewer, J = John
I	 Today we’re talking to the Creative Director of a business that 
names companies and products. Welcome, John.
J	 Hello, Sarah.
I	 So, how do companies go about choosing their names?
J	 Oh, in all sorts of ways. Many, like Burberry clothes and 
accessories, and Ferrari cars, are named after the people who 
started them. Others are combination words, such as Vodafone, 
which is from letters in the words voice, data, and telephone – 
though actually, they changed the P-H in telephone to F. And 
Microsoft comes from the words microcomputer and software.
I	 Interesting…
J	 And other names come from phrases in the local language. A 
good example of that is Samsung, the big Korean electronics 
company. In Korean, Samsung means ‘three stars’. The name was 
chosen back in the year nineteen thirty-eight, and at that time, 
b	
1	 They sent it to me.
2	 I gave them to her.
3	 She found them for me.
4	 My grandmother wrote them to me.
5	 Will you lend it to him?
6	 My son made it for me.
7	 My parents offered it to us.
8	 We didn’t buy it for her.
9	 I read it to them.
 10	 A friend sold them to me.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 e 1.6  Focus on the instructions and examples. Explain 
(or show on the board) that first Sts will hear a sentence, 
then they have to change it, by changing the direct object 
to a pronoun.
	 Play the first sentence and then elicit the new sentence 
from the class.
	 Play the rest of the audio, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and say the sentence.
EXTRA SUPPORT   As Sts listen, pause the audio at the beep if 
they need more time.
e 1.6
1	 Give me the book. (pause) Give it to me.
2	 Give her the shoes. (pause) Give them to her.
3	 We gave him the present. (pause) We gave it to him.
4	 Show me the photo. (pause) Show it to me.
5	 I’ll give them the information. (pause) I’ll give it to them.
6	 Did you give her your number? (pause) Did you give it to her?
7	 She didn’t send me an email. (pause) She didn’t send it to me.
8	 He can’t give us the details. (pause) He can’t give them to us.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
f	 Focus on the task. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to 
take it in turns to talk about a couple they know, using 
the suggested topics and anything else they think is 
interesting. Focus on the example and remind Sts to use 
he / his / him when talking about a man, and she / her / 
hers when talking about a woman.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use the appropriate 
pronouns.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by telling Sts a 
little about a couple you know.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to ask each other follow-up 
questions, e.g. How did you meet them?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 17@@
1A
17
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of the phrase raise money.
	 Point out the Glossary and go through it with the class. 
Check that Sts understand straw /strɔː/, and model and 
drill its pronunciation.
	 Now give Sts time to read about one of the products on 
the website.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
EXTRA IDEA   Before focusing on the straws, ask What brand 
and model of phone, car, and / or computer do you and your 
family have? Do you like the names?
b	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to discuss the two questions.
	 Elicit some opinions from various pairs. You could also 
have a class vote with a show of hands for each name.
	 Then tell Sts that the name that was chosen for the 
product was Lolistraw (a lollipop is a sweet on the end of 
a stick). The product raised $29,759 from 821 people.
c	 Focus on the task and on the Making suggestions, 
Accepting suggestions, Rejecting suggestions box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read about the three products.
	 Then put them in small groups and get one person in 
each group to act as ‘secretary’, writing down all the 
possible ideas for names. Monitor and help, encouraging 
Sts to use expressions from the box.
d	 Now tell Sts to decide in their groups on the best names 
for each product.
	 Elicit ideas from each group for each product and write 
the names on the board.
	 Then have a class vote for the best name for each product.
	 Now tell the class the real names of the products and 
where the names come from. Ask Sts whether they think 
the real names are as good as the names they chose.
1	 Quercus; the word is from the Latin name for the oak tree.
2	 IQ bars; IQ means ‘Intelligence Quotient’.
3	 Pixl; the word is from a pixel which is a small individual 
coloured square on a computer screen – together these form 
the whole display.
	 Finally, ask Which product do you think was the most 
popular? (Pixl raised the most money from the most 
people on the website.)
1	 Quercus raised £6,342 from 86 people.
2	 IQ bars raised $73,664 from 1,500 people.
3	 Pixl raised $225,017 from 4,018 people.
three stars was the most impressive rating that people could 
imagine for hotels and things like that.
I	 So if they’d started the company today, they would probably have 
called it ‘five stars’ – whatever that is in Korean.
J	 Absolutely. Some names even come from Latin – the name of 
the cosmetics company Nivea comes from the Latin word niveus, 
which means ‘snow white’. And talking of Latin, there’s another 
famous brand name with a classical connection, which is Nike.
I	 I think I know this one. Nike is the Greek goddess of victory. Is that 
right?
J	 Yes, exactly. However, ‘Nike’ wasn’t the company’s original name. 
When it started in nineteen sixty-four, its original name was Blue 
Ribbon Sports. They changed their name to Nike a few years later, 
in nineteen seventy-one.
I	 I didn’t know that.
J	 And a name ideally needs to have a strong sound. Take the coffee 
chain Starbucks, which was founded by two teachers and a writer, 
who decided to set up a business selling high-quality coffee 
beans and roasting equipment. Their advertising agency advised 
them that the letters S-T were powerful, and so they brainstormed 
words beginning with these letters and thought of a character 
called Starbuck from a nineteenth-century novel. The name didn’t 
have anything to do with coffee, but they said that ‘the sound 
seemed to make sense’.
I	 And do you have a favourite brand name?
J	 Well, one of my favourites is Bluetooth. This one comes from 
the name of a Viking king, Harald Blatand, so called because he 
had a dead tooth which had turned blue – blatand means ‘blue 
tooth’ in Danish. This king believed in good communication 
between people, which is an excellent model for developing new 
communication technologies. But also, the logo for Bluetooth 
on your phone screen, the B shape, is made up of the two Viking 
letters for the King’s initials – the symbols for H – Harald – and B – 
Blatand. I love that.
I	 Thank you so much, John, for speaking with us this afternoon.
J	 You’re very welcome.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. founders, Viking.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and write their 
answers to each question. You could pause after each 
question is answered to give Sts time to make notes. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Microcomputer and software
2	 1938
3	 Blue Ribbon Sports
4	 Because an advertising agency said they were powerful 
letters
5	 H and B
	 Get feedback on what Sts found surprising about the 
brand names.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 If your Sts come from the same country, you could do this 
as a whole-class activity. If not, put Sts in pairs and then 
get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 18@@
18
1B
	1B	 Life in colour
1	VOCABULARY  adjective suffixes
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the eight 
colours on the page. Tell Sts to do The colour test 
individually. They should do this task quickly.
b	 Now tell Sts to go to Communication The colour test  
on p.106 and read the results of the test.
	 Tell Sts to read about the colour they chose and to 
underline the points they agree with.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
!   Don’t ask Sts about their results yet, as they will be 
discussing these at the next stage. You might want to tell the 
class that this activity is based on the famous Max Lüscher 
colour test.
c	 Focus on the Talking about results box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Now put Sts in pairs to answer the two questions.
	 Monitor and encourage Sts to use the expressions in the 
box and to ask each other follow-up questions.
	 Elicit some feedback. You could also tell Sts which colour 
you chose and what you think of the results.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to vote with a show of hands for the 
most and least popular colours.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the adjectives with the correct suffixes.
	 Check answers, and elicit the meaning of the adjectives, 
especially if you didn’t do the Optional lead-in.
ambitious    passionate    sensitive    sociable    successful
e	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Adjective suffixes  
on p.152.
Vocabulary notes
Describing people
Sts will have met several of these adjectives before. If they 
are new, encourage them to try out the words with the 
different endings to see which one sounds best.
Describing places and things
Some of the stems can be used with different suffixes, e.g. 
useable (= can be used) and restive (= unable to stay still). 
We have focused on the two more common adjectives, 
but you may also want to point out these two alternatives.
-ful and -less
Point out that hopeless can also mean ‘not good’, e.g. I’m 
hopeless at maths.
	 Look at 1 Describing people. Focus on the Word 
endings for adjectives box and go through it with Sts.
	 Now get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Let Sts use their dictionaries to help them 
with this section.
	 e 1.9  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
 G 	 adjectives
 V 	 adjective suffixes
 P 	 word stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is colour. Sts start by taking a colour 
personality test and reading the results, which revises some 
adjectives of personality covered in English File Intermediate. 
They then focus on word-building with adjectives and 
suffixes, and this is followed by a pronunciation focus on 
word stress in adjectives. Next, Sts listen to a podcast about 
some facts about colours. The first half ends with a speaking 
activity in which Sts discuss various questions related to 
colours.
The second half of the lesson begins with the grammar 
focus, which is on adjectives, revising basic rules and 
extending Sts’ knowledge of comparative and superlative 
adjectives, together with a focus on the use of one / ones. 
Next, Sts read and discuss an article about the psychology of 
colour – how the colour of a room can affect our mood. This 
lesson ends with Sts talking and then writing about their 
favourite room at home.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  adjectives p.153 
Communicative  Good, better, best p.180  
(instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  Adjective suffixes p.206 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook  1B
Online Practice  1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise adjectives of personality by doing this quiz with the 
whole class, getting them to write the answers.
Ask: What do you call someone who…?
	 1	wants to be successful in life (ambitious)
	 2	isn’t confident about himself / herself (insecure)
	 3	refuses to change his / her opinion (stubborn)
	 4	is friendly and enjoys being with other people (sociable)
	 5	always thinks about himself or herself and not about other 
people (selfish)
	 6	has moods that change quickly and often (moody) 
Check answers and elicit the stressed syllable in each 
adjective.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 19@@
19
1B
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
Pronunciation notes
Word stress can be difficult for Sts and needs lots of 
practice. The presence of prefixes and suffixes can add 
to the difficulty for Sts from L1 backgrounds where 
suffixes take the main word stress. The main thing for all 
Sts to learn is that suffixes and prefixes are not stressed 
in English. The only exception is the a in -ation, e.g. 
converse – conversation.
a	 Focus on the Word stress on adjectives formed with 
suffixes box and go through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the instructions and questions 1–10. Give 
Sts time to underline the stressed syllable in the bold 
adjectives.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Remind Sts that the stress will never be on 
the prefix or suffix.
b	 e 1.12  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.12
1	 creative
2	 possessive
3	 envious
4	 rebellious
5	 glamorous
6	 comfortable
7	 unhealthy
8	 suitable
9	 impressive
 10	 luxurious
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each adjective for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to match the stressed syllable in 
each adjective to its vowel sound (/e/, /iː/, etc.).
1  /eɪ/    2  /e/    3  /e/    4  /e/    5  /æ/    6  /ʌ/    7  /e/    8  /uː/    
9  /e/    10  /ʊə/
c	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs, A and B.  
Tell Sts A to ask their partner questions 1–5 and Sts B to 
ask 6–10. Encourage them to ask for extra information 
where possible.
	 Monitor, making sure Sts stress the bold adjectives 
correctly.
	 Get feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to ask you a couple of the questions 
first. Encourage them to ask the follow-up questions for 
more information.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to reply to the questions with What 
about you?
e 1.9
Adjective suffixes  
1 Describing people
sociable, sensible, loveable, reliable, responsible
passionate, affectionate, compassionate, considerate
sensitive, assertive, attractive, creative, impulsive, possessive
ambitious, envious, glamorous, rebellious
successful, helpful, powerful, thoughtful
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA IDEA   If your Sts’ L1 is a Latin-based language, some of 
these adjectives may be quite similar. Get Sts to highlight or 
circle the ones that are completely different.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover the chart, look at 
the nouns and verbs in the list in a, and see if they can say 
the adjectives.
	 Now focus on 2 Describing places and things and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Let Sts use their dictionaries to help them 
with this section.
	 e 1.10  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Point out the difference in pronunciation 
between luxury /ˈlʌkʃəri/ and luxurious /lʌgˈʒʊəriəs/.
e 1.10
2 Describing places and things
recognizable, affordable, comfortable, desirable, profitable, suitable
easy, dirty, healthy, messy, noisy, risky
addictive, expensive, impressive
dangerous, luxurious, spacious
useful, colourful, peaceful, restful, stressful
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover the chart, look at 
the nouns and verbs in the list in a, and see if they can say 
the adjectives.
	 Now look at 3 -ful and -less. Focus on the -ful and -less 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Focus on the instructions for a and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Get them to do it 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 1.11  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 1.11
3 -ful and -less
helpful, helpless
powerful, powerless
thoughtful, thoughtless
useful, useless
colourful, colourless
restful, restless
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 20@@
20 1B
Most diamonds in their natural state are brown. These are used in 
industry as cutting tools, rather than in jewellery. The largest cut 
diamond in the world is this colour. It was found in nineteen eighty-
five in South Africa and weighs one hundred and nine grams.
The name for the colour black hasn’t always meant ‘dark’. It comes 
from the root word bhleg-, which meant ‘to burn, gleam, or shine’. 
This may explain why in languages like French and Spanish, blanc or 
blanco are actually the words for white.
These are just a few of the fascinating facts I discovered when I was 
researching colour. The next time you make a choice about colour, 
for example, for a new car, do some research first to find out exactly 
what it means.
d	 Now focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–10. Make sure they understand them.
	 Play the audio again. You might want to pause it after 
each colour has been mentioned to give Sts time to 
answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  white    2  orange    3  black    4  yellow    5  blue    6  purple    
7  red    8  pink    9  brown    10  green
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.124–125, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts how many of their answers  
in a were the same as the information in the text. If you 
wrote Sts' ideas in a on the board, point to them.
4	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the questions, and go through them, making 
sure Sts can remember the meaning of smart and dye.  
You might also want to check they understand the 
question What are they like? They should answer this 
question after each person they have mentioned in the 
third section.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use adjectives and 
to ask for extra information.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
5	GRAMMAR  adjectives
a	 Focus on the task and then give Sts time to complete 
facts 1–8.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  most    2  than    3  ones    4  in    5  more    6  much    
7  as    8  the
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.133.
Grammar notes
Adjectives
Revise the basics
Sts will have seen both these forms before, but may still 
be confusing comparative and superlative forms, e.g. It’s 
the more expensive watch in the shop.
3	LISTENING  listening for extra information
a	 You could do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback from various pairs.
	 You could elicit a few colours for each noun and write 
them on the board. Leave them up to help Sts when 
doing e later.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
fascinating in the title. Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to read each fact and choose 
a colour from the list for each gap. Tell them not to write 
anything at this stage.
c	 e 1.13  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
know what a podcast is (= a digital audio file that can be 
taken from the internet).
	 Tell Sts that the podcast has a lot of information in it, more 
than just the text on the Student’s Book page, and the first 
time they listen, they just have to check their answers to b.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Find out how many Sts got all answers 
correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  red    2  orange    3  Pink    4  purple    5  blue    6  green    
7  yellow    8  white    9  brown    10  black
e 1.13
(script in Student’s Book on pp.124–125)
Look around you. Colour is everywhere in our lives. Did you know 
that, according to some experts, there are as many as ten million 
possible colours in our world, though many are too complex for the 
human eye? So how much do you really know about colour? Here 
are some fascinating facts.
Research shows that the world’s most popular colour is blue, 
followed by purple, red, and green, while white, orange, and yellow 
are our least favourite colours.
Works of art using the colour red tend to be more expensive. This 
is because it’s a powerful colour, which is considered lucky in many 
countries, such as China. The most expensive works by the artist 
Mark Rothko, for example, whose paintings are mainly just blocks of 
colour, are his two red paintings.
The word orange didn’t describe a specific colour in English until the 
sixteenth century, when it was named after the fruit. Instead, people 
used the old English word geoluhread, which meant ‘yellow-red’. This 
is why we have the word redhead for people with this colour of hair.
Pink has a calming effect and reduces anger and anxiety. Many 
prisons and hospitals paint their walls pink, to make prisoners and 
patients less anxious.
In Imperial Rome, the colour purple was produced with an extremely 
expensive dye made from thousands of seashells. The colour 
symbolized the power and wealth of the Roman Empire, and by the 
fourth century AD, only the emperor was allowed to wear it.
Mosquitoes are attracted to dark colours, especially blue. So, if 
you’re planning to be outside in the evening in an area with a lot of 
mosquitoes, be careful what colour clothes you wear.
There is no such thing as a green mammal, even though it’s a 
perfectly common colour for birds, reptiles, fish, and insects. One 
reason might be that most mammals can’t see this colour, so it 
doesn’t help with camouflage.
Van Gogh said that yellow was the colour of happiness, and it’s 
the main colour of many of his paintings between eighteen eighty 
and eighteen ninety. The Dutch painter suffered from epilepsy, and 
doctors may have given him the drug digitalis, which can cause 
people to see this colour very strongly.
The safest colour for a car is white. Studies show that it is the most 
visible colour in all driving conditions except snow.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 21@@
21
1B
c	 Focus on the Compare them! section and the example 
answer.
	 Then get Sts to look at the Extremes! section and elicit 
the superlative of the adjectives in brackets. Tell Sts not to 
write them in the questions.
1  the saddest    2  the most positive    3  the most popular, the 
best    4  the furthest (or farthest)    5  the most generous    
6  the most boring
	 Tell Sts to choose three topics or questions from each 
section to talk about.
	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the topics and / or answer the 
questions, then swap roles.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to give reasons and 
explain their choices as fully as possible.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts they have to try to talk for at least one 
minute on each topic they have chosen.
6	READING  scanning for information
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the meaning of colour scheme (= the way in which colours 
are arranged, especially in the furniture and decoration of 
a room). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in pairs to share their ideas.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class.
b	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts understand 
that they should read quickly to find which room in a 
generally follows the advice given in the article.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
C  the study
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts can 
remember the meaning of suitable.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again, complete the chart, 
and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Suitable colours
a bedroom
pink, blue, green, purple
a living room
green, brown
a dining room
red, orange
a kitchen
yellow
a study
purple, blue
a bathroom
blue
Not suitable for bedrooms: red, yellow, white
d	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer questions 1–9.
	 Check answers.
1	 Because, as it’s a strong colour, it might be too much or give 
people headaches.
2	 Pink can be a ‘girlie’ colour, so adding grey or black will make it 
attractive to more people.
3	 Because it can make a room look smaller.
Adjective + one / ones
In many languages, adjectives can be used as nouns, and 
Sts need to be encouraged to say, e.g. the blue one NOT 
the blue. 
More rules for comparatives and superlatives
Rule 2: two-syllable adjectives
You may want to point out that:
•	 adjectives which end in -ing, -ful, and -less use more / 
the most for comparatives and superlatives, e.g. boring, 
careful, painless.
•	 two-syllable adjectives with a negative prefix which 
end in -y, e.g. unhappy, untidy, can make comparatives 
and superlatives with -er / -est or more, e.g. unhappier or 
more unhappy.
•	 although the least + adjective is very common, less + 
adjective is not as common – we tend to use not as…
as…, e.g. Today isn’t as hot as yesterday (rather than 
today is less hot than yesterday).
a bit and much + comparative adjective
Highlight that very is not used with comparatives, e.g. very 
bigger.
You could point out that we can also use a little instead of 
a bit with comparatives, and far or a lot instead of much.
	 Focus on Revise the basics and go through the 
examples, eliciting the rules for each one, e.g. that 
adjectives go before nouns in 1, that we never add 
an s to adjectives in 2, etc. Then focus on the chart for 
comparative and superlative adjectives and use it to revise 
the rules.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for adjective +  
one / ones and play audio e 1.14 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for more rules for comparatives and 
superlatives e 1.15 and a bit and much + comparative 
adjective e 1.16.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  g the worst film    2  g as sporty as    3  f    4  f, f    
5  g a cheap one    6  g a better driver    7  g the most 
comfortable ones    8  g very successful    9  g is easier than    
10  f
b	
1	 Tom’s brother is luckier than he is.
2	 Our house is much smaller than theirs.
3	 My old password was more difficult / harder to memorize 
than my new one.
4	 This flat is the nicest of the three we’ve seen.
5	 My children aren’t as helpful as my sister’s.
6	 The weather was worse than we’d expected.
7	 The book was a bit more dramatic than the film.
8	 Red won’t look as good as yellow for your kitchen walls.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 22@@
22 1B
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 the size and colour of the room
3	 what furniture there is
1	 which room it is and where
4	 why she likes it
	 Focus on c and tell Sts to read the description again and 
complete the gaps with prepositions in the list. They 
should use the photo of the room to help them. Remind 
Sts that some prepositions will be used more than once.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  in    3  inside    4  from    5  in    6  on    7  above    8  on    
9  in    10  with
	 Focus on d and tell Sts they are going to write a 
description of their favourite room. Remind them that 
they described it to their partner in the main lesson.
	 Tell Sts to plan their description by using 1–4 in b in the 
correct order. Encourage them to make brief notes on 
what they will write about.
!   Emphasize to Sts that the planning stage of writing is 
usually the most important stage because it provides a 
structure for the piece of writing.
	 Now focus on the instructions in e and tell Sts they are 
going to write the description of their favourite room. 
They should write four paragraphs, as in the model, and 
use the language in the Vocabulary Bank Adjective 
suffixes on p.152 to help.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their description, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
	 In f, Sts should check their description for mistakes before 
giving it in.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts to take a photo of their room and add 
it to the description. Sts could also show each other the 
photos.
4	 It apparently discourages insects.
5	 If it’s all one shade of purple, it can make it difficult for people 
to relax.
6	 Only green can make people feel lazy and fall asleep.
7	 Brown on its own can be boring, so blue and green add extra 
mental stimulation.
8	 People with white bedrooms work in bed a lot (and don’t 
relax).
9	 It’s a dramatic colour and can work in any room in 
moderation.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
pale / light green 2    bright green 3    dark green 1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to describe each colour 
using the adjectives in 1–3. You might want to do the first 
one as a class.
	 Check answers.
beige = pale brown
cream = pale yellow
khaki = dark green
maroon = dark brownish-red (brownish = quite brown)
navy = dark blue
scarlet = bright red
turquoise = bright blue / green
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback from the class. You could also tell 
Sts about the colours in the rooms in your house.
7	SPEAKING & WRITING  describing a room
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to think of their 
answers. Make sure they understand all the lexis, e.g. 
blinds, etc.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to take turns to 
describe their favourite room. They can use the items in 
the list and anything else about their room that comes 
to mind. Encourage Sts to give as much information as 
possible and to ask their partner follow-up questions.
	 Get feedback from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could start by brainstorming 
vocabulary for furniture and accessories. You could also 
demonstrate the activity by describing your favourite room 
and getting Sts to ask you a few questions about it.
b	 This is the first time Sts go to the Writing Bank at the 
back of the Student’s Book. In this section, Sts will find 
model texts with exercises and language notes, and a 
writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercises in class, but set the actual writing 
(the last activity) for homework.
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing a room on p.115.
	 Focus on a and get Sts to look at the photo of Ana’s room 
and describe what’s in it.
	 Now give Sts time to read the description and answer the 
two questions. Tell them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Get some feedback.
	 Now focus on b and tell Sts to number the topics 
according to the paragraph in which they appear.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 23@@
23
PE1
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
If your Sts did English File Intermediate, elicit anything they 
can remember about Jenny and Rob. Ask Who’s Jenny? Where 
does she work / live? Who’s Rob?, etc. 
If your Sts didn’t do English File Intermediate, tell Sts who Rob 
and Jenny are (see the Lesson plan) and explain that they 
are now married and living in New York.
1	r JENNY IS BACK IN LONDON
a	 e 1.17  Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit that 
Jenny and Andrew, a man who was on her flight, are 
coming into the terminal at Arrivals, and that Jenny is 
carrying a lot of bags, which she then drops. Focus also 
on the photo of the man on the phone. Explain that he is 
called Grant, and is watching Andrew and Jenny. They will 
find out more about him as the story progresses.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the two questions. Play 
the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch or listen.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to  
pre-teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
Andrew helps Jenny when she drops her bags, and carries one 
of them for her.
Her suitcase hasn’t arrived.
e 1.17
(The narrator’s lines are on the audio, but not in the video.)
N = narrator, A = Andrew, J = Jenny, G = Grant
N	 Day one. Two p.m. Jenny Zielinski has just arrived in London. Her 
husband, Rob, is still in the States, but Jenny’s going to visit his dad, 
Henry, before she starts work. She’s carrying a lot of bags, and drops 
them. But a fellow passenger helps her.
A	 Are you all right? I’ll carry that for you.
J	 Oh yeah, that’d be great. Thank you.
N	 They don’t know it, but a man is watching them. He makes a phone 
call…
G	 We’ve just arrived on the flight from New York. He’s talking to 
someone. I’ll follow them.
N	 Jenny gets to the queue for Passport Control. She’s chatting to 
Andrew, the man who helped her with her bags.
A	 …And have you been to the UK before?
J	 A few times, actually. I work for a magazine in the States – 
NewYork 24seven – and we have a sister company in London.
A	 I see. And are you here on business this time?
J	 Sort of. I’m here for a few meetings, but I have a couple of days off 
beforehand. I’m visiting my father-in-law in the countryside. How 
about you? How was your holiday in New York?
A	 It wasn’t really a holiday. I was doing some research there.
J	 That sounds interesting.
A	 It was, but I didn’t have much time for sightseeing! Is your 
husband coming, too?
J	 No, he’s working.
A	 What does he do?
J	 He’s a journalist. He’s on assignment in Alaska at the moment.
A	 In Alaska? Wow!
J	 I know, right? I’ve never been, but he says it’s incredible.
A	 I can imagine. A bit different from the English countryside!
J	 That’s true.
A	 I’d better go. Oh, before I forget, here’s your laptop.
Function    reporting lost luggage, greeting someone you 
haven’t seen for some time
Language  My suitcase hasn’t arrived; It’s medium size, etc.
Lesson plan
This is the first in a series of five Practical English lessons (one 
every other File) which teach Sts basic functional language 
to help them ‘survive’ in an English-speaking environment. 
All the content for these lessons is on video. There is also an 
audio version if you are unable to show the video in class.
The storyline is based on two characters, Jenny Zielinski, an 
American journalist who works in the New York office of a 
magazine called NewYork 24seven, and her husband, Rob 
Walker, a British journalist who works for the same magazine. 
If your Sts did English File Intermediate, or any of the previous 
levels, they will already be familiar with the characters. If 
not, they will not be at a disadvantage because the story is 
stand-alone. In the audio-only version, a narrator has been 
added to tell the story, so that Sts will be aware of all the 
action even if they aren’t watching the video. The storyline 
in this series of lessons is a mystery, which Jenny has to 
solve. Sts will enjoy the story much more if you build up the 
suspense and encourage them to speculate about what has 
happened, or is going to happen during and at the end of 
each episode. If any Sts have watched ahead in the Online 
Practice, ask them not to spoil the ending for those that 
haven’t.
In the first scene, Jenny has just arrived in London for 
business, but she’s planning to visit her father-in-law, Henry 
– Rob’s father (Rob proposed to Jenny at the end of the 
Intermediate video) – for a few days first. She talks to fellow 
passenger Andrew Page in the airport while a mysterious 
man watches them. At Baggage Reclaim, Jenny discovers 
her suitcase is missing, and in the second scene she reports 
it to Lost Luggage. In the third scene, she and Henry then 
drive to his house in the countryside and Jenny later calls 
Rob, who is on assignment in Alaska, on Skype. Neither 
Jenny nor Henry realizes that the strange man, whose name 
is Grant, is watching them from outside the house.
These lessons can be used with Class DVD, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, or Class Audio CDs (audio only). Sts can find 
all the video content and activities in the Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 1 
Can you remember? 1
Online Practice  Practical English 1 
Check your progress
EPISODE
	 1	
Practical English  A bad start
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 24@@
24 PE1
e 1.18
A = attendant, J = Jenny
A	 Can I help you?
J	 Yeah, my suitcase hasn’t arrived.
A	 Which flight were you on?
J	 Flight RT-one-six-three from JFK.
A	 I’ll take your details and then I can issue you with a reference 
number. Can I have your name, please?
J	 My name’s Jenny Zielinski. That’s Z-I-E-L-I-N-S-K-I.
A	 And you’re a visitor to the UK.
J	 That’s right.
A	 How long are you staying for?
J	 Ten days.
A	 OK. How many bags are you missing?
J	 Just one – a suitcase.
A	 Can you describe it for me?
J	 Well, it’s kind of greyish blue…and hard plastic, I think…
A	 And what size is it?
J	 Oh, it’s medium size, like this. And it has wheels.
A	 Anything else?
J	 Yeah, there’s a small lock and a label with my name and phone 
number on it.
A	 And what was in the suitcase?
J	 Just about everything! Clothes, toiletries, all my personal 
belongings, really.
A	 Can I have your address in the UK?
J	 Just a minute. It’s The Grange, Marsh Lane, Long Crendon, 
Oxfordshire.
A	 And a contact number?
J	 Yes, it’s oh-oh-one, two-oh-two, four-nine-four, oh-one-two.
A	 And finally, can you sign this?
J	 Of course. Do you have any idea where it is? I mean, do you think 
it’s still in New York?
A	 It’s possible. We’re very sorry for the inconvenience. Here’s your 
reference number. You can track the progress of your luggage 
online, or just give us a call. But we should be able to get it back 
to you within twenty-four hours.
J	 That’d be great. Thank you.
b	 Focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who says the 
You hear phrases (the airline employee) and the You say 
phrases (the passenger, here Jenny). These phrases will be 
useful for Sts if they ever lose their luggage after a flight.
	 Give Sts time to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Now play 
the video / audio again and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Which    2  details    3  visitor    4  long    5  bags    6  describe   
7  size    8  in    9  address    10  contact    11  sign    12  sorry    
13  online
	 Now go through the conversation and deal with any 
new vocabulary. Elicit / Explain that your details means 
information about you, and a contact number is a 
telephone number on which you can be contacted.
c	 e 1.19  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear some of them again. Not all the 
phrases are given for Sts to repeat, as at this level, they 
should have no problem with, e.g. ten days. Get Sts to 
repeat these phrases, and encourage them to copy the 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing after the beep, if necessary, 
for Sts to repeat the phrases. Remind Sts that Jenny is 
American, so she says the letter z as ‘zee’ instead of ‘zed’ 
when she spells her name.
J	 Oh yeah! Thanks a lot…Sorry, I didn’t ask your name.
A	 Andrew Page. And yours?
J	 Jenny Zielinski. It was nice meeting you.
A	 You too.
J	 And thanks again for helping with my bags.
A	 No problem. Have a great time at your father-in-law’s.
J	 I will…if I ever get through here!
A	 Bye, then.
J	 Yeah, bye. Take care.
N	 Andrew leaves…but the man follows him. Jenny gets through 
Passport Control, but after waiting at Baggage Reclaim, she 
discovers that her luggage hasn’t arrived. She goes to Lost Luggage 
and waits in another queue. While she’s waiting, she calls Henry, her 
father-in-law.
J	 Henry?…Hi, yeah, I’m here at last. The flight was late taking 
off…I’m so sorry you’ve had to wait for me…I know, I know. 
And you won’t believe this – it looks like my suitcase didn’t get 
here…I’m not sure, it’s turning out to be a nightmare! I can’t wait 
to just get back to your house and – oh, hang on, I have to go – 
it’s my turn. Bye.
b	 Now focus on sentences 1–6 and go through them with 
Sts, making sure they know the meaning of pleasure.
	 Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen again and 
mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind them to 
correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (He was doing research.)
3	 F (He’s working in Alaska.)
4	 T (Sts will later discover that, in fact, although Andrew gives 
Jenny back the laptop case, it is not her laptop. For the 
moment, they should believe that it is hers.)
5	 F (His surname is Page.)
6	 T
	 Now focus on the last two questions and get Sts to 
speculate about why the man (Grant) was watching them, 
and what he is going to do. Elicit ideas, but don’t tell Sts if 
they are correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r REPORTING LOST LUGGAGE
a	 e 1.18  Focus on the photo and elicit who Jenny is 
talking to (an airline employee).
	 Now tell Sts to focus on the four questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the questions.
	 Check answers. Sts may not know the word toiletries, 
so write it on the board and elicit that it means soap, 
shampoo, etc. Model and drill its pronunciation. Highlight 
also that greyish = with some grey in it / quite grey, and 
that the suffix -ish can be added to all colours and to some 
other adjectives.
1	 Ten days
2	 Greyish blue and hard plastic; medium size with wheels; it has 
a small lock, and a label with her name and phone number  
on it
3	 Clothes, toiletries, and all her personal belongings
4	 Up to 24 hours
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 25@@
25
PE1
e 1.20
N = narrator, J = Jenny, H = Henry, G = Grant, R = Rob, S = Selina
N	 Day one. Four p.m. Jenny finally meets Henry and they walk to the 
car park where he’s left his car.
J	 …so then I had to go to Lost Luggage and report it missing.
H	 You poor thing! What a journey!
J	 Well, I’m here now.
H	 And it’s lovely to see you.
J	 It’s great to see you, too.
H	 No, no, let me take that…
J	 It’s OK…
H	 You’ve had a hard journey. Allow me.
J	 Thanks, Henry.
N	 Jenny and Henry drive off to Henry’s house in the country, near 
Oxford. But the man from th	e airport has been following them. He 
makes another phone call.
G	 We’ve got a problem.
***
N	 Day one. Nine p.m. At Henry’s house. Jenny calls Rob on Skype.
R	 I can’t believe I’m not there with you, Jenny.
J	 Neither can I. It’s weird, isn’t it?
R	 I really miss you.
J	 Me too. How’s Alaska?
R	 Not great. It’s been snowing all day! I haven’t left the hotel.
J	 Oh no! That’s awful.
R	 What are you drinking? Is that coffee?
J	 No, it’s tea.
R	 Tea?
J	 It’s good. Really!
R	 Where’s Dad now?
J	 Oh, I think he’s getting me something. I’m not sure what.
R	 So why are you using his computer?
J	 Oh, it’s crazy. You know my laptop?
R	 Yeah?
J	 This screen keeps popping up and asking me for a password. I’ve 
never seen it before. I’m worried I have a virus.
R	 It’s not your day, is it? First your suitcase, and then your laptop!
J	 No, but your dad’s being so nice. And he says your cousin Luke 
will be able to fix my computer for me. Apparently, he’s kind of a 
computer geek.
R	 Kind of? He’s a genius. If he can’t do it, nobody can.
J	 Well, I’m going to go and see him tomorrow.
H	 Here’s a pair of my pyjamas you can use, Jenny.
R	 Oh wow! You’ll look great in those, Jenny!
N	 Safe in the house, Jenny and Henry have no idea that the man, 
whose name is Grant, is outside in the dark…watching. He makes 
another phone call.
S	 Selina Lavelle.
G	 Selina? It’s Grant. She’s in the house, but she isn’t alone. I could 
come back tomorrow with…
S	 No. Stay there. All night if you have to.
G	 Yes, boss.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–6.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 No, he isn’t because it’s been snowing all day and he hasn’t 
left the hotel.
2	 Tea
3	 Henry’s because she thinks her laptop has a virus
4	 Rob’s cousin
5	 Tomorrow, so that he can fix her computer
6	 A pair of his pyjamas
	 You could point out that computer geek is a slang 
expression for someone who’s very good with computers.
e 1.19
A = attendant, J = Jenny
A	 Can I help you?
J	 Yeah, my suitcase hasn’t arrived. (pause)
A	 OK. How many bags are you missing?
J	 Just one – a suitcase. (pause)
A	 Can you describe it for me?
J	 Well, it’s kind of greyish blue…and hard plastic, I think. (pause)
A	 And what size is it?
J	 Oh, it’s medium size, like this. (pause)
	
And it has wheels. (pause)
A	 Anything else?
J	 Yeah, there’s a small lock and a label with my name and phone 
number on it. (pause)
A	 And what was in the suitcase?
J	 Just about everything! (pause)
	
Clothes, toiletries, all my personal belongings, really. (pause)
A	 And finally, can you sign this?
J	 Of course. Do you have any idea where it is? (pause)
	
I mean, do you think it’s still in New York? (pause)
A	 You can track the progress of your luggage online, or just give us 
a call. But we should be able to get it back to you within twenty-
four hours.
J	 That’d be great. Thank you. (pause)
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A are the airline employee 
and Sts B the passenger. Get Sts to read the conversation 
in b aloud, and then swap roles.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
e	 Focus on the Useful language box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions. Tell Sts they will both 
be playing the part of the passenger, so they should 
think about the suitcase or bag that they usually take 
when they’re travelling and make sure they have all the 
language they need to describe it. Tell them also to decide 
how long they are staying, and to invent an address. You 
could elicit and write the names of a few hotel chains.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. First, Sts A are the passenger and 
B the airline employee. Tell Sts A to close their books and 
Sts B to start with Can I help you? Then Sts practise the 
conversation with Sts B reading their role, and Sts A role-
playing the passenger.
	 Monitor and help.
f	 When Sts have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
3	r AT HENRY’S HOUSE
a	 e 1.20  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Who do you think the man is? What is he doing? What is 
Jenny doing in the second photo?
	 Now focus on the instructions and question. Play the 
video / audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch or listen.
	 Check the answer.
Her laptop isn’t working properly, possibly because of a virus.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 26@@
26 PE1
	 Now focus on the last two questions and check the first 
answer. Then get Sts to speculate about the second.
Selina Lavelle is Grant’s boss.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 1.21  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  lovely    2  great    3  let    4  isn’t    5  miss    6  awful    
7  day    8  wow
e 1.21
1	 (And) it’s lovely to see you.
2	 It’s great to see you, too.
3	 No, no, let me take that.
4	 It’s weird, isn’t it?
5	 I really miss you.
6	 Oh no! That’s awful.
7	 It’s not your day, is it?
8	 Oh wow! You’ll look great in those, Jenny!
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  4    B  3    C  6    D  5    E  8    F  7    G  1, 2
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 27@@
	1A	
2A
27
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer the second 
question. Make sure they explain their choice. You could 
demonstrate the activity by answering the question 
yourself.
	 Elicit some ideas from the class.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
verb pack.
	 In their pairs, Sts tell each other what items they 
would take.
	 Elicit some ideas.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Packing on p.153.
Vocabulary notes
Electronics
You could tell Sts that earphones and headphones are 
sometimes used interchangeably, although they are in 
fact different.
Toiletries
Highlight that a washbag / sponge bag is a small bag for 
holding toiletries such as soap, a toothbrush, etc. when 
you are travelling.
You may also want to point out that while brush on its 
own usually refers to a hairbrush, it is used in compound 
nouns, e.g. toothbrush, paintbrush, etc.
	 Focus on 1 Things to take on holiday and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. Some of these words may already 
be familiar to them.
	 e 2.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.1
Packing
1 Things to take on holiday
Electronics
6	 adaptor
5	 batteries
7	 charger
1	 earphones
4	 hairdryer
3	 headphones
2	 travel iron
Toiletries
16	 brush
12	 comb
15	 deodorant
11	 insect repellent
10	 make-up
17	 razor
13	 scissors
18	 shampoo
9	 sunscreen
14	 toothbrush
19	 toothpaste
8	 washbag
Clothes and shoes
27	 bathrobe
21	 flip-flops
23	 pyjamas
28	 rain jacket
26	 slippers
25	 sun hat
24	 swimming trunks
20	 swimsuit
22	 underwear
Others
31	 beach bag
29	 first-aid kit
30	 guidebook
33	 pack of cards
32	 towel
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
 G   present tenses
 V   packing
 P   /s/, /z/, and /ɪz/
Lesson plan
Preparing for holidays is the main topic for this lesson, which 
revises and extends Sts’ understanding of the present simple 
and continuous. Packing for a holiday provides the context 
for learning vocabulary for items (including documents) that 
people often take with them. Then the pronunciation focus 
revises the sounds /s/, /z/, and /ɪz/, as used in the vocabulary 
just practised. In Listening, Sts first listen to a list of items 
British holidaymakers frequently forget to pack and then 
they listen to a journalist giving tips on how to pack. The 
first half of the lesson ends with a speaking activity in which 
Sts answer a questionnaire entitled How good are you at 
preparing for a holiday?
The second half of the lesson starts with a grammar focus 
on the present tenses. This is presented through holiday 
text messages, which helps Sts recognize the differences 
between the present simple and present continuous. After 
further grammar practice, Sts read an article from a website 
about things people only do when on holiday, e.g. buy 
useless souvenirs. Sts then talk about their own feelings 
about holidays and holiday preferences. The lesson finishes 
with a writing focus, where Sts write holiday messages to 
friends.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present tenses p.154 
Communicative  Ask me a question p.181  
(instructions p.172) 
Vocabulary  Packing p.207 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook  2A
Online Practice  2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following questions on the board:
WHEN WAS YOUR LAST HOLIDAY?  
WHERE DID YOU GO?  
WHAT LUGGAGE DID YOU TAKE WITH YOU? 
DID YOU OVER-PACK OR UNDER-PACK?
First, answer the questions yourself. Then elicit answers from 
individual Sts.
1	VOCABULARY  packing
a	 Books open. Focus on the first question and do it as a 
whole-class activity. Highlight that a break is specifically a 
short holiday.
A city break is a short holiday spent in a city. People typically 
spend a few days sightseeing, going to museums or other local 
attractions, and eating out.
	2A	 Get ready! Get set! Go!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 28@@
2A
28 2A
2	PRONUNCIATION  /s/, /z/, and /ɪz/
Pronunciation notes
Sts who have the sounds /s/ and /z/ in their L1 will not 
find them hard to pronounce, but what is confusing for 
most Sts is that the letter s in the middle or at the end of a 
word can be pronounced in different ways (usually /s/ or 
/z/). It is worth reminding Sts that the letter z in English 
(and zz) is always pronounced /z/. Point out that double  
s = /z/, as in scissors, is unusual.
a	 Focus on the instructions and the two sound pictures and 
elicit the words and sounds (snake /s/ and zebra /z/).
	 Put Sts in pairs and remind them that this kind of activity 
is easier if they say the words aloud to themselves.
b	 e 2.4  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Remind Sts that the c in scissors is silent.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity. Write the 
two words on the board. Play the first word on the audio or 
say it yourself, and then elicit the sound for each pink letter. 
Do the same for the second word.
slippers: The first s = /s/; the final s = /z/.
scissors: The first s = /s/; the double s and final s = /z/.
e 2.4
See words in Student’s Book on p.16
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the words and 
concentrate on the two sounds.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts are having problems noticing the 
difference between the two sounds, get them to place their 
finger and thumb on their throats and then say scissors 
slowly, feeling for the vibration in the /z/ sound. You could 
also use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s Resource 
Centre.
c	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to write the words in 
the correct column.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Say each word for Sts to listen and write 
the words in the columns.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answers to c before playing the 
audio in d.
d	 e 2.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.5
snake /s/  flip-flops, passport, swimsuit, sunscreen, toothpaste
zebra /z/  batteries, cards, pyjamas, razor, visa
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then get Sts to practise saying the words.
	 Now ask Sts In what position is the letter s never 
pronounced /z/?
s is never pronounced /z/ at the beginning of a word.
e	 Focus on the instructions and the pronunciation of /ɪz/.
	 Give Sts time to circle the words ending in /ɪz/. Remind 
them that this kind of activity is easier if they say the 
words aloud to themselves.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the words and 
look at the photos. Can they remember the words?
EXTRA IDEA   Elicit any other things Sts often take on holiday, 
e.g. hair straighteners, etc.
	 Now focus on 2 Documents you may need and get Sts 
to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
1  d    2  a    3  c    4  b    5  e
e 2.2
2 Documents you may need
1	 d	 You take your passport or ID card to allow you to leave and 
enter a country.
2	 a	 You take a visa if you are travelling to a country which requires 
one, for example, the USA.
3	 c	 You take travel insurance documents in case you have an 
accident or another problem.
4	 b	 You take your driving licence if you want to rent a car.
5	 e	 You take your booking confirmation to prove to a hotel or 
airline that you have paid for a room, flight, etc.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words for the documents, or model and drill them 
yourself. Give further practice of any words your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and either do the question as a 
whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then get some 
feedback.
	 Now focus on 3 Packing verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Point out that the o in fold and roll is 
pronounced the same.
1  wrap    2  roll up    3  fold    4  pack    5  unpack
e 2.3
3 Packing verbs
3	 fold
4	 pack
2	 roll up
5	 unpack
1	 wrap
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to write their 
list. Tell them to work individually.
	 Get Sts to compare lists with a partner and to find any 
differences.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could tell the 
class what you would definitely take on a beach holiday 
(e.g. sunscreen, a beach towel, a book, etc.) and what you 
wouldn’t take (e.g. any expensive items). You could ask 
Sts how their lists are different from the ones they made 
in 1b.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 29@@
2A
29
e	 e 2.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Find out if Sts predicted any correctly.
1  too much    2  shopping    3  order    4  clothes    5  chargers, 
adaptors    6  shoe    7  security    8  wallet
e 2.8
1	 Don’t pack too much.
2	 Keep some space in your suitcase for shopping.
3	 Pack in the right order.
4	 Make sure your clothes arrive looking good.
5	 Keep your chargers and adaptors together.
6	 Use shoe bags.
7	 Think about airport security.
8	 Buy a travel wallet.
f	 e 2.9  Focus on questions 1–8 and make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. one third, hand luggage, etc.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through. You 
could pause after each tip to give Sts time to answer the 
question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Put them back in the cupboard.
2	 Clothes, souvenirs, presents for the family
3	 At the top of your suitcase
4	 a) Roll T-shirts.  b) Fold shirts.
5	 All together in a separate bag, in your hand luggage
6	 Socks and underwear
7	 Your washbag, your laptop or tablet, and anything you might 
need to put on a separate tray at Security
8	 You might lose your phone, or it may run out of battery when 
you need to show the documents.
e 2.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.125) 
The holiday season is here, and many of you will be about to travel, 
and that means that you need to start thinking about packing. 
Packing is often something we do at the last minute, and we 
frequently get it wrong – we take too much and then have to pay 
for extra luggage, or we forget some really important items. Often 
when we arrive and unpack, our clothes need ironing before we can 
wear them. So, to make things easier, here are my top eight tips for 
perfect packing.
My first tip is: 'Don’t pack too much’. 
Put all the clothes you think you want to take on your bed. Then put 
a third of them – yes, a third – back in the cupboard. And only pack 
things you really love, otherwise you probably won’t wear them.
Now to my second tip: 'Keep some space in your suitcase for 
shopping’. 
If you’re planning to do some serious clothes shopping when you’re 
away, or if you love buying souvenirs, or you want to buy presents 
for the family, make sure there’s some empty space in your case. 
Think about what you might want to buy, and how much space you’ll 
need.
My third tip is: 'Pack in the right order’. 
Think about your itinerary, and put your first day’s clothes at the 
top and your last day’s clothes at the bottom. Then if you don’t have 
space to unpack everything, you can just leave your suitcase under 
the bed, and every morning you’ll easily find what you want to wear.
OK, tip number four: 'Make sure your clothes arrive looking good’. 
Learn to pack your clothes like a professional. Roll your jeans, 
T-shirts, and pyjamas. The only things you really need to fold are 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answers to e before playing the 
audio in f.
f	 e 2.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
beaches, brushes, cases, sunglasses
e 2.6
See words in Student’s Book on p.16
	 Get Sts to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now ask Sts When are the letters -es pronounced /ɪz/?
after ch, sh, se, ss, and x (also when a word ends in ce, as in pieces, 
or ge, as in pages)
3	LISTENING  understanding advice
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. Tell Sts if you have ever forgotten 
to pack something really important, and what you did.
b	 Focus on the title of the article and ask Sts if they find it 
surprising. Ask why / why not.
	 Now focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to read the 
introduction, and, in pairs, guess the top three items.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they’re correct.
c	 e 2.7  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand in reverse order.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Elicit the top ten items in reverse order, and then ask the 
class if anyone got the top three correct.
10  passports    9  flip-flops    8  mobiles    7  toothbrushes    
6  toothpaste    5  sunglasses    4  a good book   
The top three are:
3  sunscreen    2  phone chargers    1  comfortable shoes
e 2.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.125) 
In reverse order, here’s the list of the things that the British most 
often leave behind when they go on holiday:
At number ten, we have…passports.
At number nine, flip-flops.
Number eight, mobile phones.
At number seven, toothbrushes, and at number six, toothpaste.
At number five, sunglasses, and at number four, a good book.
So, to the things people forget the most often:
At number three, sunscreen.
At number two, phone chargers.
And finally, the number one thing people forget to bring is…
comfortable shoes!
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts if they think the list would be 
the same for people in their country. If not, why not? What 
about the top three?
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read tips 1–8.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and give them time to guess what 
the missing words might be.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answers to each tip in d before 
playing the audio in e.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 30@@
2A
30
1	 I’m wearing (It’s happening now.)
2	 I look like (look like is a non-action verb, not normally used in 
the continuous)
3	 f (The present simple can be used to talk about future events 
that are part of a timetable. The present continuous can be 
used for a future arrangement.)
4	 I’m reading (It’s happening now.)
5	 I’m having (have is an action verb here, and is in the 
continuous to show the action is happening now.)
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.134.
Grammar notes
Present tenses
You may need to remind Sts, especially if their L1 does not 
have continuous tenses, to use the present continuous to 
talk about actions in progress (It’s raining NOT It rains).
Action and non-action verbs
Non-action verbs, not usually used with continuous forms, 
may refer to mental states (believe, know, realize), emotions 
(admire, dislike, respect), the senses (feel, hear, smell), 
and possession (owe, own, possess). Rather than simply 
memorize lists of such verbs, Sts should try to think about 
whether the verb is being used to indicate action, e.g. 
read, play, drive, or non-action.
Present continuous for future arrangements
The use of the present continuous to talk about personal 
arrangements in the future (We’re leaving next week) is 
very similar to going to, but implies that something is an 
arrangement rather than a plan, i.e. it has been organized, 
tickets booked, etc.
Present simple for ‘timetable’ future
Highlight that the present simple is not usually used for 
the future, but when we refer to something that could be 
part of a timetable, e.g. a flight or a class time, we often 
use the present simple, e.g. The next class starts in ten 
minutes, because these things always happen at these 
times. We can also sometimes use the present continuous 
for timetabled activities when the emphasis is on that 
particular moment, e.g. Hurry up! Our train is leaving / 
leaves in five minutes.
	 Focus on Revise the basics. Go through the example 
sentences and use them to elicit the rules, e.g. in 1 that we 
add (e)s to third person, in 2 that we use does NOT do for 
third person, etc.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for action and 
non-action verbs and play audio e 2.10 for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for verbs which can have action and non-
action meanings e 2.11, present continuous for 
future arrangements e 2.12, and present simple for 
‘timetable’ future e 2.13.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs. In a tell Sts to use the present 
simple (NOT continuous) for timetable future. Encourage 
them to use contracted forms rather than full forms in b.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
shirts and jackets. Where possible, travel with clothes that don’t 
need ironing.
My fifth tip is: 'Keep your chargers and adaptors together’. 
We all need chargers for our gadgets these days. Pack them all 
together in a separate small bag, with adaptors if you’re going 
to need them. It’s also a good idea to put this bag in your hand 
luggage, and not in your checked-in luggage, to avoid losing it.
Tip number six: 'Use shoe bags’. 
Never allow your shoes to have direct contact with your clothes – 
use shoe bags to keep them separate, and put socks and underwear 
inside your shoes.
Tip number seven: 'Think about airport security’. 
If you’re travelling with hand luggage only, put your washbag at the 
top or in an outside pocket of your case, so you can easily take it out 
at security. The same is true of laptops, tablets, and anything you 
might need to put on a separate tray.
And finally, my eighth tip: 'Buy a travel wallet’. 
It’s a good idea to print out all your important documents, like your 
itinerary or travel insurance, and keep them with your passport 
in a special wallet. It’s true that nowadays you can keep a lot of 
documents on your phone, including boarding passes. But you 
might lose your phone, or it may run out of battery just when you 
need it.
So now you’re ready to go. Have a great holiday!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. You could have a class vote for 
the most useful tip. You could also ask Sts if they know any 
other packing tips.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the questionnaire and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. How far in advance…, get your car 
serviced, etc.
	 Give Sts time to think of their own answers.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the example.
	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them to take turns to ask each other a 
question, and the same question can be returned using 
What about you?
	 Get some whole-class feedback by finding out, e.g. which 
websites Sts use, and asking individual Sts to talk about 
their preparation.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could model the activity first by 
getting Sts to ask you a couple of questions and eliciting 
follow-up questions if possible. Write WHAT ABOUT YOU? on the 
board to remind Sts to use it when they are taking turns.
5	GRAMMAR  present tenses
a	 Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to read Caroline’s holiday 
messages quickly, then choose the correct form or tick 
both forms.
b	 Get Sts to compare their answers to a in pairs and discuss 
why they think each form is correct.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to explain why one form is 
correct and the other form is wrong, or why both forms 
are correct. (They can explain in their L1 if necessary.) You 
might want to tell Sts that timetable future sentences also 
work in the present continuous.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 31@@
2A
31
e	 Focus on the instructions and the question prompts. Elicit 
that the ones that are habitual, show a ‘timetable’ future, 
or have a non-action meaning (e.g. prefer) use the present 
simple. The ones that are in progress at the moment or 
show future arrangements, use the present continuous if 
they have action verbs (e.g. going).
	 Elicit the questions from the class to check that they are 
forming the questions correctly, and that they are using 
the correct rhythm.
Holidays
Do you prefer summer holidays or winter holidays? Why?
Which places are you thinking about going to for your next 
holiday?
Why do you want to go there?
Weekends
What do you usually do at the weekend?
What are you doing this weekend?
Today
What time does this class finish? Where are you going after class 
today?
What are you doing this evening? Where are you having dinner?
	 Now get Sts to ask and answer the questions in pairs. 
Monitor and help, making sure Sts are using the present 
simple and present continuous correctly.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6	READING  understanding linkers / cohesive 
devices
a	 Focus on the task, the words and phrases in the list, and 
the example. Then do this as a whole-class activity, or put 
Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering the 
question yourself.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article to see if any of the points they 
mentioned in a are there. Tell Sts not to worry about 
the gaps.
	 Elicit some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the words in the highlighted phrases.
c	 Now set a time limit for Sts to read the article again 
and complete gaps 1–8 with phrases A–H. Check 
Sts understand the vocabulary in the phrases, e.g. 
adventurous, super-sociable, etc.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  E    2  C    3  G    4  H    5  F    6  B    7  A    8  D
d	 Focus on the instructions and the highlighted phrases. 
Get Sts, in pairs, to try to work out what the phrases mean. 
Tell them to use the context to help them.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
a	
1  leaves    2  We need    3  we’re going    4  we’re staying    
5  takes    6  we’re breaking    7  gets in    8  are meeting    
9  they’re looking after    10  we’re travelling    11  we’re renting    
12  We have
b	
1	 Do you prefer camping or staying in hotels?
2	 We’re thinking of going on a safari next year.
3	 Do we need to pack insect repellent?
4	 She’s flying to Frankfurt for a business meeting next week.
5	 Yes, I’m looking for a charger for my phone.
6	 A  This hotel doesn’t have a restaurant.
	
B  It doesn’t matter, we can eat in town.
7	 A  Hi. Can you hear me? What are you doing?
	
B  I’m reading by the pool and Tanya is having a spa 
treatment.
8	 A  What time does our flight leave?
	
B  It leaves at 9.50 and it arrives at 12.10.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Caroline’s holiday plans, A on p.107,  
B on p.111.
	 Go through the instructions, and focus on the holiday 
calendars, and the example questions and answers. Tell Sts 
to ask similar questions about all the incomplete entries 
and write the answers in the gaps. Elicit that most of the 
questions are in the present continuous, but the ones 
about her travel times, class, etc., are better in the present 
simple, as they refer to timetabled events.
	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare books to 
check their answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Quickly revise telling the time before 
putting Sts in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit Sts A’s and B’s questions before they 
start:
Sts A
What time does she have her yoga class on Friday?  
(At half past seven in the morning)
Where is she going sightseeing on Friday afternoon?  
(In Ibiza Town)
What time is she having dinner at Bambuddha on Saturday?  
(At nine in the evening)
What is she doing at six in the evening on Sunday?  
(She’s having a massage at the hotel spa.)
What time does she leave Ibiza on Monday?  
(At eight thirty-five in the morning)
Sts B
Who is she going waterskiing with on Friday morning?  
(She’s going waterskiing with Emma.)
What is she doing at half past eight in the morning on Saturday? 
(She’s going on a guided tour of the island.)
What is she doing at eight in the morning on Sunday?  
(She’s going on a boat trip to Formentera.)
What time is she getting the bus to the airport on Monday?  
(At half past five in the morning)
What time does she arrive at London Gatwick?  
(At ten o’clock in the morning)
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 32@@
2A
32
Sheila feels happy and tired / relieved: so beautiful, 13 hours, ready 
for a shower
Andrew feels stressed: stressful, Not sure I want to go, stressed-face 
emoji
Danielle feels depressed: Plants dead, no milk, Please send me back 
to the beach
Sam feels sad: last…morning, work tomorrow, emoji of sad face
c	 Focus on the Writing messages box and go through it 
with the class. You could point out that other possible 
changes to make full sentences include articles (a / an, 
the) and some.
	 Now get Sts to rewrite the last five messages (for Haylee, 
Sheila, Andrew, Danielle, and Sam) as complete sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Haylee: There are 48 hours until I’ll be in Rio sipping a piña 
colada – or is it a caipirinha? I can’t wait!
Sheila: I’ve just got to Cuzco! It’s so beautiful here! After 13 hours 
on a bus, I am ready for a shower!
Andrew: I’m packing my bags. Holidays are really stressful! I’m 
not sure that I want to go!
Danielle: I got back an hour ago. The plants are dead and there’s 
no milk in the fridge. Please send me back to the beach.
Sam: I’m making the most of the / my last glorious morning 
in the sun. I’m going home this evening and back to work 
tomorrow.
d	 Focus on the instructions. Now get Sts to imagine they’re 
going to have a four-day holiday to any place they’d like 
to go to.
	 Go through the list of times and tell Sts to imagine 
themselves in the different situations.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Tell them to write one message 
for each day and time in d. Remind them to use the 
information in the Writing messages box.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their messages, e.g. 15–20 minutes, 
and if there is time, get Sts to compare their messages in 
pairs or small groups.
f	 Sts should check their work to make sure their messages 
are clear and as short as they can be.
1	 whatever the reason /wɒtˈevə ðə ˈriːzn/ = for lots of 
different reasons
2	 get your revenge on /get jɔː rɪˈvendʒ ɒn/ = do sth to make 
sb suffer because they have made you suffer
3	 goes completely out the window 
/gəʊz kəmˈpliːtlitə aʊt ðə ˈwɪndəʊ/ = disappears 
completely
4	 have the urge /hæv ðə ɜːdʒ/ = have a strong desire to do sth
5	 develop a magnetic pull /dɪˈveləp ə mæɡˈnetɪk pʊl/ = 
have a powerful attraction
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the question. 
Encourage them to answer with as much detail as 
possible.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and the holiday options. Make sure Sts 
understand the question Would you rather…? (= Would 
you prefer to…?).
	 Now give Sts time to read each holiday option and, 
individually, choose the one they would prefer. Tell them 
to think of reasons as they will need to explain their 
choice in b. Tell them that in this activity, they are not 
allowed to reject both options – they must choose one of 
the options in each pair and say why it would be better 
than the other one.
b	 Focus on the Expressing preferences box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in small groups and give them time to go through 
each holiday option in a and explain which they prefer 
and why. Encourage Sts to ask each other for more 
information.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any repeated mistakes.
	 Get some feedback from the class. Find out if any Sts in 
their groups liked the same kinds of holiday.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by choosing one 
of the options and telling Sts your own opinion.
8	WRITING  holiday messages
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Holiday messages on p.116.
a	 Focus on the task. Tell Sts to read the messages quickly 
and to answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
Caroline, Mark, Michael, Sheila, and Sam are on holiday now.
Haylee and Andrew are going to have a holiday soon.
Danielle has just finished a holiday.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Get Sts to read the messages 
again and answer the questions individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
Suggested answers
Caroline feels great: the most amazing experience, fantastic people
Mark feels relaxed: He uses hard day ironically; emoji of a winking 
smiley face, which can mean I’m joking
Michael feels annoyed because of the noisy children on the 
plane: Oh no!, the longest flight of my life
Haylee feels excited: Can’t wait!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 33@@
	1A	
33
	2B	 Go to checkout
1	GRAMMAR  possessives
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and photos. Elicit what 
each photo represents (A fruit and vegetables, B meat  
and fish, C clothes, D books, E electronic items, F shoes,  
G bread).
	 Put Sts in pairs to answer the questions. You could 
demonstrate the activity by choosing a photo and 
answering the two questions about it.
	 Elicit some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell Sts if 
there is anything you would never buy online and why.
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. You could do the first one as a class. 
Before Sts start, tell them that there are some mistakes in 
punctuation in 1–6, but they shouldn’t worry about it now 
as they will be focusing on it later.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  in a shop    2  online    3  in a shop    4  online    
5  online    6  in a shop
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at the highlighted 
words and phrases in sentences 1–6 in c, and insert 
apostrophes where necessary.
	 Check answers by eliciting the words and punctuation 
onto the board. If Sts ask why the apostrophe is in a 
particular place, elicit possible rules, but tell them they will 
be looking at this next in the Grammar Bank.
1  children’ s books    2  Carlos’s / Carlos’ present    3  Marta’s    
4  your husband’s new car    5  my sister’s sweater    6  My two 
daughters’ friends
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.135.
Grammar notes
Possessives
Most Sts will have met possessives at Elementary level 
and not revised them since, although Sts often continue 
making mistakes in this area. Here they also learn new 
rules, and other expressions to show possession.
More rules for possessive ’s
•	 Rule 3: Apart from using the possessive ’s for people’s 
houses, many shops and businesses also use the 
possessive ’s, as Sts will see when they do Vocabulary 
Bank Shops and services, e.g. the hairdresser’s, the 
dentist’s, the chemist’s to mean the hairdresser’s salon, etc. 
However, nowadays people sometimes drop the ’s, e.g. 
I’m going to the dentist.
•	 Rule 4: Sts may find the following comparison useful:
	 We saw Tom and Mary’s parents. = Tom and Mary are 
brother and sister. We saw their parents.
	
We saw Tom’s and Mary’s parents. = Tom and Mary are 
husband and wife. We saw Tom’s parents and we saw 
Mary’s parents.
 G   possessives
 V   shops and services
 P   r and final -r
Lesson plan
The main topic in this lesson is shopping, with a focus on 
online shopping, whether people love it or hate it, and 
whether online shopping is putting other businesses at risk. 
In the first half, the grammar focus is on different ways of 
expressing possession. Sts revise the use of the possessive 
’s and learn to use other structures, e.g. a friend of mine, my 
own business, etc. Pronunciation follows with a focus on 
the letter r, paying special attention to when it is or isn’t 
pronounced /r/ at the end of a word. Next, Sts listen to some 
people talking about how they feel about online shopping. 
Finally, Sts discuss their own experiences of online shopping.
The second half begins with a vocabulary focus on shops 
and services. This leads to questions prompting discussion 
about shops in Sts’ own neighbourhoods. Next, Sts read 
about a bookshop chain that is fighting to survive against 
Amazon. The lesson ends with a video about Winchester 
farmers’ market.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  possessives p.155 
Communicative  Spot the difference p.182-183 
(instructions p.173) 
Vocabulary  Shops and services p.208 (instructions p.202)
Teacher’s Resource Centre  
Video  A farmers’ market
For students
Workbook  2B
Online Practice  2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
MARKET – SUPERMARKET – DEPARTMENT STORE  
Elicit from Sts exactly what the difference is between the 
three (a market is usually an open area where people buy 
and sell things, often food but also clothes, antiques, etc.; 
a supermarket is a large shop usually on one level, which 
mostly sells food and drink; a department store is a very large 
building, usually on several floors, which sells a wide range 
of goods). Elicit examples of these stores that are near where 
Sts live.
Then ask Sts which ones they like / dislike shopping at  
and why.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 34@@
34
a	 e 2.17  Focus on the sound picture and elicit the word 
and sound: right /r/.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just  
to listen.
e 2.17
See words and sound in Student’s Book on p.20
	 Then play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 2.18  Focus on the instructions and the Final -r box.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question in the rule.
	 Check the answer.
vowel
e 2.18
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.20
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences or questions.
d	 e 2.19  Tell Sts they must listen and write the five 
sentences they hear.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to mark where the letter r is pronounced /r/. 
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner. 
	 Check answers. Elicit each sentence onto the board, and 
for each one, ask Sts which letter r is pronounced /r/ (see 
bold in script 2. 19).
e 2.19
1	 Chris and Peter made their own website.
2	 Our local shops don’t deliver at weekends.
3	 My French teacher lives near our house.
4	 Is that all your own work?
5	 They’re Sam and Andy’s parents.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre.
3	LISTENING  recognizing positive / negative 	
	 comments
a	 Focus on the task and the list, making sure Sts understand 
all the vocabulary, e.g. push your way through crowds, 
interact, substitute, etc. Tell Sts to put their tick(s) at the end 
of the sentences, and not in the boxes. Make sure they 
understand that they should only tick things they strongly 
agree with.
	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare in pairs.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
More rules for of  to show possession
In many languages, possession is expressed with  
of-phrases, so Sts tend to overuse of-phrases in English. 
Many languages also use an of-phrase, e.g. the door of 
the car, the window of the shop, where English uses a 
compound noun, e.g. car door, shop window, summer 
holiday.
Highlight that we use a pronoun, e.g. mine, in phrases like 
a friend of mine, not an adjective, e.g. my.
own
Remind Sts that own is also a verb (= possess).
	 Focus on Revise the basics. Go through the example 
sentences and use them to elicit the rules, e.g. that we use 
’s after a singular name or noun, etc.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for more rules for 
possessive ’s and play audio e 2.14 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm and get the 
pronunciation of the ’s correct. Then go through the rules 
with the class.
	 Repeat for more rules for of to show possession e 2.15 
and own e 2.16.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  my friend’s car    2  brothers’    3  the top of the building    
4  travel agent’s    5  Jim and Marie’s    6  my husband’s sister    
7  my parents’    8  of mine    9  the centre of London    
10  my own
b	
1  g women’s clothes shops    2  f    3  g their own flat    
4  g a colleague of hers    5  g There’s been a hairdresser’s    
6  g Two of my friends’ mothers    7  f    8  f    9  g Keith and 
Brian’s mother    10  f
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  r and final -r
Pronunciation notes
Here Sts are exploring the pronunciation of the letter r. 
At this level, Sts should be able to understand when and 
when not to pronounce r, depending on its position in a 
word (initial, middle, or final).
•	 r = /r/ at the beginning (e.g. run) and in the middle of a 
word (e.g. umbrella) when the r is followed by a vowel.
•	 r also = /r/ at the end of a word when the following 
word begins with a vowel (e.g. her own), in which case 
the words are linked.
•	 r is silent in British English when followed by a 
consonant either within the word (e.g. car, work), or if 
it comes at the end of a word and the following word 
begins with a consonant, e.g. My brother works here, 
or when it is the last word in a sentence, e.g. That’s my 
brother.
You may want to point out that in American English r is 
always = /r/.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 35@@
35
e 2.21
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
1	 Carol
I do a lot of shopping online. I love how convenient it is you know, 
I can be in my pyjamas and do the food shopping for the week, 
or clothes shopping. But one thing I hate about it, though, is how 
difficult it is to sort out any problems – because, you know, if you 
buy something in a shop, you go back to the shop and you sort 
it out, but if you’ve bought something online, returning it can be 
a pain, especially getting something replaced or changed if it’s 
broken – it’s just a huge nightmare.
2	 Alex
I love online shopping. I guess because it’s so convenient, because 
I can do it at any time of day or night, and I can do it from home. I 
don’t particularly like going shopping, so that’s a real bonus for me. 
But I hate having to send things back, particularly shoes. They never 
seem to fit when I buy them online.
3	 David
I do quite a lot of shopping online. Mainly food – I usually do my 
supermarket shopping online. What I like best is that I don’t have 
to take the shopping home. I live at the top of a hill, and I used to 
have to walk up the hill with a whole load of shopping bags. It was a 
real pain. The only thing I really don’t like is that online, it’s easy not 
to notice what size the packets are, so you can end up with a huge 
packet of things when you only want a tiny amount. For example, I 
ordered a box of tea bags and I wanted a small box of forty bags, but 
I didn’t read the description properly and I ended up with a huge 
box with four hundred and sixty tea bags!
4	 Anna
I do a lot of online browsing, looking for things I might buy. Not 
really for clothes, more shopping for, kind of, cooking things, or 
things on Amazon, presents for friends – that sort of thing. I love the 
fact that you have access to all kinds of shops, and access to brands 
that you can’t necessarily find in shops that are near where you live. 
But I don’t like not being able to feel things or know exactly what the 
colours are – they’re often different from what you see online.
5	 Chris
I do a lot of shopping online because I’m not very keen on going to 
places where there are crowds of people and it’s really busy. It’s great 
being able to avoid the big department stores and shopping streets 
especially at weekends, where you can hardly walk on the pavement 
because there are so many people there. 
The only thing I hate is people delivering things when I’m not in. 
Some companies are really good and give you a one-hour delivery 
window, but with others, they say they’ll deliver between eight in 
the morning and seven in the evening, so you stay in all day – but 
then just when you need to go out for an hour, that’s when they 
come. That’s so annoying.
d	 Focus on the questions and give Sts time to go 
through them.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
Speaker 5 likes knowing exactly when things he has bought are 
going to arrive.
Speaker 3 once bought a huge quantity of something by mistake.
Speaker 2 has one particular item she often has to return.
Speaker 4 enjoys looking on shopping websites.
Speaker 1 thinks it’s easier to deal with problems in real shops.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell the 
class your thoughts about online shopping.
b	 e 2.20  Focus on the instructions and explain that first, 
Sts are only going to hear seven extracts from the main 
listening. They need to complete 1–7 and then decide if 
each extract is positive or negative. Encourage them to 
think about the reasons for their decisions.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, first eliciting the missing words and 
then asking whether the extract is positive or negative. 
Then elicit / explain the meaning of each extract. Draw 
attention to the intonation of positive and negative 
expressions, i.e. that positive expressions usually have 
rising intonation at the end of the phrase, whilst negative 
expressions usually have falling intonation.
1  nightmare (negative)    2  convenient (positive)    
3  bonus (positive)    4  pain (negative)    
5  love (positive)    6  great (positive)    7  annoying (negative)
e 2.20
1	 It’s just a huge nightmare.
2	 It’s so convenient.
3	 That’s a real bonus.
4	 It was a real pain.
5	 I love the fact that…
6	 It’s great being able to…
7	 That’s so annoying.
c	 e 2.21  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the five 
people talking about what they love or hate about online 
shopping. Sts need to listen to each speaker and write the 
speaker’s number in the box he / she is speaking about in 
the lists in a.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. You could 
pause the audio after each speaker to give Sts time to do 
the task. Then play again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1
You can do your shopping in your pyjamas...
If something isn’t right, it can be a problem sending it back or 
getting it changed.
Speaker 2
Online shops are open 24/7.
Clothes and shoes often don’t fit...
Speaker 3
You don’t have to carry heavy bags any more.
Things are often bigger or smaller than you wanted because you 
didn’t read the detailed description.
Speaker 4
You can buy things from shops that aren’t near you. 
It’s easy to send presents to people.
You can’t feel things or see exactly what they look like. 
Speaker 5
You don’t have to push your way through crowds of people.
Your shopping is always delivered when you’re out.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play each speaker again, pause, and elicit 
the answers.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 36@@
36
	 Check answers.
e 2.22
Shops and services
1 Places
13	 baker’s
15	 barber’s
10	 butcher’s
3	 car showroom
2	 chain store
19	 chemist’s
8	 deli
7	 DIY store
5	 dry-cleaner’s
17	 estate agent’s
12	 fishmonger’s
21	 florist’s
4	 garden centre
6	 greengrocer’s
20	 hairdresser’s
9	 jeweller’s
18	 launderette
16	 market stall
22	 newsagent’s
14	 off-licence
1	 stationer’s
11	 travel agent’s
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation and tell Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photos, and see if they can remember the places.
	 Go through the Shop names with ’s box with the class.
	 Next, go through Other places to buy things in the UK 
with the class and ask Sts if these kinds of shops exist in 
their country.
	 Now focus on 2 Phrasal verbs related to shops and 
shopping and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. 
Some of these phrasal verbs will already be familiar to 
them. Encourage Sts to use the context of the sentence to 
help them with the meaning.
	 e 2.23  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.23
2 Phrasal verbs related to shops and shopping
1	 d 
A lot of local shops and businesses have closed down because of 
the recession.
2	 f
A	 Do you need any help?
B	 No thanks, I just want to look round.
3	 c 
I wanted to get the coat in a large, but they’d sold out.
4	 b
A	 Is there somewhere where I can try on this sweater?
B	 Yes, the changing rooms are over there.
5	 e 
Excuse me, can you help me? I’m looking for a butcher’s. 
Someone told me there was one near here.
6	 a
A	 Do you have these in a medium?
B	 I’m sorry, we’re out of mediums at the moment, but we should be 
getting some in soon.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover 1–6 and try to 
remember the phrasal verbs from the definitions, or vice 
versa.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to close their books and revise the 
names for places by asking them either Where would you 
go if you want to buy some meat? or What can you get at a 
butcher’s?
4	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the instructions and go through the topics. Give 
Sts time to decide which three topics they are going to 
talk about.
	 Now focus on the Showing interest box and go through 
it with the class. Model interested intonation and get Sts 
to practise the phrases.
	 Put Sts in pairs (or small groups) and get them to discuss 
their topics. Encourage Sts to give and ask for as much 
detail as possible, and to use the phrases in the box to 
respond and get more information.
	 Monitor and help with any new vocabulary they need, but 
don’t correct too much as the aim here is to encourage 
fluency.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get fast finishers to talk about more 
topics.
5	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  shops and 
services
a	 Focus on the photos and do the questions as a whole-
class activity.
A	 in a chemist’s, sells medicines
B	 in a butcher’s, sells meat
C	 in a car showroom, sells cars
D	 at a beauty counter (in a department store), sells make-up 
and beauty products
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Shops and services 
on p.154.
Vocabulary notes
Places
Some shops sometimes use another word, e.g. bakery 
instead of baker’s, and travel / estate agency instead of 
agent’s.
Point out that deli is short for delicatessen and that 
hardware store is another word for DIY store.
You may also want to point out that you can buy both 
medicines and things like cosmetics at a chemist’s in 
the UK. In the USA, pharmacies just sell medicine, and 
drugstores sell medicines and other things.
You could also remind Sts that they can use ’s for 
some other services, e.g. the doctor’s, the dentist’s, the 
hairdresser’s, etc.
Remind Sts also, as pointed out in the Grammar notes, 
that nowadays people sometimes drop the ’s at the end 
of these words, e.g. I’m going to the hairdresser (rather than 
hairdresser’s).
Phrasal verbs related to shops and shopping
You may want to highlight the difference between go 
shopping (= go to look round several shops, e.g. in a mall 
or shopping street) and go to the shops (= go to buy 
something specific, e.g. food).
	 Focus on 1 Places and get Sts to do a individually or in 
pairs. Point out or elicit that DIY stands for ‘do-it-yourself’, 
and this kind of shop sells tools and materials for doing 
jobs around the house or making things, e.g. furniture.
	 e 2.22  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 37@@
37
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Encourage them to use the context 
of each extract to work out the missing word before 
checking back with the article.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  branches    2  back    3  loyal    4  cut    5  stocks
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
e	 Do the question as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and get some feedback. You could have a class vote 
to see how many Sts agree with James Daunt.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts How do you think other high street shops 
can attract back customers who are now shopping online? and 
elicit ideas.
7	r  VIDEO LISTENING
	 This is the first of five Video Listenings, which are 
incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable to 
show the video in class, remind Sts that they can find the 
video on Online Practice, and ask them to watch the video 
and do the activities for homework.
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you go to a local 
market, tell Sts about it.
!   Don’t elicit / explain what a farmers’ market is yet as Sts 
will do this later.
b	 Tell Sts they are now going to watch a documentary 
about a farmers’ market.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the first question.
	 Check the answer to the first question. Then ask Sts if they 
have similar markets in their country.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Whereas a normal market sells a lot of products, a farmers’ 
market sells locally produced food directly to the customers.
A farmers’ market
Hi, I’m Louise. Today I’m at a farmers’ market in Winchester, in the 
south of England.
There are now over seven hundred and fifty markets in Britain. 
Unlike normal shops, these markets move from place to place. They 
set up in each location at regular intervals. Some are weekly, some 
are fortnightly, and some are monthly.
At farmers’ markets, producers can sell directly to customers. In an 
age of globalization and internet retailing, some people want to 
return to a simpler way of shopping. They like to touch and taste 
what they’re buying. And, most importantly, they want to know 
where it comes from.
When you shop in the supermarket, it isn’t always easy to find out 
who produces your meat, picks your fruit, or grows your vegetables. 
But at farmers’ markets, customers buy directly from the producer, 
who can tell them all about the goods they sell.
Supermarkets also have a long supply chain. The food often has to 
travel from the producer to a distributor and a wholesaler before 
it reaches the supermarket shelf. This means food can often spend 
days in lorries and warehouses.
But at farmers’ markets, there’s no supply chain. It comes directly 
from the farm to the market. Producers sell it as soon as it’s ready, so 
it’s always fresh, organic, and tasty.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the difference 
between the pairs of words and phrases.
	 Check answers.
1	 A stationer’s sells stationery (= paper, pens, envelopes, etc.).  
A newsagent’s sells newspapers, magazines, sweets, 
cigarettes, etc.
2	 A dry cleaner’s cleans things that can’t be put in a washing 
machine, e.g. coats, dresses, duvets, curtains, etc.  
A launderette is a place where you can pay to do your 
washing or sometimes have your washing done.
3	 An estate agent’s sells and rents out houses. A travel 
agent’s sells holidays and plane / train tickets.
4	 The shop’s closing means it’s time for people to stop 
shopping, as the shop will no longer be open. The shop’s 
closing down means it’s stopping trading or doing business.
d	 Focus on the My local shops questionnaire and go through 
the questions.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Answer the first two questions yourself to 
demonstrate the activity.
6	READING  predicting content from visual clues
a	 Focus on the instructions. In pairs or as a whole class, 
Sts use the headline and the clues in the photo to try to 
predict what the article is about. Elicit some ideas, but 
don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article to check their answer to a. 
Point out the Glossary and go through it with the class. 
You might want to point out how the name Goliath is 
pronounced /ɡəˈlaɪəθ/.
	 Check the answer. Sts might be interested to know 
that James Daunt removed the apostrophe from the 
shop name Waterstone’s when he took over the chain, 
presumably to indicate that it didn’t belong to Tim 
Waterstone any more!
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words in d.
The article is about how bookseller James Daunt managed to 
stop a chain of high street bookshops called Waterstones closing 
down in spite of huge competition from the online retailer 
Amazon.
c	 Focus on 1–5 and go through them with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and choose the 
correct option a–c for each question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  a    2  b    3  c    4  b    5  a
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 38@@
38
Winchester Market is the largest regular farmers’ market in the UK. It 
takes place twice a month, and it has around ninety stalls selling all 
kinds of food and drink. Bakers sell freshly baked bread and cakes;  
farmers sell meat, vegetables, and fruit; and beekeepers sell honey. 
There are lots of different stalls, and they sell everything from 
homemade meat pies to jams and sauces made from locally sourced 
ingredients.
The best part is that all this food comes from the local area. 
Winchester is in the county of Hampshire. All the businesses that 
have stalls at Hampshire farmers’ markets must be based in the 
county or within fifteen kilometres of its borders. This is good news 
for customers. There’s no middle-man, like a shop or a supermarket, 
so customers can find out anything they want to know about the 
product they’re buying. It’s also good for the local economy. The 
money stays in the area, and as these local businesses grow, they 
employ more local people.
This is Lyburn Farmhouse Cheesemakers. It’s an excellent example 
of a local business which has benefited from these markets. They 
make all their produce in Salisbury, less than thirty miles away from 
here. Lyburn Farm is a family-run business. They milk their own cows 
and they use this milk to make their own cheese. Every morning the 
farm’s cheesemakers collect the milk and separate it into curds and 
whey. When the curd is ready, they drain it, squeeze it, and put it 
into moulds. The next day they package the cheese and store it on 
the farm until it matures. At any one time, they have eight thousand 
cheeses maturing!
When the farm’s cheese is ready, these employees bring it to markets 
like this, where they sell it directly to the customer. So this cheese 
comes straight from the farm. That’s why it tastes so good!
Everything about Lyburn Cheese is local. The employees work 
locally, the customers buy locally – even the cows are local!
This is why people come to farmers’ markets. They want to support 
local producers and want to buy local produce. Here you know 
exactly what you’re buying and where it’s from. So more and more 
people are trying to use the supermarket less and buy fresh, locally 
produced food instead.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 
1–10. Make sure they understand all the lexis, e.g. 
fortnight, warehouse, to mature, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs to decide whether the missing information 
in each gap is a word or a number.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Go through each sentence and elicit what 
Sts think is missing in each sentence before playing the 
video again.
d	 Now tell Sts they need to complete the gaps in c with the 
exact word or number. Play the video again the whole 
way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  750    2  month    3  producer    4  lorries    5  twice    6  90    
7  local    8  family    9  8,000    10  cows
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video  
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
2B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 39@@
	1A	
39
	1&2	Revise and Check
PRONUNCIATION
c	 1  easy /z/    2  headphones /e/    3  scissors /ɪ/    
4  chemist’s /k/    5  stall /ɔː/
d	 1  initials    2  affordable    3  luxurious    4  underwear    
5  fishmonger’s
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	 Elephant & Castle and Piccadilly Circus
b	 1  C    2  A    3  E    4  B    5  F
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  b    5  c
e 2.24
1
I = interviewer, T = Tilly
I	 What’s your name?
T	 My name’s Tilly.
I	 Where does it come from?
T	 Um, it’s actually short for Ottilie, which is spelled O-T-T-I-L-I-E, um, 
and I think it’s Hungarian.
I	 Who chose your name?
T	 My dad. 
I	 Would you like to change your name?
T	 I’m happy with my name, yeah, I quite like it.
2
I = interviewer, T = Tory
I	 What’s the colour scheme of your bedroom?
T	 The colour scheme of my bedroom changes in dependence of my 
mood. Currently it’s purple and white.
I	 Do you like it?
T	 Um, I stopped liking it once it was all sorted.
I	 Would you like to change it?
T	 All the time. But once I change it, then I’ll want to change it again. 
It’s a never-ending cycle.
3
I = interviewer, C = Claudia
I	 Are you good at packing when you go away?
C	 When I go away, I’m really good at packing because I don’t pack a 
lot. I’m very efficient, I’ve moved a lot, I’ve travelled a lot, so I can 
pack lightly. It’s always a very small carry…I like to travel with a 
carry-on, if I can.
4
I = interviewer, M = Maria
I	 Is there anything you only do when you’re on holiday that you 
wouldn't do in everyday life?
C	 Um, when I’m on holiday, I usually go for more walks. So for 
example, after dinner, I would always go for a walk on holiday, but 
at home, I’d never do that. I’m always too tired, it’s a bit cold in the 
UK, so, yeah, on holiday it’s usually warmer and I’ll go for walks 
after dinner.
I	 What’s your favourite kind of holiday?
M	 My favourite kind of holiday, um, is somewhere warm, and 
somewhere that’s, um, not too crowded and perhaps with some 
historical significance, a nice place to walk around. Um, I wouldn’t 
like to go somewhere too, um, quiet.
5
I = interviewer, D = Diarmuid
I	 What sort of things do you buy online?
D	 I buy almost everything online these days, er, so clothes, um, all 
gadgets and equipment. Um, I don’t buy food, but I know a lot of 
other people do.
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, 
in class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and 
the class time available.
The first page revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 50 
(grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), so 
you can use the first page as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. 
The pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank on 
pp.166–167. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the video showing the mouth position for each sound. If you 
don’t want to use this in class, tell Sts to look at it at home 
and to practise making the sounds and saying the words.
The second page presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a 
slightly higher level than those in the File, but which revises 
grammar and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The 
listening is some unscripted street interviews, where people 
are asked questions related to the topics in the Files. Sts can 
either watch the interviews on video or listen to them on 
audio. You can find these on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, Class DVD, and Class Audio CDs 
(audio only). Alternatively, you could set this section / activity 
as homework. Sts can find the video on Online Practice. 
Finally, there is a speaking challenge which assesses Sts’ 
ability to use the language of the Files orally. You could get 
Sts to do these activities in pairs, or Sts can tick the boxes if 
they feel confident that they can do them.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 1&2 
Quick Test 2 
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  a    5  c    6  a    7  c    8  a    9  b    10  a    
11  b    12  a    13  a    14  c    15  b
VOCABULARY
a	 1  glamorous    2  considerate    3  reliable    4  sensible    
5  creative    6  suitable    7  luxurious    8  stressful    9  risky    
10  impressive
b	 1  insect repellent    2  adaptor    3  toothpaste    4  pack    
5  swimsuit    6  driving licence    7  scissors    8  guidebook
c	 1  butcher’s    2  newsagent’s    3  baker’s    4  florist’s    
5  chemist’s    6  estate agent’s    7  fishmonger’s    
8  greengrocer’s
Revise and Check 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 40@@
3A
40
e 3.1
6	 He’s a baby.
4	 She’s a toddler.
2	 He’s a child.
9	 She’s a pre-teen.
1	 She’s a teenager.
5	 He’s in his early twenties.
7	 She’s in her mid-thirties.
8	 He’s in his late forties.
3	 She’s retired.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Next, focus on the middle-aged, old, elderly box and go 
through it with the class. You may want to tell Sts that  
the word ancient also exists, but it has a negative meaning 
(= very old and possibly incapacitated) when referring to a 
person, though it can also be used in a humorous sense.
EXTRA IDEA   Give Sts more practice in using phrases like in 
her early / mid- / late thirties, e.g.: 
T  a man, 48    Sts  in his late forties 
T  a woman, 25    Sts  in her mid-twenties
c	 Focus on the task and go through the prompts, making 
sure Sts understand them. Model and drill any words your 
Sts find difficult to pronounce. Then focus on the example 
speech bubbles, and elicit the meaning of any age (= it 
doesn’t matter what age).
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss each item.
	 Get some feedback from the class. You could find out if 
Sts disagreed with each other about any of the items, or if 
they worked in small groups, all agreed on a stage of life 
for a particular prompt.
d	 Focus on the task and the example. Give Sts time to think 
of their three people.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other about 
their three people. Monitor and help them with any new 
vocabulary they may need.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by telling Sts 
about three people you know.
2	READING  read and retell
a	 Focus on the instructions and the cartoon. Now focus 
on the grow up box and go through it with the class. 
You could get Sts to look at the title of the lesson, Grow 
up!, and elicit / explain what it means (= used to tell 
somebody to stop behaving in a silly, juvenile way).
	 Do the question as a whole-class activity, and get Sts to 
explain their answers.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
first paragraph. 
	 Then get them to discuss the three questions with a 
partner.
	 Check answers.
 G   past simple, past continuous, or used to?
 V   stages of life
 P   -ed endings, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is generational differences and 
stages of life.
In the first half, the focus is on adults and teenagers. Sts 
learn vocabulary to describe different stages of life. Then 
they read a newspaper article about when people feel that 
they are grown-ups. This is followed by a listening about the 
Mosquito Tone, a controversial sound which is used to keep 
teenagers away from certain areas. The first half of the lesson 
ends with Sts talking about at what age they did certain 
activities, such as learn to swim, and what age they think is 
the best for doing certain activities, e.g. having a baby.
The second half of the lesson begins with a grammar focus 
on three past forms: past simple, past continuous, and used 
to, which Sts revise and contrast through online posts about 
childhood. This leads into a pronunciation focus which 
revises the three different pronunciations of -ed endings. 
Sts then go on to practise sentence rhythm with the past 
forms presented in the grammar focus. The lesson ends with 
extended oral practice of the three past forms.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple, past continuous, or used to? p.156 
Communicative  When you were younger p.184 
(instructions p.173) 
For students
Workbook  3A
Online Practice  3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board MIDDLE-AGED and OLD.
Then do a class survey and ask Sts How old is ‘middle-aged’? 
How old is ‘old’? Have a class vote.
1	VOCABULARY  stages of life
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the photos. 
Give Sts time individually or in pairs to match the phrases 
to the photos.
b	 e 3.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Explain to Sts that a toddler is a child 
who has recently learned to walk (toddle = to walk in an 
unsteady way) and a pre-teen is someone who is not yet a 
teenager, e.g. a child of 11 or 12.
See script 3.1
	3A	 Grow up!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 41@@
41
	 Check the answer to question 1. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 It’s a sound that only people under 25 can hear.
e 3.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
I = interviewer, M = Mark
Part 1
I	 Welcome back. Up next, age and the generation gap. We know 
how hard it can be to tell someone’s age, but in fact it turns out 
there may be a way that’s quite simple. It’s called the ‘Mosquito 
Tone Test’, and Mark is here to tell us more.
M	 Thanks, Sue. The Mosquito Tone is a sound – a very high-pitched, 
very annoying sound, which is why it’s named after the insect. 
What’s interesting is that apparently as we age, we slowly lose 
our ability to hear this sound. According to scientists, almost 
everyone under the age of twenty-five can hear the Mosquito 
Tone, but almost no one over twenty-five can hear it!
I	 Really! Is that right?
M	 Yes. And to test this out, I actually played the tone for my family 
last night. My wife and I heard absolutely nothing at all, but our 
teenage daughters could hear it, and in fact they complained that 
it was an irritating sound that was quite painful to hear.
I	 Oh no! Well, at the risk of irritating some of our younger listeners’ 
ears, why don’t we play the tone briefly now?
M	 OK, here goes. I’m playing the tone in three, two, one…
I	 Have you played the tone yet?
M	 I just did. Or, at least, I think I did.
I	 Well, I suppose that just confirms that neither of us are under 
twenty-five!
	 Now play the rest of the audio and check the answers to 
questions 2 and 3. Find out which Sts could hear it. Ask 
those who said they could if they are under 25, and how 
the sound made them feel.
2	 No, neither of them could hear it.
c	 e 3.3  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
the expression in favour of.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen to Part 2 and answer the questions in pairs.
	 Check answers.
It’s being used in shopping centres to keep teenage gangs away.
Not everybody is in favour of it; some people are against it.
e 3.3
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Part 2
I	 Now, Mark, apart from testing a person’s age, what is the 
Mosquito Tone being used for?
M	 This has actually become an interesting controversy. Because the 
sound is so annoying, and because only the young can hear it, the 
Mosquito Tone is being used to keep teenagers away from certain 
places.
I	 What kinds of places?
M	 Well, for example, from shopping centres. As you know, in some 
towns you get large groups of young people hanging around 
shopping centres and causing trouble. And some shop owners 
say that these gangs can annoy other customers or frighten them 
away, which is obviously not good for business. So now these 
centres can play the Mosquito Tone over their audio system, and 
the groups of teenagers will feel uncomfortable and leave the 
area. But, of course, the sound won’t annoy the other customers 
at all, as they don’t hear it.
I	 Have you spoken to any of these shop owners?
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 11 years
2	 You don’t have children and live in your own house, and are 
not financially independent.
3	 They both show that you’re a grown-up.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Tell Sts that they are now going to read two journalists’ 
writing about feeling grown up. Put Sts in pairs, A and B. 
Tell them to go to Communication A real grown-up?,  
A on p.107 and B on p.111.
	 Focus on the instructions. Sts A should read about Carol 
and complete the sentences in a whilst Sts B do the same 
for Hugo. Monitor and check how they are completing 
their sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put two As and Bs together first to do a. 
Monitor and help if necessary. Then put Sts in pairs A and B.
Sts A (Carol)
1	 does things that aren’t very adult, for example forgetting to 
charge her phone and being terrified of being in a bar or 
restaurant alone.
2	 thinks that the laws about being an adult are confusing 
because when you’re 16, you can work full-time, get 
married, and join the army, but you can’t drive or buy an 
alcoholic drink.
3	 first felt like an adult when she was driving alone in France 
in the middle of the night with a map and no phone.
4	 became a real grown-up when her baby was in hospital.
Sts B (Hugo)
1	 thinks he must be an adult because he has two kids, a 
mortgage, and a pension plan.
2	 thinks that it was clearer in the past when you became an 
adult because at 16 a boy started wearing trousers instead 
of shorts, and left home to raise a family.
3	 says that adults now still do teenage things like staying 
longer in the family home, finding it difficult to become 
financially independent, listening to pop music, and 
wearing T-shirts.
4	 says that having kids doesn’t make you feel like a grown-up.
5	 thinks that he will become a real grown-up when he stops 
wanting a big night out once a month or four days a year 
at a music festival.
	 When they are ready, Sts A should use their answers in a 
to tell Sts B about their texts. Then they swap roles.
	 Finally, Sts should decide who is more grown-up.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then elicit ideas from various pairs. You could also tell the 
class if you have grown up yet.
3	LISTENING  listening for detail
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Encourage Sts to explain 
their opinions and give examples.
b	 e 3.2  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 1 of a local 
radio news report about teenagers.
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–3.
	 Play the audio and pause just after the interviewer says, 
Why don’t we play the tone briefly now?
3A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 42@@
42 3A
5	GRAMMAR  past simple, past continuous,  
	 or used to?
a	 Focus on the task and list of adjectives. Make sure Sts 
understand them all, and model and drill pronunciation 
where necessary.
	 Give Sts time to choose two adjectives from the list in 
answer to the question and then think of another.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their 
answers. Tell them to explain their choices.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs, and tell them what 
you were like.
b	 Focus on the task and the title of the forum, What kind of 
child were you…and have you changed?
	 Tell Sts to read the four posts and answer the questions. 
Tell them not to worry about the options in the 
highlighted phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Alex    2  David    3  Stephen    4  Magda
c	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to circle the correct form of 
the highlighted verbs in the posts. They should tick the 
phrases if they are both correct.
	 Check answers.
1  used to like    2  f    3  was holding    4  started    
5  used to have    6  went    7  f    8  always hated
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts, in pairs, to discuss why one form 
is correct and the other not. Check answers.
1	 You can’t use the continuous form with a non-action verb 
(here like).
3	 It was a long action that happened in the past.
4	 It was a short action that happened and finished in the past. 
She started university on one occasion.
5	 You can’t use the continuous form with a non-action verb 
(here have).
6	 The action isn’t repeated. The mother only went into hospital 
once, not several times in the past.
8	 You can’t use the continuous form with a non-action verb 
(here hate).
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.136. 
Grammar notes
Past simple, past continuous, or used to?
Students at this level will have practised narrative tenses 
(past simple, past continuous, and past perfect) before, 
but here they contrast the past simple and continuous 
with used to. Sts often confuse these forms or use them 
incorrectly because they do not correspond exactly to 
equivalent forms in their L1. For instance, they use the 
past continuous to refer to a past habit or repeated past 
action, e.g. I was living in Madrid when I was a child.
	 Focus on Revise the basics. Go through the example 
sentences and use them to elicit the rules, e.g. in 1 that 
was is the past of is, and that we add (e)d to regular verbs 
to form the past tense.
M	 Yes, I have, and they said that the Mosquito Tone has worked 
very well for them. And they also said that although it’s true that 
the Mosquito Tone is certainly very annoying, it doesn’t hurt the 
teenagers.
I	 It sounds like rather a good idea to me. But you said this was a 
controversy. Who’s against it?
M	 Well, there are some groups of people who are trying to ban the 
Mosquito Tone. They’ve pointed out a number of problems with 
it. Firstly, they worry that the sound really is harmful, but more 
to the point, they say that the Mosquito Tone affects all young 
people, some of whom are well-behaved and just want to go 
shopping. And finally, they say that the Mosquito Tone doesn’t 
actually stop the problem of teenage gangs; it just drives them 
from one place to another.
I	 Those do seem like good points.
M	 Yes, indeed. And there’s also an interesting twist. Some teenagers 
have discovered an advantage to the Mosquito Tone.
I	 Oh yes?
M	 Well, the Mosquito Tone has also been released as a ringtone for 
your mobile. So in secondary schools that don’t permit mobile 
phones, teens can use their phones in class. They can receive calls 
and messages during lessons and teachers don’t have any idea 
what is happening.
I	 Because the teacher can’t hear it! That must really annoy them.
M	 That’s right. And if they can’t hear it, they can’t…
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read items 1–5.
	 Play Part 2 of the audio again for Sts to listen and answer 
the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
once more if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 They cause trouble, annoy other customers, and frighten 
them away.
2	 They say it has worked very well for them, and that it doesn’t 
hurt the teenagers.
3	 Because they worry that the sound might be harmful, and 
because it affects all teenagers, not just gangs.
4	 It just makes teenagers go somewhere else.
5	 They are using it as a ringtone for their phones at school.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do the question as a whole-class activity. Encourage Sts to 
give reasons to justify what they say.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know what 
a nursery school is. If Father Christmas is not traditional 
where you are teaching, replace it with a local example, 
e.g. in Spain The Three Kings.
	 Give Sts time to write the age at which they did each 
one. If Sts can’t remember, tell them to guess the 
approximate age.
	 Now put Sts in small groups and get them to compare 
their answers.
	 Get some feedback from different groups.
b	 In their groups, Sts now discuss what they think is the best 
age to do certain activities.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from different groups. Find out if Sts 
disagreed strongly about any of the situations.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 43@@
43
3A
6	PRONUNCIATION  -ed endings, sentence 	
	 rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Sts at this level should be aware that the regular past 
simple ending -ed can be pronounced in three different 
ways, but they will probably still be making mistakes and 
will benefit from being reminded of the rules:
1	 -ed is pronounced /t/ after verbs ending in these 
unvoiced sounds: /p/, /k/, /f/, /θ/, /s/, /ʃ/, and /tʃ/, e.g. 
hoped, liked, laughed, washed, etc.
2	 -ed is pronounced /d/ after verbs ending in vowels or 
in voiced sounds, e.g. enjoyed, played, tried, changed, 
showed, named, smiled, etc. This group is the largest.
3	 -ed is pronounced /ɪd/ after verbs ending in the sounds 
/t/ or /d/, e.g. started, wanted, ended, decided, etc.
a	 e 3.6  Focus on the sound pictures and remind Sts of the 
three different pronunciations of the -ed ending.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 3.6
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.28
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each pair of 
sentences for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
b	 e 3.7  Focus on the task. Give Sts time to read sentences 
1–6 and decide if the -ed ending in the verbs is 
pronounced /t/, /d/, or /ɪd/.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 3.7
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.28
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to tick the correct box.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  /ɪd/    2  /t/    3  /d/    4  /d/    5  /t/    6  /ɪd/
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to tick the correct box in each 
sentence before they listen to the audio.
c	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences in b.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Remind Sts that the most important rule is 
to not pronounce the -ed as /ɪd/, except after /t/ and /d/.  
Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for past simple 
and past continuous and play audio e 3.4 for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for used to and past simple e 3.5. Remind Sts 
also how used to is linked and pronounced /ˈjuːst tə/.
	 Refer Sts to the Irregular verbs list on p.165 and explain 
that this is their reference list. Get Sts to go through the 
list quickly in pairs, checking that they know what the 
verbs mean. Encourage them to highlight verbs they 
didn’t know or whose past forms they had forgotten. Test 
the class or get Sts to test each other.
	 Tell Sts to go back to p.136.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  f    2  g did they get    3  g I was working    4  f    
5  g I travelled    6  g didn’t use to get on    7  g never studied    
8  f    9  g I was watching    10  f
b	
1	 They were already having dinner when I arrived.
2	 When we were young, our parents used to take / took us to 
the beach every weekend.
3	 We were still packing when the taxi came.
4	 Did your brother teach you to play the guitar when you were 
young?
5	 When I was a child, I didn’t use to like / didn’t like 
vegetables.
6	 He used to have / had a beard when he was at university.
7	 We used to spend / spent all day playing together when we 
were children.
8	 He was talking on his phone when the police stopped him.
9	 I went to a boarding school for two years, from the age of 13 
to 15.
10	 They didn’t use to have / didn’t have a car when I first  
knew them.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to write 
their post.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary. Correct 
any mistakes with the past simple, past continuous, or 
used to.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts not to write their names on their posts. 
Then collect all the posts and number them. Display them 
around the classroom. Sts should read each post and guess 
which classmate wrote it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 44@@
44 3A
7	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the three sections in the task and elicit / explain 
the meaning of event (= sth important that happens in 
your life) and incident (= sth unusual or unpleasant that 
happens).
	 Now focus on the Events in your life section. Tell Sts to think 
what the missing words might be, but not to write them 
in, as they should be able to produce them orally.
	 Check answers.
1	 Where were you born?
	
Where did you live when you were a child?
2	 How old were you when you started primary school?
	
Did you enjoy your first day?
	
What did you do?
3	 When was the first time you travelled abroad?
	
Where did you go?
	 Now focus on the instructions and the example speech 
bubbles. Sts take it in turns to ask and answer the 
questions, using their own information. Tell them to 
answer with full sentences as much as possible. 
	 Monitor to check they are pronouncing the past simple 
-ed endings correctly and using the correct sentence 
rhythm.
	 Next, focus on the instructions and example speech 
bubble for the When you were younger section. Go 
through the six statements and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Stress that they should answer with 
full sentences and give as much information as they can. 
Encourage Sts to interact by asking each other questions.
	 Finally, focus on the instructions in An incident in your 
childhood. Give Sts time to choose one of the topics.
	 Focus on the example speech bubble. Then, in pairs, Sts 
take turns to describe the incident. 
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to get the sentence 
rhythm correct.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to change partners for each 
section.
	 Get some feedback from the class for each section.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering 
some of the questions yourself in the first two sections, and 
then telling Sts about an incident in your childhood.
d	 e 3.8  Go through the Past or present? box with Sts. 
Give examples of when the /t/ or /d/ pronunciation of the 
-ed ending can be hard to hear, i.e. when the next word 
begins with a consonant sound, e.g. We liked them / We 
like them or They played badly / They play badly. 
	 Focus on the task and play the audio once the whole way 
through for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Ask Sts to tell you which words helped them to 
understand if the sentences were past or present, e.g. last 
summer.
1  Past    2  Present    3  Past    4  Past    5  Present    6  Present
e 3.8
1	 I worked as a waiter last summer.
2	 We often play video games on Saturday evenings.
3	 We lived in America for six months.
4	 I watched too much TV last night.
5	 I usually cook at weekends.
6	 I look like my sister.
EXTRA SUPPORT   First, elicit if each sentence is present or 
past. Then elicit the sentence onto the board.
e	 e 3.9  Focus on the instructions.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen and to focus on the rhythm.
	 Ask Sts what kind of words are stressed and unstressed. 
Point out the bold words in the sentences.
Content words like verbs, nouns, and adjectives are usually 
stressed.
Prepositions, pronouns, and auxiliary verbs are usually 
unstressed.
e 3.9
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.28
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 45@@
45
	3B	 Photo albums
3B
 G   prepositions
 V   photography
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is photography. It begins with 
a vocabulary focus which includes useful phrases for 
describing photos and language related to taking photos. 
This leads into a pronunciation focus on word stress in words 
from the root word photograph and other multi-syllabic 
words. Next, Sts listen to an interview with a professional 
photographer who gives some tips on how to take good 
photos with a phone. In Speaking, Sts talk about their own 
preferences when taking photos and what they do with the 
results. Sts then write their own tips in an article on how to 
do something.
The second half of the lesson begins with a grammar focus 
on prepositions of place and movement, and dependent 
prepositions after verbs and adjectives. Sts then listen to 
people describing a holiday photo, before talking about a 
photo they took whilst on holiday. Finally, Sts read an article 
about storing digital photos safely, with some surprising 
revelations about why digital photos may not be as safe as 
we think they are. Before you get to this final stage, ask Sts to 
bring in a favourite holiday photo to the next class.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  prepositions p.157 
Communicative  What’s the preposition? p.185 
(instructions p.173)  
Vocabulary  Photography p.209 (instructions p.202)
For students
Workbook  3B
Online Practice  3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board SELFIE and SELFIE STICK, and elicit / explain 
what they both are. 
Then ask the class if they take a lot of selfies and why (not), 
and also if they ever use a selfie stick. 
Finally, ask why they think people like taking selfies so much.
1	VOCABULARY  photography
a	 Books open. Focus on the photo and elicit where it was 
taken. Don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 Focus on the title and, if you didn’t do the Optional  
lead-in, elicit / explain what a selfie is (= a photo of 
yourself that you take).
	 Now tell Sts to read the article to quickly check their 
answer in a, and to answer the question. Tell them not to 
worry about the numbered highlighted options in the 
article.
	 Check answers.
a	 It was taken in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil.
b	 Because people are risking their lives to take the ultimate selfie.
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and this time to circle the 
correct answer in the highlighted words or phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  taking    2  take    3  in the background    4  on top of
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Photography on p.155.
Vocabulary notes
Describing a photo
Check that Sts understand the difference between 
opposite and in front of, and between foreground and 
background.
You might want to highlight that in the background 
means behind the main objects, people, etc. in the photo, 
whereas in the distance means far away but still able to 
be seen.
Taking photos
Point out that the subject of a photo is the main person 
or thing you are photographing, and the settings are the 
positions for the controls on the camera.
You may want to explain that you can set a camera to a 
landscape position – one that’s wider than it is high – or 
just hold the camera the other way round. Sts might 
have across the terms landscape and portrait when using 
computer software such as Word, so you might want to 
explain / elicit the difference:
portrait = printed so that the top of the page is one of the 
shorter sides 
landscape = printed so that the top of the page is one of 
the longer sides
You may also want to point out that zoom can be used as 
a noun to describe the lens some photographers use for 
this function.
	 Focus on 1 Describing a photo and go through the on 
top of or at the top of box with the class. Make sure Sts 
understand the difference in meaning.
	 Now tell Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.10  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.10
Photography
1 Describing a photo
Photo 1
1	 In the background, there’s a mountain and some low cloud.
2	 In the bottom right-hand corner, there’s a grandmother and 
three children.
3	 The boy in an orange T-shirt is standing in front of his 
grandmother.
4	 In the centre of the photo, there’s a building with lots of steps.
5	 There’s a small building that looks like a temple on top of a  
small hill. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 46@@
46
e 3.12
1	 photo
2	 photograph
3	 photographer
4	 photography
5	 photographic
6	 photogenic
7	 photoshop
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to tell you where each word is 
stressed before playing the audio.
	 Get Sts to practise saying the words, focusing on the 
stress.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 Focus on the sentences and get Sts to underline the 
stressed syllable in each of the bold multi-syllable words.
c	 e 3.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllable.
1  background    2  foreground    3  distance    
4  behind    5  bottom, corner
e 3.13
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.30
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Spot the differences, A on p.107, B on 
p.112.
	 Go through the instructions and the example with the 
class carefully.
	 Get Sts to sit face-to-face, and take turns to describe their 
pictures without looking at their partner’s picture. 
	 Monitor and help, correcting any mistakes with the 
vocabulary they have just learned.
	 When Sts have found all nine differences, tell them to 
compare pictures to see if they have correctly identified 
the differences.
	 Check answers.
1	 A  There’s a hotel in the background.
	
B  There’s a tower in the background.
2	 A  There’s a man playing the guitar in the middle of the 
picture.
	
B  The man is taking a photo.
3	 A  There’s a man riding a bike.
	
B  The man is walking with the bike.
4	 A  The woman is drinking a coffee.
	
B  She’s eating something.
5	 A  The woman’s bag is on the table.
	
B  Her bag is under the table.
6	 A  The waiter is walking away from the table.
	
B  The waiter is walking towards the table.
7	 A  There are some birds / pigeons on the fountain.
	
B  There aren’t any birds on the fountain.
8	 A  The dog is standing on the steps, looking up at the 
fountain.
	
B  The dog is walking down the steps, away from the fountain.
Photo 2
6	 In the foreground, there’s a woman standing on a terrace looking 
at the view.
7	 The woman is standing behind a low wall.
8	 Opposite the woman, there’s a building with a tower that looks 
like a church.
9	 In the distance, on the right, you can just see the top of an old 
building which looks like a ruin.
10	 In the top left-hand corner, there are some trees.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover sentences 1–10, 
look at the photos, and describe them.
	 Now focus on 2 Taking photos and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.11  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.11
2 Taking photos
1	 e	 You use flash when you want to take a photo somewhere dark, 
for example indoors or at night.
2	 a	 You zoom in when you’re far away from something and you 
want to take a close-up of it.
3	 g	 A photo can be out of focus if your camera isn’t automatic and 
you haven’t used the right settings.
4	 d	 Many cameras have a portrait setting to use when you want to 
take a photo of a person.
5	 c	 A photo can be overexposed if there’s too much light on the 
subject when you’re taking it.
6	 b	 With good cameras, you can use different lenses, for example, a 
wide-angle lens when you want to take a photo of a landscape, 
but you can’t get all of it in.
7	 f	 You edit a photo when you change the size, colour, or 
brightness.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover a–g, look at 1–7, 
and try to remember the rest of the sentences.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could demonstrate 
the activity by answering the two questions first.
2	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
Pronunciation notes
Word stress can be difficult to perceive, especially if an 
English word is similar to the equivalent word in the Sts’ 
L1 but is stressed differently. Remind Sts to underline the 
stressed syllable when they write down any new multi-
syllable words.
a	 e 3.12  Focus on the words beginning with photo. Check 
that Sts know the meaning of photogenic (= sb who looks 
good in photographs) and photoshop (= change a photo 
using a computer). Get Sts to underline the stressed 
syllable in each word.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllable.
3B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 47@@
47
with me most of the time. Also, keep your phone in your hand, 
not in your bag. I always keep my phone in camera mode so that 
when I unlock it, it’s ready to take pictures.
N	 Tip two.
D	 Don’t think twice. Take photos whenever you want and of 
whatever you want! There’s nothing to lose. Some moments will 
never be repeated. If you don’t like your picture, you can always 
delete it, but you can’t turn back time.
N	 Tip three.
D	 Learn about your phone camera. Read your phone manual, and 
make sure you’re using your camera in the best way. Sometimes 
little tips can really help you to improve your photos. Learn how 
you can control the exposure or focus on the objects better. Know 
the strengths and weaknesses of your phone camera. My iPhone 
isn’t good at night photography, so I try to only use it in the 
daytime.
N	 Tip four.
D	 Don’t use zoom. Don’t forget that this is just a phone. It does not 
work like a camera with a DSLR lens. If you want to take a close-up 
of something, use your legs and move nearer!
N	 Tip five.
D	 Light is important. Good photography is all about using light well. 
Even the most boring composition will be saved by good use of 
light, whether it’s day or evening.
N	 Tip six.
D	 Use the grid. Imagine your picture is divided into nine equal 
squares. This is called ‘the grid’. The important parts of your photo 
should be positioned where the lines cross. Learn to use the grid, 
and then, just as importantly, learn to do without it.
N	 Tip seven.
D	 Choose unique angles. Try looking at objects from a new 
perspective. Take a picture from the dog’s view!
N	 Tip eight.
D	 Don’t stick to one style. A lot of people nowadays try to take 
photos in the same style or colours. Don’t do this! Show your 
creativity. Take any photos you like – landscapes, portraits, or 
unusual compositions. Your own unique style will develop.
N	 Tip nine.
D	 Select and edit. Be selective! Choose only your best pictures and 
then edit those. There are many apps that will help you to do this. 
But remember that sometimes a picture can be better without 
any filters.
N	 Tip ten.
D	 Make your pictures come alive. Print your pictures, send them 
as postcards, give them to your friends, and hang them on your 
walls. Holding your photos in your hands is such a lovely feeling – 
much nicer than looking at them on a screen.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the tips again and this 
time they must complete the advice in 1–10.
	 Give Sts time to read 1–10.
	 You could tell Sts that the pieces of advice follow the 
order of the tips on the audio. Play the audio again, 
pausing after each tip to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  camera    2  delete    3  strengths, weaknesses    
4  close-up    5  light    6  without    7  dog’s    
8  style    9  apps    10  screen
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.126, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback from various pairs.
	 You could tell Sts that there are more of Darja’s photos on 
her website if they are interested.
9	 A  The man in the bottom right-hand corner is taking a photo.
	
B  The man in the bottom right-hand corner is playing the 
guitar.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
3	LISTENING  understanding advice
a	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering the 
questions first.
b	 Focus on the task. You could either get Sts to read about 
Darja Bilyk on their own or you could read it to the class, 
explaining / eliciting the meaning of atmosphere (= a 
feeling in a particular place or situation) and mood  
(= the way people feel at a particular time). Model and 
drill pronunciation.
	 Give Sts time to do the matching task and choose their 
favourite photo.
	 Check answers, eliciting what a still life is (= a photo of 
objects such as flowers, fruit, etc.). 
1  A    2  E    3  C    4  D    5  B
	 Ask individual Sts which photo is their favourite and why. 
If you have a favourite, you could tell the class.
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs and get them to describe 
the photos, using language from Vocabulary Bank 
Photography.
c	 e 3.14  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
read the ten tips, making sure they understand all the 
lexis, e.g. to stick to (= continue using the same style 
without changing), unique, etc.
!   The term grid is explained in the audio.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and number the tips in the correct order.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Be ready.
2	 Don’t think twice.
3	 Learn about your phone camera.
4	 Don’t use zoom.
5	 Light is important.
6	 Use the grid.
7	 Choose unique angles.
8	 Don’t stick to one style.
9	 Select and edit.
10	 Make your pictures come alive.
e 3.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
D = Darja, N = narrator
D	 You don’t need expensive photographic equipment to take 
amazing photos. The camera on your phone can be just as good. 
Here are my top ten tips for taking great photos on your phone.
N	 Tip one.
D	 Be ready. It may be an obvious thing to say, but remember to 
charge your phone and to keep your lens clean. I carry a charger 
3B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 48@@
48
e 3.15
I took this photograph when we were flying over the Great Wall of 
China – I was going back to the USA after a holiday in Beijing. I was 
sitting next to the window, so I had a great view. I’m not usually very 
good at taking photographs, but I’m quite proud of this one. It was a 
long flight, and by the time we finally arrived home in Washington, 
DC, I was exhausted. But when I look at this photograph, it reminds 
me of the fantastic trip I had to China.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts the following questions (elicit the 
answers in brackets) or write them on the board:
Which preposition shows where a person or thing is? (3 next to)
Which prepositions show where a person or thing is moving?  
(1 over, 2 to)
Which prepositions are examples of prepositions used after 
certain verbs? (6 in – after arrived, 7 at – after look, 8 of – after 
remind)
Which prepositions are examples of prepositions used after 
certain adjectives? (4 at – after good, 5 of – after proud)
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.137.
Grammar notes
Prepositions
English prepositions are usually a problem area for 
Sts because they frequently do not correspond to 
prepositions in Sts’ L1.
Prepositions of place and movement
This should be revision, but will be needed for many Sts, 
particularly in the case of prepositions of movement. 
This is because movement is expressed by a single verb 
in many languages, not a verb of movement plus a 
preposition.
Dependent prepositions after verbs and adjectives
These are often hard to remember. This is because in 
many cases the prepositions have no central meaning, 
which makes it all the more difficult for Sts to remember 
which ones to use. Remind Sts to record verbs and 
adjectives with dependent prepositions when they meet 
them, e.g. depend on or proud of rather than just depend or 
proud. There are also cases where verbs take a preposition 
in Sts’ L1, but not in English, which can also lead to them 
inserting unnecessary prepositions, e.g. I need to call to my 
friend.
	 Focus on the example sentences for prepositions of 
place and play audio e 3.16 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm, reminding them 
that prepositions are not normally stressed unless they 
come at the end of a sentence or question. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for prepositions of movement e 3.17 and 
dependent prepositions after verbs and adjectives  
e 3.18. 
	 Finally, focus on the information box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Refer Sts to the Dependent prepositions list on p.164 
and explain that this is their reference list of prepositions 
after verbs and of prepositions after adjectives. Get Sts to 
go through the list quickly, checking that they know what 
the expressions mean.
4	SPEAKING & WRITING  an article
a	 Focus on the task. Go through the questions, making 
sure Sts understand panoramic (= a view of a wide area), 
slo-mo (= slow motion), etc. You might want to tell Sts 
that scenery and landscape have the same meaning, but 
scenery is uncountable.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An article on p.117.
	 Focus on the task in a and give Sts time to look at the 
three photos. Tell them not to read the text yet.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class.
	 Focus on the instructions in b and go through the 
headings, making sure Sts understand them.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and to match the 
headings to the paragraphs. Remind them there are two 
extra headings they don’t need to use.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Don’t look at me!
2	 Don’t make them pose
3	 Try different angles
	 Focus on c and get Sts to answer the questions in pairs, 
small groups, or as a whole-class activity.
	 Get some feedback.
	 Focus on d and the Useful language: tips and 
instructions box and go through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to choose which topic they 
want to write three tips about.
	 Tell Sts to think of a heading for each tip and then to plan 
the content. Remind them to use the Useful language.
	 For e, you may like to get Sts to do the writing individually 
in class or you could set it as homework. If you do it in 
class, set a time limit for Sts to write their article, e.g. 15–20 
minutes.
	 Finally, in f, Sts should check their article for mistakes 
before giving it in.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
5	GRAMMAR  prepositions
a	 Focus on the photo with the text and tell Sts or elicit that 
it shows the Great Wall of China and that it was taken from 
a plane.
	 Now focus on the task and tell Sts to read the text quickly. 
Then in pairs, Sts complete the gaps with prepositions 
from the list.
b	 e 3.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Highlight the expression It reminds me 
of… (= it makes me remember) and tell Sts this is very 
common when you are talking about a favourite photo. 
You might also want to point out that the speaker uses 
the word photograph, not photo, as in American English 
the abbreviation is never used.
1  over    2  to    3  next to    4  at    5  of    6  in    7  at    8  of
3B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 49@@
49
e 3.19
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
1	 Chris
I took this photo last year when I was in Uganda. I was there working 
for three weeks with a charity, and before going back to London, 
the two friends I was working with and I decided to go and see 
the mountain gorillas which live in the rainforest on the border of 
Uganda. On the day of the trek, I was feeling very nervous because 
I wasn’t sure whether I would manage it. I’m not very fit, and we 
basically had to walk up the mountain in the rainforest until we 
found the gorillas, which could take as long as five or six hours. 
Luckily, after two hours, just when I was wondering if I could carry 
on, we found them. The first gorilla we saw was this silverback, 
which is the large dominant male in the group. I couldn’t believe my 
eyes – he was so close, only about a couple of metres away. I’ll never 
forget that moment. We stayed with the gorillas for an hour, and 
then walked back down again. I love this photo because it reminds 
me of that moment, how proud and relieved I was to have got there, 
and probably the most amazing wildlife experience I’ve ever had. I 
keep it on my computer as my desktop background, and when I’m 
sitting working in rainy England, it reminds me of another world.
2	 Tom
So, I took this photo in Australia, when I was visiting my girlfriend, 
Roz. She was studying out there for a year. It was taken in Byron Bay, 
which is the most easterly point of the Australian mainland. We were 
out walking along the beach, and in Byron, when the sun sets, it’s 
a really special occasion. Lots of people go out onto the beach and 
watch the sun set over the bay, and so I took this photo just as the 
sun was setting. I really like the photo because I have some great 
memories of Byron Bay and Australia, because I’d been there before 
on my own, and I was really glad to go there with Roz. It was a really 
happy time of my life, and we were having a lovely holiday. And I like 
that you can see the silhouettes of people on the sand and in the 
water, and I love the way the light comes off the sea and sand. It’s 
one of several photos, actually, from that trip, that we printed, and 
it’s in a frame on a wall in our house.
3	 Kate
This is a photo I really like. Me and my partner, David, were staying 
with friends who live on the edge of Dartmoor, a really wild and 
beautiful place in Devon, in the south-west of the UK. We had a 
big lunch, and then we all decided to walk up to the top of the hill 
behind their house. The weather wasn’t very good on most of the 
walk – in fact, at one point it rained quite hard, but when we got to 
the top, the sun came out and there was a glorious blue sky, and 
we could see the most fantastic view of the countryside. We asked 
another walker up there to take the photo for us. That’s me and 
David in the middle, in red and green, with our little black dog. I like 
this photo because it’s so colourful and we all look really happy – it 
was just a lovely, memorable day. I have the photo on my phone and 
my iPad – at the moment, it’s my Facebook profile photo.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read questions 1–5.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to give 
Sts time to take notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Speaker 1 (Chris)
1	 In Uganda. She took it.
2	 With two friends
3	 She was working for a charity there and they decided to go 
and see the mountain gorillas. After walking for two hours in 
the mountains, they had just found the gorillas.
4	 It reminds her of the amazing experience.
5	 She keeps it on her computer as her desktop background.
	 Tell Sts to go back to p.137.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  across    2  into    3  onto    4  between    5  round    6  on    
7  off    8  under    9  into    10  next to    11  in    12  towards
b	
1	 I’m tired of all this work – I’m ready for a holiday!
2	 I’m not looking forward to apologizing for what happened.
3	 He’s very proud of his new phone.
4	 We need to discuss the problems with our IT department.
5	 Mum! Josh won’t share his sweets with me!
6	 You can’t always rely on the buses – they’re often late.
7	 I don’t know what you’re talking about.
8	 The pilot told us not to worry about the turbulence.
9	 Who’s responsible for updating the website?
10	 Let’s not argue about it now – let’s wait for the boss to get 
here.
11	 Sarah married Anthony in July this year.
12	 I’m interested in photography, but I’m not very good at taking 
photographs!
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and 1–10. Get Sts to complete 
the gaps individually.
	 Check answers.
1  of    2  to    3  to    4  for    5  with    6  over    7  on    8  on    
9  for    10  up
	 Now tell Sts to choose four of the topics they want to tell 
their partner about.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to give and ask for as much 
information as possible.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any mistakes with 
prepositions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write on the board: I’M GOING TO TELL YOU 
ABOUT…
Tell Sts to start each topic with this, and remind them to 
change you to I, your to my, etc.
6	LISTENING & SPEAKING
a	 e 3.19  Focus on the instructions and the three photos.
	 Play the audio once all the way through and get Sts to 
number the photos 1–3.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
A  3    B  2    C  1
Now ask Sts if all the photos were taken by the speakers.
No, Kate’s photo (speaker 3) was not taken by her.
3B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 50@@
50
c	 Focus on the instructions. Get Sts to read the article again, 
and give them time, individually or in pairs, to match the 
storage methods to the problems.
	 Check answers.
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  e    5  f    6  d
d	 Focus on the bold words and phrases in 1–5 and tell Sts 
to match them to their meaning a–e.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
1  e    2  d    3  a    4  b    5  c
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary and encourage Sts to 
write down any useful new lexis from the article.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs. Tell them to cover 
meanings a–e and see if they can guess the meaning of the 
bold words and phrases from their context.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions.
Speaker 2 (Tom)
1	 Australia. He took it.
2	 He was visiting his girlfriend Roz.
3	 They were walking along a beach and the sun was setting.
4	 Because he had great memories of that place, and he likes the 
silhouettes and light on the sea and sand.
5	 He has it printed and framed on a wall in their house.
Speaker 3 (Kate)
1	 In Devon in the UK. Another walker took it.
2	 With her partner and friends
3	 They had just walked to the top of a hill. The weather had 
been really bad, but when they got to the top, the sun  
came out.
4	 Because it’s colourful and they all look happy
5	 She has it as her Facebook profile (homepage) photo and it’s 
on her phone and iPad.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.126, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think of a 
photo and their answers to 1–5 in b.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to first describe the photo. If 
they have the photo on their phone, tell them to show it 
to their partner. When they have finished describing the 
photo, they should answer the five questions. Encourage 
Sts to ask their partners follow-up questions.
	 Monitor and help, but don’t correct too much as the aim 
here is to encourage fluency.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before putting Sts in pairs, demonstrate the 
activity by showing the class an interesting photo you took 
on your last holiday and describing it.
d	 Most Sts nowadays have photos on their phones. Get Sts 
to show some to each other, explaining where they were 
taken, who the people are, etc.
7	READING  understanding the main point in a 	
	 paragraph
a	 Focus on the question and go through the options. 
	 Then get Sts to tell each other what they usually do with 
their photos.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the article and headings A–F, and make sure Sts 
understand them. Elicit / Explain the meanings of come 
and go and obsolete (= no longer used because sth new 
has been invented). 
	 Now focus on the Glossary and go through it with the 
class.
	 Tell Sts to read the article and match the headings to 
paragraphs 1–5. Remind them that there is one extra 
heading.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the bold verbs and phrases in d.
1  C    2  F    3  E    4  A    5  D
3B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 51@@
51
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
He wants to take her to his nephew Luke’s house in Oxford.
He can’t because two of the tyres are flat / punctured.
She’s going to take the bus.
e 3.20
N = narrator, J = Jenny, H = Henry, L = Luke
N	 Day two. Nine a.m. Jenny has come to the UK for work and a bit of 
holiday. She’s staying with her father-in-law, Henry, outside Oxford. 
She had some problems on her first day – her suitcase didn’t arrive, 
and her laptop isn’t working for some reason. Henry says that Luke, 
Rob’s cousin, who lives in Oxford, will be able to fix her laptop. While 
they are walking to Henry’s car to drive to Luke’s house, Jenny’s 
phone rings.
J	 Hello?…Yes, it is…Oh that’s great news. Thank you…Later today? 
Great. Now I won’t have to buy new clothes.Yeah, that’s the right 
address. Bye.
H	 Good news?
J	 Great news! They found my suitcase, and they’re bringing it over 
later today.
H	 Excellent. Right, I’ll take you to my nephew’s house so he can fix 
your computer.
J	 I’m looking forward to meeting Luke.
H	 You’ll like him. He’s a bright boy. Not that I understand a word  
he says.
J	 I bet he doesn’t know much about Greek mythology, either!
H	 You’re probably right.
N	 Henry looks at one of the front wheels of his car.
H	 That’s funny.
J	 What’s wrong?
H	 The tyre’s flat.
J	 Do you have a spare?
H	 Well, yes, but it shouldn’t be flat; it’s new and…
N	 He walks round and looks at the other front wheel.
H	 Oh, I don’t believe it!
J	 What is it?
H	 They’re both flat! They’ve been punctured!
J	 What? Somebody did that on purpose? In the English 
countryside?
H	 You get vandals everywhere these days. Well, I’ll just have to stay 
here and see if I can get the AA to bring out another spare tyre. I’ll 
call you a taxi.
J	 Isn’t there a bus I could catch?
H	 Well, there’s a bus stop on the main road. You could get the bus to 
Oxford from there, I suppose.
J	 How do I get to the bus stop?
H	 The quickest way is the footpath at the back of the house.
J	 I think I’ll do that, then.
H	 Are you sure you want to get the bus? How will you find Luke’s 
house?
J	 You gave me the address. I can look it up on my phone if I get lost.
H	 Ah, yes, of course. But this is really inconvenient for you. You were 
going to borrow my car, weren’t you?
J	 No, don’t worry, Henry. I’d actually decided to rent a car, anyway. 
I’ll need it for work, and it’ll probably be cheaper to rent here than 
in London. I can get one while Luke is working his magic.
H	 Well, if you’re absolutely sure. Just go to the back door and you’ll 
see the path. Follow that – it takes you to the bus stop.
J	 OK. Oh, I’d like to cook dinner this evening to thank you for 
having me.
H	 You don’t need to do that!
J	 I want to.
H	 Well, if you’re sure. What time?
J	 How about seven o’clock?
H	 Great! And I’ll keep my phone on in case you need me.
Function    renting a car; recording a voicemail greeting and 
leaving a message
Language  Automatic or manual? Would it be possible to leave 
the car at the airport?, etc.
Lesson plan
In this second Practical English lesson, the functional focus is 
language used to rent a car.
The mystery develops. In the first scene, Henry is about to 
take Jenny to see his nephew Luke when he realizes the two 
front tyres of his car have been punctured. Jenny decides to 
take the bus to Luke’s house in Oxford, hoping that Luke can 
solve the problem with the laptop and that she will be able 
to hire a car. In the next scene, Jenny goes to the car rental 
company. In the final scene, she returns to Henry’s house to 
find that her missing suitcase has been returned with the 
padlock broken. Henry is not at home, and Jenny, feeling the 
effects of jet lag, falls asleep. She wakes up four hours later to 
the sound of a TV news report saying that Andrew Page, the 
man she’d met at the airport, has been attacked and is now 
in a critical condition. Meanwhile, Henry is still not at home, 
and Jenny, starting to worry, phones Rob.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 2 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 2 
Can you remember? 1–3
Online Practice  Practical English 2 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 2, elicit everything Sts can remember 
about Episode 1. Ask Who’s Jenny? Why is she visiting the UK? 
What problems is she having? Who’s Henry? Who is watching 
them?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 1.
1	r  HENRY’S CAR
a	 e 3.20  Books open. Focus on the photos at the top and 
bottom of the column, and elicit who Sts think the people 
are and what they think is happening. Don’t tell them if 
they are correct.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the questions.
	 Check answers. Sts should understand that there is a 
problem with Henry’s car, even if they don’t know the 
exact words. Write HIS TYRES ARE FLAT / ARE PUNCTURED on 
the board, and model and drill the pronunciation.
	 2	
Practical English  All kinds of problems
EPISODE
PE2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 52@@
52
e 3.21
N = narrator, Ne = newsreader, A = assistant, J = Jenny
N	 Inside a car rentals shop, the assistant is watching the news on TV 
on the counter. On the TV screen, there is a photograph of Heathrow 
Airport and the headline ‘Airport Assault’.
Ne	The man found unconscious at Heathrow Airport yesterday has 
been named as Andrew Page, a research scientist from Oxford. 
Police believe he was attacked…
A	 Hello. Can I help you?
J	 Oh, hi. I’d like to rent a car, please.
A	 Have you hired from us before?
J	 No.
A	 OK, could I see your driving licence, please?
	
Great. So, what kind of car are you looking for?
J	 Oh, nothing too big. It’s just for me.
A	 OK, so a compact. Three-door?
J	 Yeah, that’ll be fine.
A	 For how long?
J	 Nine days.
A	 Automatic or manual?
J	 An automatic, please.
A	 Any additional drivers?
J	 No, just me.
A	 Great. Well, we have several models I can show you, but I’d 
recommend the Vauxhall Corsa. It’s sixty-five pounds per day, and 
that includes insurance.
J	 That sounds promising. Can I take a look?
A	 Of course, but first I’d like to run through some of the basics. The 
petrol tank is full when you start, so if you return it with a full tank, 
there’s no extra charge.
J	 Great.
A	 But if you get any parking tickets or speeding fines, you have to 
pay for them yourself.
J	 Fair enough! Would it be possible to leave the car at the airport?
A	 No problem, but that’s a one-way rental, so there’s an additional 
charge of £50.
J	 OK.
A	 And one last thing – have you driven in the UK before?
J	 Yes, I have. So driving on the left’s not a problem.
A	 That’s good. OK, let’s go out and take a look at the car. We can go 
through the paperwork afterwards.
J	 Great.
N	 As Jenny and the assistant leave the office to see the car, the TV 
shows Andrew’s photograph with the headline ‘Airport Assault’.
	 Now focus on the last two questions and get Sts to 
discuss them in pairs or as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the conversation on p.35. Elicit who says the 
You hear phrases (the assistant at the rental company) and 
who says the You say phrases (the customer, here Jenny). 
Highlight that these phrases will be useful for Sts if they 
ever rent a car.
	 Give Sts time to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Then play 
the video / audio again and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  hired    2  see    3  kind    4  Three    5  manual    
6  drivers    7  models    8  65    9  petrol    10  charge    
11  parking    12  50    13  the UK
	 Now go through the conversation and deal with any new 
vocabulary. Elicit / Explain the meaning of run through 
some of the basics (= discuss the main points quickly), fair 
enough (= a colloquial expression meaning that’s OK), and 
assault (= a physical attack on someone). You may also 
want to point out that take a look is an alternative to have 
a look and is more common in US English.
J	 See you later, Henry.
H	 Bye!
N	 Jenny leaves to catch the bus and Henry phones the Automobile 
Association. Suddenly, a dark car draws up in front of the house. The 
driver is a strange man he’s never seen before.
H	 Who’s that?
N	 Day two. Eleven a.m. Jenny finally arrives at Luke’s house in Oxford.
J	 Luke?
L	 You must be Jenny. Hi.
J	 Nice to meet you.
L	 You too. Come in. Would you like some coffee? I’ve just made 
some…
J	 I’d love to, but I’m running a bit late. We had trouble with the car, 
and then the bus took forever. And I really need to get to a car 
rental place. I’m really sorry, but could I just leave the computer 
with you?
L	 Yeah, no problem.
J	 That’s great. I feel awful just leaving it here like this.
L	 Honestly, don’t worry about it.
J	 Are you sure?
L	 Yeah, it’s cool. I love doing this kind of thing. I’ll send you a text 
and let you know how I’m getting on.
J	 That’s nice of you, Luke. Thanks. See you later.
L	 See you later.
b	 Point out the Glossary and the British and American 
English box and go through them with the class.
	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 1–8.
	 Now play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or 
listen a second time and circle the correct answers. Pause 
as needed.
	 Check that Sts understand the meaning of vandals and 
vandalize.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  has been found    2  will like Luke    3  has two flat tyres    
4  vandals    5  knows    6  rent a car    7  make dinner for 
Henry    8  doesn’t wait
	 Finally, focus on the last two questions and get Sts to 
discuss them in pairs or as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r  RENTING A CAR
a	 e 3.21  Focus on the photo and elicit where Jenny is (at 
a car rental company). Ask Sts what they think she is doing 
(She’s showing the assistant her driving licence). Focus also 
on the TV screen, and elicit that the man whose face they 
can see is Andrew Page, the man who helped her at the 
airport.
	 Now tell Sts to focus on questions 1–3.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen.
	 Get Sts to answer the questions with a partner, and then 
check answers.
1  Nine days    2  A Vauxhall Corsa (Vauxhall is what this brand 
of cars is called in the UK; in many other countries it is called 
Opel)    3  At the airport
PE2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 53@@
53
e 3.23
N = narrator, J = Jenny, H = Henry, L = Luke, Ne = newsreader
N	 Day two. Five p.m. Jenny drives back to Henry’s house. She’s bought 
food to cook for dinner. She leaves the food on the table and looks for 
Henry.
J	 Henry? Henry? Henry?
N	 Henry doesn’t seem to be there, so she phones him.
H	 This is Henry Walker. I’m afraid I can’t take your call at the 
moment. Please leave your message after the tone.
J	 Hi, Henry, it’s Jenny here. I just wanted to let you know everything 
went fine. I got my car and I’m back home. Remember, I’m making 
dinner. See you soon.
N	 She notices some books on the floor and picks them up and puts 
them away. She then phones Luke.
J	 Hi, Luke. It’s Jenny.
L	 Hi, Jenny. What’s up?
J	 I just wanted to apologize for running off this morning.
L	 You really don’t need to! I should apologize, actually. It’s going to 
take me longer than I thought to unlock your computer. It’s like 
there’s an extra security code or something.
J	 That’s really weird.
L	 Don’t worry, I’m sure I can crack it.
J	 I just have no idea how it got there. Hang on.
L	 What is it?
J	 My suitcase has arrived!
L	 Hey, that’s great!
J	 Oh, look at that. The lock’s broken.
L	 Must have been the baggage handlers!
J	 Well, at least it’s back.
L	 So, how’s Uncle Henry?
J	 He isn’t here. I called him, but he didn’t answer.
L	 He probably went for a walk. He often does that. He thinks about 
his research and stuff.
J	 Well, I hope he’s back in time for dinner!
L	 He will be. He’s always on time.
J	 Yeah, Rob told me Henry’s very punctual.
L	 Unlike Rob!
J	 Exactly.
L	 Is that the jet lag catching up with you?
J	 Yeah, I’m pretty tired.
L	 You should have a nap. Don’t worry, I’ll get this computer working 
as soon as I can.
J	 Thanks, Luke. See you later.
L	 Bye!
N	 Jenny sits down on the sofa and turns on the TV, but soon she closes 
her eyes and falls asleep. The TV is still on. Jenny suddenly wakes up. 
She’s been asleep for almost four hours.
J	 Oh no, dinner! Henry? Henry! That’s strange.
N	 Jenny phones him again.
H	 This is Henry Walker. I’m afraid I can’t take your call at the 
moment. Please leave your message after the tone.
N	 She then glances at the TV.
Ne	The victim of last night’s assault at Heathrow Airport has been 
named as Andrew Page. Mr Page is a research scientist from 
Oxford. Police believe he was attacked as he left the airport. He 
is now in hospital in a critical condition. Police are appealing 
to anyone who may have seen Mr Page to contact them 
immediately. Mr Page had just returned from New York, where he 
was conducting research on renewable energy.
J	 Oh my gosh! Andrew!
N	 Jenny picks up her phone and dials.
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Rob, I need to talk to you.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–8. Elicit / Explain the meaning of jet lag  
(= the feeling of being tired and confused after a long 
plane journey, especially when there’s a big difference in 
time).
c	 e 3.22  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear some of them again, and should 
repeat them, copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing after the beep for Sts to 
listen and repeat the phrases.
e 3.22
A = assistant, J = Jenny
A	 Hello. Can I help you?
J	 Oh, hi. I’d like to rent a car, please. (pause)
A	 Great. So, what kind of car are you looking for?
J	 Oh, nothing too big. It’s just for me. (pause)
A	 OK, so a compact. Three-door?
J	 Yeah, that’ll be fine. (pause)
A	 Automatic or manual?
J	 An automatic, please. (pause)
A	 Any additional drivers?
J	 No, just me. (pause)
A	 It’s sixty-five pounds per day, and that includes insurance.
J	 That sounds promising. (pause) Can I take a look? (pause)
A	 But if you get any parking tickets or speeding fines, you have to 
pay for them yourself.
J	 Fair enough! (pause) Would it be possible to leave the car at the 
airport? (pause)
A	 And one last thing – have you driven in the UK before?
J	 Yes I have. So driving on the left’s not a problem. (pause)
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A are the assistant and Sts B 
the customer. Get Sts to read the conversation in b aloud, 
and then swap roles.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
e	 Focus on the Useful language: describing cars box and 
go through it with the class. You may also want to elicit 
the models of cars for the different categories.
	 Now focus on the instructions. Tell Sts that they will both 
be role-playing renting a car, so give them time to decide 
what kind of car they will want and for how long.
	 First,  Sts A are the customer and Sts B the assistant. Tell 
Sts A to close their books. Sts B start with Hello. Can I help 
you? Then Sts practise the conversation, with Sts B reading 
their role and Sts A role-playing being a customer.
	 Monitor and help.
f	 When Sts have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
3	r  WHERE IS HENRY?
a	 e 3.23  Focus on the photo and ask Sts where they think 
Jenny is and what is happening.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
a)	 Jenny’s laptop is still with Luke, who needs more time to fix it.
b)	 Her suitcase has arrived at Henry’s house, but the lock is 
broken.
She hears on the news that Andrew Page, the man she met at 
the airport, has been attacked and is now in hospital in a critical 
condition.
PE2 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 54@@
54
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions. Tell them to mark the 
sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind them to correct the 
ones that are false.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 F (Henry isn’t at home.)
2	 T
3	 F (She thinks it’s really weird.)
4	 F (Luke thinks Henry has probably gone for a walk.)
5	 F (He’s very punctual.)
6	 T
7	 F (Henry still isn’t home.)
8	 F (She phones Rob because she needs to talk to him.)
	 Now focus on the last two questions, and elicit ideas from 
the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 3.24  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  afraid    2  tone    3  up    4  Hang    5  least    6  pretty    7  later
e 3.24
1	 I’m afraid I can’t take your call at the moment.
2	 Please leave your message after the tone.
3	 Hi, Jenny. What’s up?
4	 Hang on…my suitcase has arrived!
5	 Well, at least it’s back.
6	 I’m pretty tired.
7	 Thanks, Luke. See you later.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  6    C  4    D  1, 2    E  7    F  5
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
PE2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 55@@
	1A	
4A
55
	 Now tell Sts to read the information and match the 
highlighted words and phrases to definitions 1–5.
	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
tricky words. 
1  food waste    2  goes to waste    3  supply    4  supply chain   
5  surplus
c	 Focus on the instructions and then put Sts in pairs to 
discuss their reaction to the facts.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs for each option, a, 
b, and c.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Quickly revise / elicit how to say the 
numbers in the infographic, i.e. the fraction 1/3 and per cent 
for the symbol %.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Rubbish and 
recycling on p.156.
Vocabulary notes
Rubbish: nouns and phrasal verbs
You may want to remind Sts that waste as a verb (e.g. 
waste money, waste time) means to use in a non-
productive way, and that sometimes the noun waste also 
has this meaning as in the expressions What a waste! or It’s 
a waste of time.
Point out that when waste refers to materials that are not 
needed it is uncountable, i.e. only used in the singular and 
not with a.
Highlight the pronunciation of refuse /ˈrefjuːs/ in refuse 
collector, so that Sts don’t confuse it with the verb refuse 
/rɪˈfjuːz/.
You could also introduce the informal nouns tip / dump, 
which refer to a local centre where you can take 
household or garden rubbish or recyclable waste (verb go 
to the tip / dump).
Tell Sts that all four phrasal verbs are separable, i.e. they 
can have an object after the particle or between the verb 
and the particle. Remind Sts that if the object is a pronoun 
(e.g. it), then it must go between the verb and the particle, 
e.g. Throw it away.
Packaging
Explain / Elicit that:
•	 polystyrene is a lightweight, synthetic material, which is 
often used in packaging.
•	 sell-by date is the date after which a shop cannot legally 
sell a product. You could also mention the expression 
best before…, which is a date printed on a container or 
package advising you to use it before this date, as it will 
not be of such good quality after that.
	 Focus on 1 Rubbish: nouns and phrasal verbs and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
 G   future forms: will / shall and be going to
 V   rubbish and recycling
 P   /aɪ/ and /eɪ/
Lesson plan
In this lesson, the topic is rubbish and recycling. Sts begin 
with a vocabulary focus on rubbish and recycling, followed 
by pronunciation practice contrasting the vowel sounds 
/aɪ/ and /eɪ/. This leads into a listening – an interview with 
a woman who invented an app to help reduce food waste 
by sharing any surplus you have. The first half of the lesson 
ends with Sts reading a questionnaire about their attitude to 
waste and recycling, and then discussing their responses in 
small groups.
In the second half, the grammar focus is on future forms: 
will / shall and be going to. These forms are revised and 
contrasted, and then the uses (e.g. predictions, offers, plans, 
etc.) are extended. Next, Sts read an article about what 
can and can’t be recycled. Finally, they talk about their 
predictions for the future of recycling.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  future forms: will / shall and be going to p.158 
Communicative  The Green Quiz p.186 
(instructions p.173) 
Vocabulary  Rubbish and recycling p.210 
(instructions p.203)
For students
Workbook  4A
Online Practice  4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following list on the board:
BANANAS	
BREAD
MILK	
CAKES
BACON	
CHICKEN
FIZZY DRINKS	
POTATOES
Ask Sts what they think these foods have in common. Elicit 
ideas, then tell them that these are the top eight foods that 
British households are guilty of throwing away every week, 
even though they’re still OK to eat. Ask Sts if they think the 
top eight would be the same in their country.
1	VOCABULARY  rubbish and recycling
a	 Books open. Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then elicit as much information as possible.
	 Try to elicit vocabulary for food, e.g. different kinds of fruit 
and vegetables, as this will help Sts later with the listening.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
an infographic is (= information or data that is shown in a 
chart, diagram, etc., so that it is easy to understand).
	4A	Don’t throw it away!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 56@@
56
	 Focus on Activation. Make sure that Sts know the 
meanings of the words in the list. Do this as a whole-class 
activity, or put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
biscuits – packet
cereal – cardboard box / plastic bag
chicken legs – polystyrene tray
ice cream – tub
milk – bottle / carton
olives – jar
pasta sauce – jar, pouch
sardines – tin
soft drinks – bottle, can / carton
yogurt – pot
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to cover the words / phrases, look at the 
pictures, and remember the words.
	 Finally, look at 3 The prefix re- and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.4
3 The prefix re-
1	 There’s a bottle bank at the local supermarket where you can 
recycle all your glass bottles and jars.
2	 All supermarkets in the UK now charge extra for plastic bags. They 
prefer customers to have shopping bags which they can reuse.
3	 If you’re not sure about the project, you should rethink the whole 
thing.
4	 You can reheat your dinner in the microwave.
5	 They’ll have to replay the match next Saturday.
6	 You should reapply sunscreen every hour if you have fair skin.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Elicit that the prefix re- = again, e.g. reuse = use again. 
You may want to point out that there is a secondary 
stress on re-.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to cover sentences 1–6 and try to 
remember the meaning of the verbs.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could elicit other words which start 
with the prefix re-, e.g. rewrite, remarry, restart.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  /aɪ/ and /eɪ/
Pronunciation notes
Students may confuse the vowel sounds /aɪ/ and /eɪ/. 
They often make sounds influenced by their L1, e.g. 
pronouncing the letters ay as /aɪ/.
a	 Focus on the two sound pictures and elicit the words 
and sounds: bike /aɪ/ and train /eɪ/. Elicit / Remind Sts that 
these are both diphthongs.
	 Tell Sts to focus on the pink letters in the words in the 
list and write the words in the correct column. Remind 
Sts that this kind of activity is easier if they say the words 
aloud to themselves.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
e 4.1
Rubbish and recycling
1 Rubbish: nouns and phrasal verbs
Nouns
1	 rubbish
2	 waste
3	 bin
4	 bin bag
5	 waste-paper basket
6	 refuse collector
7	 landfill site
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.2  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.2
Phrasal verbs
1	 If that pen doesn’t work, just throw it away. I hate having pens 
around that don’t work.
2	 Please could you take out the rubbish? I did it last week.
3	 I’m moving house in a few weeks, and I’ve decided to give away a 
lot of books and clothes to a charity shop.
4	 In most countries, people throw away used glass, cardboard, etc. 
in special bins. Local councils then collect this waste and take it 
away to be recycled.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the nouns 
and phrasal verbs in a and c, and try to remember the 
definitions (1–7 in a) and sentences (1–4 in c).
	 Now focus on 2 Packaging. Make sure Sts know the 
meaning of packaging /ˈpækɪdʒɪŋ/ (= materials used to 
wrap or protect goods that are sold in shops). Model and 
drill its pronunciation. Then get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs.
	 e 4.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.3
2 Packaging
5	 bottle
6	 can
 14	 cardboard box
3	 carton
 15	 jar
9	 lid
 13	 packet
 12	 plastic bag
4	 pot
7	 pouch
 11	 sell-by date
 10	 tin
8	 tray
1	 tub
2	 wrapper
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
4A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 57@@
57
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  neighbours    2  businesses    3  sell-by date    4  baker’s    
5  fridge    6  share    7  photo    8  message
e 4.7
Part 1
I = interviewer, T = Tessa
I	 Tessa, can you explain what OLIO is, exactly?
T	 So, OLIO is a free app which connects neighbours with each other 
and with local businesses so that surplus food can be shared and 
not thrown away.
I	 What kinds of food?
T	 It could be food that’s near its sell-by date in local shops, or 
home-grown vegetables that you’re not going to eat, or bread 
from your baker’s that hasn’t been sold at the end of the day, or 
the food that’s in your fridge when you’re about to go away. Any 
food that people have that they’re not going to use.
I	 And how does the app work?
T	 It’s super easy! If you have some food that you want to share, 
you simply open the app, add a photo and a description, and say 
when and where the food can be collected from. And if you’re 
looking for some food, you just put in your postcode and send 
a message to the person who’s offering the food you want, and 
then you arrange a time to go and collect it.
 !   Don’t ask Sts what they think of the app at this stage, as 
they will be discussing it later in the lesson.
c	 e 4.8  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the 
three questions. 
	 Now play Part 2 of the interview, pausing the audio when 
each question has been answered to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Because she lived on a farm as a child, and learned how much 
hard work goes into producing food.
2	 She was moving from Switzerland and packing up her flat, 
and she didn’t want to throw away good food.
3	 She was very excited. .
e 4.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Part 2
I	 So how did you come up with the idea?
T	 Well, I’ve always been worried about food waste. My parents have 
a farm in the north of England, in North Yorkshire, and I learned 
as a child how much hard work goes into producing the food that 
we all eat. And so I grew up with the belief that food should be 
eaten; it ought not to be thrown away. But I got the idea for the 
app when I was living in Switzerland and I was packing up my flat 
because I was going to move back to the UK. When the removal 
people came to take all my things, I still had in my fridge some 
potatoes, a cabbage, and some pots of yogurt. The men told me 
to throw away the food, but it seemed such a terrible thing to do, 
to throw away good food. The removal men didn’t want it, and my 
neighbours were out, and I thought to myself, ‘This is absolutely 
crazy…This food is delicious. Why isn’t there an app where I can 
share it with someone nearby who wants it?’  
And so the idea for OLIO was born…When I told my friend Saasha 
about it…
I	 You co-founded OLIO with your friend Saasha, is that right?
T	 Yes. Saasha has always been passionate about recycling, and 
when I told her my idea, her eyes immediately lit up – she got 
very excited. In just an hour of talking, we’d come up with a name  
and made a plan.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Say the words in the list once for Sts just to 
listen before they write them in the correct column.
b	 e 4.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.5
bike /aɪ/  reapply, recycle, require, sell-by, site, supply
train /eɪ/  away, date, replay, tray, waste
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the words.
c	 Tell Sts to look at the words in a and give them time to 
complete the rules in the /aɪ/ and /eɪ/ box.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
ay is always pronounced /eɪ/.
a + consonant + e is usually pronounced /eɪ/.
i + consonant + e is usually pronounced /aɪ/.
Consonant + final -y in a stressed syllable is usually 
pronounced /aɪ/.
d	 Focus on the instructions and point out that the pink 
letters in the words in the list are either pronounced /aɪ/ 
or /eɪ/.
	 Give Sts time to decide which sound the pink letters are.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play audio e 4.6 once for Sts just to listen 
to the words before they decide how the pink letters are 
pronounced.
e	 e 4.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and make sure that Sts know the meaning 
of all the words.
train /eɪ/  break, neighbour, straight, survey, weight
bike /aɪ/  buy, climate, eyes, flight, guy, height, wi-fi
e 4.6
See words in Student’s Book on p.36
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	LISTENING  listening and taking notes
a	 Focus on the instructions and elicit / explain what  
co-founder means (= a person who starts an organization, 
institution, etc. with someone else).
	 Get Sts to read Part 1 of the interview and then, with 
a partner, predict what the missing words might be. 
Encourage them to use the context for clues. Tell them 
not to write in the gaps, but on a piece of paper.
b	 e 4.7  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
4A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 58@@
58
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the Zero waste questionnaire and quickly go 
through the questions to make sure Sts understand all the 
vocabulary, e.g. leftover food.
	 Give Sts time to think about what they are going to say.
b	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and tell them to 
take turns to ask each other the questions. Emphasize 
that they should give and ask for as much information as 
possible.
	 Monitor and help Sts with any vocabulary they need.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before putting Sts in groups, get them to 
ask you some or all of the questions.
5	GRAMMAR  future forms: will / shall and 	
	 be going to
a	 Focus on conversations 1–5 and tell Sts to complete the 
gaps with the correct form of will, shall, or be going to and 
the verb in brackets. Tell them to use the contracted form 
of will (’ll) and of be after pronouns.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 4.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Pause after each conversation, check answers, and elicit 
why each form is correct.
1	 We use will / won’t for decisions made at the time of speaking.
2	 We use be going to to talk about plans. Speaker A could also 
use the present continuous here. Speaker B made a decision 
at the time of speaking.
3	 We use will / won’t to make promises.
4	 We use shall questions with I to make offers.
5	 We use will to make predictions about what we think or 
believe will happen.
e 4.10
1	 A  Could you take the rubbish out? It’s beginning to smell.
	
B  I’ll do it as soon as this programme finishes.
2	 A  Are you going to finish that pasta? You’ve hardly eaten any.
	
B  I can’t, I’m just not hungry, but don’t throw it away. I’ll have it 
for lunch tomorrow.
3	 A  Don’t put bottles in the black bin. You need to put them in the 
recycling bin.
	
B  Sorry, I forgot. I won’t do it again.
4	 A  This lasagne’s been in the fridge for three days. Shall I throw  
it away?
	
B  No, don’t waste it. Put it in the freezer.
5	 A  I’m a bit worried about this yogurt. The sell-by date was 
yesterday.
	
B  Don’t worry, it’ll be fine.
	 Now get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs. Monitor 
and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to rhythm and 
intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
EXTRA IDEA   Get pairs of Sts to perform the conversations in 
front of the class.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.138.
d	 e 4.9  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to look 
at the phrases in the list. Make sure Sts know what £700 
worth of food means.
	 Play Part 3 of the interview once all the way through. Tell 
Sts just to listen and not write anything.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and take notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then if necessary, 
play the audio again, pausing after each answer is given.
	 Check answers.
In the UK, the average family throws away £700 worth of food 
each year.
One in three people feel really terrible when they throw away 
good food.
They invited 12 people from the research survey, who said they 
hated throwing away good food, to join a closed WhatsApp 
group.
They asked them to post photos of any surplus food they had 
into the group for two weeks, and see if anyone wanted it.
The first item someone posted was half a bag of onions!
They launched the OLIO app on 9th July 2015.
Now the app is being used in 41 countries.
A man messaged Tessa to say that someone had collected his 
vegetables within an hour after he posted on OLIO.
e 4.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Part 3
I	 So what happened next?
T	 The first thing we did was some research, in order to understand 
how big the problem of food waste was, and what we discovered 
truly shocked us. For example, did you know that in the UK, the 
average family throws away seven hundred pounds’ worth of 
food each year? That adds up to twelve point five billion…twelve 
point five billion pounds that’s going straight in the bin! But our 
research also showed that one in three people feel really terrible 
when they throw away good food. But just because people hate 
throwing away food, that doesn’t mean they’ll take the next step, 
which is to share food. We needed a cheap and quick way to test 
whether our food sharing idea would work.
I	 How did you do that?
T	 We invited twelve people from our research survey, who said 
they hated throwing away good food, and we put them all in a 
closed WhatsApp group. We asked them to post photos of any 
surplus food they had into the group for two weeks, and see if 
anyone wanted it. Eventually, someone posted an item – half 
a bag of onions! And then more and more items of food were 
shared. Then, when the trial was over, we met face-to-face with 
everybody who took part, and asked for feedback. The conclusion 
was unanimous – ‘it’s an amazing idea’.
I	 So when did you actually launch the app?
T	 We launched it on the ninth of July, twenty fifteen. The very first 
version of the app could only be used in North London. But now 
it’s being used in forty-one countries.
I	 So people love it and are using it?
T	 Absolutely. We get loads of messages on our website, and there 
was one the other day from this guy – I’m going to read it to you – 
he said, ‘I had some vegetables I knew I wouldn’t have time to eat 
and within an hour they’d been collected and I suddenly felt like a 
hero!’ That’s so great. People are helping each other, and helping 
the planet, and feeling good all at the same time.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.37 and the two scripts on p.126, 
so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Encourage Sts to give 
reasons to justify what they say, and tell them what you 
think.
4A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 59@@
59
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 In this speaking activity, Sts practise using future forms to 
talk about plans and predictions.
	 Focus on the Responding to plans and predictions 
box and go through it with the class. Model and drill the 
phrases and encourage Sts to use friendly intonation.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to choose topics from both 
lists and make plans and predictions. If they don’t actually 
have a plan, tell them to invent one.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use the expressions 
in the box.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate one or two of the topics 
yourself, getting a strong student to respond.
6	READING & SPEAKING  reading to check 
assumptions
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also answer the 
questions yourself.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the title of the article. 
Encourage Sts to work out all the lexis, e.g. glittery, from 
the photos.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to choose the correct 
answers based on what they do or what they have read / 
heard.
	 Elicit some answers from Sts, but don’t tell them if they are 
correct.
c	 Now tell Sts to read the article and check their 
answers to b.
	 Check answers. You could tell Sts that more recently, some 
supermarkets have started to recycle black plastic trays.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the compound nouns in f.
1	 The bottles can be recycled, but the caps can’t.
2	 The white plastic tray can be recycled, but the black tray can’t.
3	 The glittery paper can’t be recycled, but the one without 
glitter can.
4	 The glass jar can be recycled, but the plastic pouch can’t.
5	 The pump-action bottle can be recycled, but the tube can’t.
6	 ‘4’ means the packaging contains polyethylene, which can 
only be recycled in some centres.
	 Finally, find out if anyone got all answers correct.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of summary.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and match 
paragraphs 1–6 to summaries A–F.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  C    2  E    3  D    4  F    5  B    6  A
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
Grammar notes
Future forms: will / shall and be going to
Sts will have met these future forms several times in earlier 
levels of English File, but here their uses are combined 
and extended. The correct use of future forms in English 
is always complicated for Sts because it depends on the 
concept the speaker wants to convey (a plan, prediction, 
offer, etc.) and cannot be translated directly from Sts’ L1.
Remind Sts not to use the present simple instead of will 
for offers or promises, e.g. NOT I give you a lift to the airport. 
Many Sts also tend to use will instead of the present 
continuous or going to for plans, e.g. I’ll go to see my 
grandmother at the weekend. (This would imply that you 
have just made the decision.)
You may also want to highlight that:
•	 we can also use won’t for ‘refuse to’, e.g. The kids won’t 
eat their vegetables.
•	 going to is often pronounced /ɡənə/ and written 
informally as gonna, e.g. in song lyrics.
There is sometimes very little difference between a plan 
and an arrangement, and we can often use either be 
going to or the present continuous when there is an 
arrangement to do something – something has been 
organized, e.g.: 
I’m going to the dentist tomorrow (= I have an appointment).
Liz and Nick are coming for dinner tonight (= we have 
invited them, and they have said they are going to come).
Point out that if we need to refer to the future from a time 
in the past, we use was going to (the past form of be going 
to). We often use this structure to talk about things we 
intended to do, but then didn’t, e.g. I was going to…, but 
(something happened and I didn’t do it).
	 Focus on the example sentences for will / shall and play 
audio e 4.11 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them 
to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the 
class.
	 Repeat for be going to e 4.12.
	 Go through the The future in the past box with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs. Encourage them to use contracted 
forms rather than full forms.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  f, f    2  g Shall I put, f    3  g I’m going to get, g Shall I help    
4  f, g I’ll text her    5  f   
b
1	 I’ll turn on the air conditioning.
2	 Can I borrow £10? I’ll pay you back tomorrow.
3	 I’m going to give them to the charity shop.
4	 A  Shall I buy some more bread when I go out?
	
B  Yes, please. I’ve decided I’m going to make sandwiches 
for lunch.
5	 Are you going home by bus? I’ll give you a lift if you like.
6	 OK. What film shall we see?
7	 A  What are you going to do with those old bottles and jars?
	
B  I’m going to take them to the bottle bank for recycling.
8	 After 2040, diesel cars won’t be sold in most European 
countries.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
4A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 60@@
60
e	 Give Sts time to read a–c and then choose the one that 
conveys the main message of the article. Ask Sts to justify 
their answer, using information in the article.
	 Check the answer.
b
f	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what a 
compound noun is.
	 Give Sts time to complete the words. If Sts can’t 
remember, they can check back with the article.
	 Check answers.
1  bottle    2  bin    3  tray    4  paper    5  food    6  sauce
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
h	 Focus on the instructions and four predictions. Remind Sts 
of the expressions for making predictions they saw in the 
Responding to plans and predictions box.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss each prediction. 
Encourage them to justify their answers as much as 
possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could find out 
if, on the whole, Sts feel positive about recycling in the 
future.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Choose one of the predictions and tell the 
class what you think and why.
4A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 61@@
61
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Make sure Sts know the meaning of each word. 
Model and drill pronunciation, especially of the noun 
graduate /ˈgrædʒuət/. You might want to point out that 
it can also be used as a verb, but with slightly different 
pronunciation /ˈgrædʒueɪt/.
school: classroom, head teacher, pupil
university: campus, degree, graduate, professor
applying for a job: CV, experience, qualifications, reference
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Study and work 
on p.157.
Vocabulary notes
Higher education
In British higher education, a tutor is a university teacher 
who works regularly with one student or a small group 
of Sts.
PhD is short for ‘Doctor of Philosophy’, but this title is used 
for a doctorate qualification in any subject. If necessary, 
use Sts’ L1 to clarify. Highlight that it is pronounced as 
three individual letters /piː eɪtʃ ˈdiː/.
Point out to Sts that the plural of thesis /ˈθiːsɪs/ is theses 
/ˈθiːsiːz/.
Applying for a job or course
Although scholarship and grant are often used 
synonymously, a grant tends to be awarded to Sts from 
lower income backgrounds, whereas a scholarship is often 
awarded on the basis of academic achievement.
	 Focus on 1 Higher education and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.13  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.13
Study and work
1 Higher education
1	 campus
2	 undergraduates
3	 postgraduates
4	 dissertation
5	 thesis
6	 professors
7	 faculties
8	 halls of residence
9	 tutor
 10	 seminars
 11	 lectures
 12	 webinars
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Go through the text with Sts, checking that they 
understand all the phrases in bold. If necessary, use Sts’ 
L1 to clarify. Find out if any words are similar in your Sts’ 
language(s). If so, do they mean the same? Model and drill 
pronunciation as necessary.
 G   first and second conditionals
 V   study and work
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
The main context for this lesson is study and work. In the first 
part of the lesson, Sts revise and extend vocabulary related 
to higher education and work. This includes a pronunciation 
focus on word stress, followed by extended oral practice. 
Sts then listen to a radio programme about internships, 
where two women talk about their experiences, i.e. working 
for a company in order to get experience for a very low (or 
sometimes no) salary. Next, the grammar focus revises and 
contrasts first and second conditionals, which are presented 
in the context of job interviews. The first half of the lesson 
finishes with oral grammar practice, where Sts talk about 
imagined situations.
In the second half, the topic of work is further developed 
with a newspaper article about part-time jobs once held by 
some well-known British people. This leads into a speaking 
activity in which Sts discuss their own experiences of  
part-time or holiday jobs, and their education or current job. 
Next, Sts watch a video about what happened to a music 
student who was working part-time. Finally, Sts learn to write 
a profile for LinkedIn or a similar career networking website.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  first and second conditionals p.159 
Communicative  What if …? p.187 (instructions p.174) 
Vocabulary  Study and work p.211 (instructions p.203)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  A part-time job that changed a student’s life
For students
Workbook  4B
Online Practice  4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following jobs on the board:
SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHER   WAITER   NURSE  
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER   SHOP ASSISTANT
Put Sts in pairs and get them to brainstorm for each job:  
a) what qualifications or practical skills you need, and b) 
what personal qualities you need.
Elicit their ideas onto the board and see if they agree. Then 
ask Sts if they think they are qualified to do any of the jobs.
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  study 
and work; word stress
a	 Books open. Focus on the three circles and the words in the 
list. Tell Sts to put four words or phrases in each circle, and 
point out that the first one (A levels) has been done for them. 
Elicit / Explain what A levels are (= a British exam taken in a 
particular subject, usually in the final year of school).
	4B	 Put it on your CV
4B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 62@@
62
attend    dissertation    PhD    postgraduate    professor    
qualifications    reference    residence    scholarship    
seminar    tutorial    undergraduate    vacancy
e 4.15
See words in Student’s Book on p.40
	 Now give Sts a few minutes to practise saying the words, 
focusing on getting the stress correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
e	 In pairs, Sts discuss the difference between the words and 
phrases in 1–8.
	 Check answers.
1	 An undergraduate is somebody studying for a first degree at 
university. A postgraduate is somebody who is studying for a 
further degree.
2	 A Master’s degree is a one-year postgraduate qualification.  
A PhD is a three-year (or more) postgraduate qualification.
3	 A campus is the buildings and land of a college or university. 
A hall of residence is a building where university students 
live while they are studying.
4	 A professor is a highly ranked teacher at university. A tutor is 
a university teacher who pays special attention to the studies 
of a group of students.
5	 A seminar is a university class where students discuss or 
study with their teacher. A webinar is a seminar conducted 
over the internet.
6	 A tutorial is a class with a very small group of students.  
A lecture is a class where a large group of students listen to a 
talk, but do not participate.
7	 Qualifications are exams that you have passed or a course of 
study that you have successfully completed. Skills are things 
that you can do well (e.g. speak a language).
8	 A CV is a record of your education and work experience that 
you send when you apply for a job. A covering letter / email 
is a letter / email that you send with your CV when you apply 
for a job, usually explaining why you are applying.
2	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all the 
points in the list, e.g. an arts degree (= the subjects you 
can study at university that are not scientific, such as 
languages, history, or literature).
	 Now focus on the Agreeing / Disagreeing and giving 
opinions box and go through it with the class.
	 Give Sts time to think about each statement and decide 
whether or not they agree and why. 
	 Then put Sts in small groups of three or four. They should 
take turns to say what they think about a statement, and 
the rest of the group agree or disagree.
	 Monitor and help.
	 If your Sts are at university or have been to university, they 
could discuss each point both generally and personally. 
Encourage them to give as much information as possible 
and to give examples and reasons to justify what they say.
	 Get some feedback to see whether, generally speaking, 
Sts agree or disagree with the statements.
EXTRA IDEA   If there’s time, you could have a brief whole-
class discussion on one or more of the topics.
	 Now get Sts to do Activation in pairs, and then get some 
feedback. Where there are differences, you could ask them 
which system they think they would prefer, and what the 
advantages / disadvantages are.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look only at the words in the 
list and try to remember their meaning or what they are 
associated with.
	 Focus on 2 Applying for a job or course and get Sts to 
do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.14  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.14
2 Applying for a job or course
What you may need to have
1	 qualifications
2	 experience
3	 skills
4	 a reference
What you may need to do
5	 look for a job vacancy or course
6	 apply for a work permit, a place on a course, a grant or 
scholarship
7	 write a CV and a covering letter
8	 attend an interview
9	 get a job offer or an offer for a place on a course
 10	 work as an intern
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Go through the bullets with Sts, making sure they 
understand all the words and phrases in bold.
	 Then focus on the information box and go through it with 
the class. Note that in some languages, attend and assist 
are false friends.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look only at the words in the 
list and try to remember their meaning or what they are 
associated with.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
Pronunciation notes
Many of these words are similar in other languages, but 
are stressed on a different syllable. If necessary, remind Sts 
about word stress in English (see Pronunciation notes in 
Lesson 3B on p.46).
c	 Focus on the words in the list and get Sts to underline 
the stressed syllable in each one. Remind Sts that PhD is 
pronounced as the three individual letters.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play audio e 4.15 once the whole way 
through for Sts just to listen before they underline the 
stressed syllables.
d	 e 4.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
4B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 63@@
63
J	 They can be. It all depends on your status as an intern: that 
is, whether you qualify as ‘a worker’ or not. And the law isn’t 
completely clear about what being ‘a worker’ means.
I	 So how do you know if you should be getting paid?
J	 Well, if you’re promised a contract for future work once the 
internship period is over, then you are an employee, so you’re 
entitled to the National Minimum Wage – that’s seven pounds 
seventy an hour – or the National Living Wage if you’re over 
twenty-five, which is eight pounds twenty-one an hour.
I	 Are there any other situations in which you should definitely 
be paid?
J	 Yes. If you spend your day doing jobs that would usually be done 
by a paid employee, then you should also be paid the Minimum 
or Living Wage.
I	 So when is it legal for an employer not to pay an intern?
J	 You don’t have to be paid if you’re doing an internship as part of 
your university course, or if you’re doing school work experience. 
And of course, if you’re volunteering for a charity.
I	 Any other situations?
J	 Yes, you also don’t have to be paid if the role you have is similar 
to work experience or shadowing – where you are in an office or 
another workplace just to observe and learn about what’s going 
on, rather than actually working. But, and this is very important, if 
you’re not getting paid for doing an internship, you shouldn’t be 
given fixed working hours.
I	 So the important thing is to know your rights?
J	 Absolutely!
I	 Thank you very much, Jake.
d	 e 4.17  Focus on the instructions and the two photos.
	 Play the audio, pausing at the end of each interview to 
check answers.
Rosie was paid £15 a day for lunch and transport in one 
internship.
Lauren was paid her travel expenses and her lunch in her last 
internship, but nothing in her previous ones.
e 4.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
I = interviewer, R = Rosie, L = Lauren
Part 2
I	 We’re now asking people who either are interns or have just been 
interns to phone in and tell us about their experiences. Our first 
caller is Rosie. Hi Rosie, and thanks for calling. So, what’s your 
experience?
R	 Well, I wanted to work in fashion – making hats, to be precise – 
and in the fashion industry, it’s almost impossible to get a job 
unless you do an internship first, so I did several.
I	 And did you get paid?
R	 The most I got was about fifteen pounds a day for lunch and 
transport. Companies get so many applications for internships 
that they don’t need to pay you.
I	 So it wasn’t a good experience?
R	 Actually, it was. It was very hard work, but I learned loads 
about designing and making clothes. I sometimes worked later 
than eleven p.m., and that wasn’t easy, but then I’d look in the 
newspapers and I’d see a model wearing a hat that I’d helped to 
make, and then I felt great.
I	 But it can’t have been easy to survive, financially?
R	 No, it wasn’t. My parents were able to help me a bit, but I had to 
earn money by working in a bar as well.
I	 Would you recommend doing an internship?
R	 Oh yes, overall, I think they’re brilliant. I’d definitely advise 
someone to do one – despite the hard work and the debt, you 
learn so much that it’s worth it.
I	 Thank you, Rosie. Our next caller is Lauren. Hi, Lauren.
L	 Hello.
I	 So what was your experience like?
L	 I’ve done four internships in Publicity. My last one was two 
months at a small Public Relations agency. They paid for my travel 
expenses and lunch, and I learned a lot. It really helped me when I 
applied for jobs because I knew what I was talking about.
3	LISTENING  listening for factual information
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Ask Sts if they can think 
of any circumstances when working without pay could 
benefit them, e.g. to gain experience, to make contacts, or 
to help others.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you have had any experience of working 
without pay, tell the class about it.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Check Sts understand the title, 
The ultimate guide to internships (ultimate in this context 
means best, and they saw the term internship in the 
Vocabulary Bank).
	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
Internships are paid if you’re being trained, or producing work, 
but they are not paid if they are considered work experience.
Internships are a good thing, according to the article.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts some comprehension questions to 
check they have understood the article, e.g. What do you 
think ‘shadowing other members of staff’ means? (Following 
other members of staff) Which three groups of people is 
an internship good for? (Students, graduates, and people 
who want a new career) What are the benefits of doing an 
internship? (You can try the job first, you can meet people, 
and you can include it on your CV), etc.
c	 e 4.16  Focus on the instructions. You could tell Sts that 
the website savethestudent.org was founded in 2007 and 
offers free, independent advice to university students on 
how to manage their money.
	 Explain that Sts are going to listen to a radio programme 
about being an intern and they must choose the correct 
option for the six statements. Give Sts time to read the 
statements and check they understand the meaning of 
the options. Point out the Glossary and go through it 
with the class.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and choose the correct options.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  better    2  legal    3  have to    4  must    5  don’t have to    
6  choose his or her own hours
e 4.16
(script in Student’s Book on pp.126–127)
I = interviewer, J = Jake Butler
Part 1
I	 Recently in the news, students and graduates have been 
complaining about how interns are treated, basically about the 
fact that many people doing internships are either very badly 
paid or not paid at all. We asked Jake Butler from the website save 
the student dot org to give us the facts. Hello, Jake. Nice to have 
you on the programme.
J	 Hi there.
I	 So what’s the current situation with interns getting paid?
J	 Well, I’d like to make it clear that at Save the Student, we’re 
strongly against unpaid internships. And thankfully, the situation 
is better than it used to be.
I	 But are unpaid internships actually legal?
4B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 64@@
64 4B
4	GRAMMAR  first and second conditionals
a	 e 4.18  Focus on the task and tell Sts they are going 
to hear the last few moments of two job interviews. 
Highlight that they will hear two different conditional 
forms in the interviews.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each interview for Sts to 
complete the gaps. Play the audio again as necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then discuss the 
question.
	 Check answers. Elicit the difference between the two 
conditionals – the first refers to a real possibility, and the 
second to a hypothetical situation.
1	 offer, will…be able
2	 offered, would need
	 Now ask Sts who they think is going to get the job.
The first person, Simon, has a real possibility of getting the job.
e 4.18
I = interviewer, S = Simon, A = Andrew
1
I	 Well, Simon, your qualifications are excellent and you’ve got a lot 
of great experience.
S	 Oh, thank you. I’m glad to hear it.
I	 If we offer you the job, when will you be able to start?
S	 How about tomorrow?
2
I	 OK, Andrew. You have some of the qualifications we’re looking for, 
but not enough experience.
A	 I understand.
I	 If we offered you the job, you would need a lot of training. I’m 
afraid we don’t have the budget for that at the moment.
A	 I see. Well, thanks very much for considering me.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.139.
Grammar notes
First and second conditionals have been presented 
in earlier levels of English File. They are revised and 
contrasted here.
First conditional
Emphasize that the if-clause uses a present tense, but has 
a future meaning, though we do not use a future tense 
here (NOT If I’ll see her, I’ll give her your message.)
Remind Sts that the if-clause can come at the beginning 
or end of the sentence. When the if-clause starts the 
sentence, a comma separates it from the main clause. 
When the if-clause is at the end, there is no comma.
Second conditional
It may be confusing to Sts to use past tenses in the 
if-clause – emphasize that this is how we describe a 
hypothetical or imaginary situation. The meaning is 
usually present or future, not past.
Remind Sts that would is often contracted to ’d.
Remind Sts also that we can use unless instead of if…not 
in both first and second conditionals, e.g. I wouldn’t go to 
the gym unless I really liked it (= if I didn’t really like it).
	 Focus on the example sentences for first conditional and 
play audio e 4.19 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
I	 So, a good experience.
L	 Absolutely. But in the other three, I worked ten-hour days, six days 
a week, and I got no money at all, so I also had to work in a pub to 
support myself. And each time they told me, ‘Do well and there’ll 
be a job at the end of it.’ But then there were no jobs. It made me 
so angry.
I	 And were you working during these internships, or was it more 
observing others?
L	 I was working really hard. In fact, during one of those internships, 
the manager went on holiday for a month and I had to manage 
everything. And in another one, I worked from home, using my 
own phone, and I wasn’t paid a penny, not even to cover the 
phone bill. I only met the boss once – it was all done by email. She 
promised me a job after three months, but it never happened.
I	 So you felt you were being exploited?
L	 Yes, totally.
I	 I’m really sorry to hear that, Lauren…
e	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that they are going 
to listen again and this time note down the key factual 
information both women give about their internship 
experiences: what work they did, what was good about it, 
and what was bad.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker for Sts to 
make notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting as much information as possible 
about the two internships. Make sure Sts understand 
publicity (= a business which is all about attracting the 
attention of the public to sth, e.g. a product or event) and 
public relations / PR /pʌblɪk rɪˈleɪʃnz/ (= the business of 
giving the public information about an organization or 
person in order to create a good impression).
Rosie
The kind of work: fashion design / hat-making
The good side: learned a lot about designing and making 
clothes; enjoyed seeing her hats in the newspaper
The bad side: didn’t get paid much; hard work; had to work late; 
had to work in a bar as well
Lauren
The kind of work: publicity / public relations
The good side: paid travel expenses and lunch; learned a lot; 
experience helped when she applied for jobs
The bad side: worked very long hours; earned no money; had 
to work in a pub; had to do the work of her manager; wasn’t 
paid for using her own phone; was promised jobs at the end, but 
wasn’t offered one
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on pp.126–127, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of fair (= acceptable and appropriate in certain 
situations) and industry (= business) here.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and tell them to discuss 
the questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do some questions as a whole-class 
activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 65@@
4B
65
5	READING  focusing on key information
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions. If 
you had any part-time jobs while you were studying, you 
could tell the class about them.
b	 Focus on the task and the illustrations. Point out the 
range of jobs they do now, and explain that these people 
are quite well known in the UK and successful in their 
respective fields.
	 Now focus on the Glossary and go through it with 
the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the words and phrases in d.
A	 (Sir Ranulph Fiennes) It’s too long ago to know if I actually 
learned anything from the experience.
B	 (Russell Kane) I doubt that a Saturday job really teaches you 
anything.
C	 (Tony Ross) I learned the basics of working for money, like 
arriving on time and enjoying it no matter what.
D	 (Clive Stafford Smith) I’ve learned various important things 
from that job.
E	 (Adele Parks) I am good at talking and telling stories, and I 
think I learned it there…
	 Finally, ask who is the most positive about their part-
time job.
C	 Tony Ross
c	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to read the article 
again and answer the questions. Set a time limit. You 
might like to suggest the following technique to help 
Sts focus on the key information in each paragraph. Use 
question 1 as the example. Tell Sts to look at the question, 
and underline the key words / phrases, e.g. in 1 job badly 
paid. Then scan through each paragraph quickly and try 
to look for words / phrases which link to the ones you 
underlined in the question, e.g. in paragraph D paying a 
low wage.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  D    2  C    3  A    4  E    5  B
d	 Now tell Sts to read the definitions related to money and 
find the matching word or phrase in the article.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  cash    B  pocket money    C  earned    D  wage    E  checkout
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to try to remember the words 
and phrases before checking back with the article.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Focus on the unless box and go through it with the class.
	 Repeat for second conditional e 4.20.
	 Finally, focus on the First or second conditional box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  wouldn’t    2  get    3  were    4  tell    5  think    6  You might    
7  wouldn’t    8  didn’t    9  won’t    10  earned
b
1	 If I decide to stay at university, I’ll probably do a PhD…
2	 If you didn’t spend so much on clothes, you wouldn’t have 
to borrow money all the time.
3	 I think my sister and her boyfriend would get married sooner 
if they could afford to pay for the wedding.
4	 If I have time over the summer, I’ll apply for an internship.
5	 I think Andy might get a scholarship if he keeps on  
working hard.
6	 If we bought a bigger house, we could rent a couple of 
rooms to students.
7	 I might enjoy my job more if I didn’t have such awful 
colleagues.
8	 If I don’t like the job after six months, I won’t stay.
9	 My tutor says I must attend all the seminars if I don’t want to 
fail my exams.
 10	 I’d get more job offers if I was / were better qualified.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 4.21  This is an audio dictation to help Sts focus on 
the structure of first conditional sentences. Focus on the 
instructions and then play the audio once the whole way 
through for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board.
e 4.21
1	 If you don’t have any work experience, apply for an internship.
2	 If you don’t speak English, you won’t be able to get a job abroad.
3	 If you’re asked to an interview, make sure you wear smart clothes.
4	 If you make spelling mistakes on your CV, it’ll give a bad 
impression.
5	 If you use a social media site, you’ll have more chance of 
finding work.
	 Finally, ask the whole class what they think of the advice.
d	 Focus on the instructions. Now focus on the example and 
show how the prompt for 1 has been transformed into a 
second conditional. Give Sts time to think about how to 
transform the other four sentences, and what they would 
do in each situation and why.
	 When Sts are ready, put them in pairs or small groups, and 
get them to compare what they would do and give their 
reasons.
	 Get feedback from different pairs or groups.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to write out their sentences before 
they tell them to each other.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 66@@
66 4B
And, er, and it’s been going well ever since.It’s really fabulous. I’m 
improving all the time. Er, I have some lovely friends here. But it is 
tiring and the competition is really high. There are lots of singers 
out in London who, who are really talented. 
I	 But while Milly is following her dream, isn’t it difficult being a full-
time student in London, one of Europe’s most expensive cities? 
M	 It is, absolutely, it’s very expensive and so I’ve had to have a part-
time job all the way through my studies. I’ve been working for six 
years alongside my training. At the moment, I’m an usher at the 
Wigmore Hall and I’ve been there for three years now. 
I	 So what does a concert hall usher do?
M	 We mainly look after the audience when there are concerts and 
we do jobs such as checking tickets, and we’re there in case 
there’s a fire or emergency.
I	 In fact, many music students work as ushers and most of them 
dream of being on stage themselves one day. But for Milly, this 
opportunity came a little sooner than expected, in July twenty 
seventeen. 
M	 Well, I had a call on the Wednesday evening and John Gilhooly, 
who’s the director of the hall, told me that he’d like me to step in 
for a concert on the Saturday. So, I had a few days to prepare, but 
there was a rehearsal first thing on Thursday morning, so I stayed 
up until probably one in the morning that night desperately 
learning all the music. Um, I found the words particularly tricky 
actually − so, er, I mean a lot of the pieces were in French and 
German − so I got cracking straight away.
I	 And after just three days of preparation, Milly took to the stage. 
But did the audience know she was standing in for a singer who 
was ill?
M	 There was an announcement made at the beginning of the 
concert, which was lovely because I, I think the whole audience 
was on my side and everyone wanted me to do well. 
I	 And it didn’t take Milly long to impress with her voice.
M	 …there was a great applause everyone was smiling and clapping 
and I did have a feeling that I’d done well.
I	 And the audience weren’t the only ones to take notice.
M	 So, after the concert everything went quiet for a couple of weeks, 
and life just went back to normal, um, and then just out of the 
blue, er, The Times asked whether they could do an article on me 
about what had happened and, um, it was a really nice story, so, 
um, I think it really warmed people’s hearts and, er, and it was 
nice to make people smile. So, um, that day all of these different 
news channels got in touch…and I went to the BBC, and did an 
interview for them and then I met Sky as well and, um, it was 
really exciting. I must’ve done five or six interviews in the same 
day. And, er, and then I remember the next morning, um, the 
Evening Standard had, er, had bought out their, their newspaper 
and I saw my face on the front cover and when I got on to the 
Tube everyone was reading that paper, so I saw about a hundred 
Millies down the carriage − that, and that was, that was really 
surreal and I think that, that was when it had sunk in a little bit. 
Um, because the most exciting part for me was getting to sing 
in the Wigmore Hall along all these fabulous singers that I really 
admire and look up to, um, but then I, and I sort of hadn’t focused 
on the media side as much so, er, yeah, it was, it was a lovely 
occasion.
I	 But has this opportunity helped Milly’s career?
M	 I think it has. I think, um, it’s given me a boost. It’s made me really 
inspired and it’s made me work harder over the last year, but 
actually life carries on and I still have a lot that I want to work on. 
My voice is nowhere near perfect and I’m my biggest critic but it’s, 
it was nice to know that someone had me in mind and wanted 
to encourage me, so fingers crossed things will carry on that 
positively. 
I	 And does she still work at the Wigmore Hall?
M	 I still work there as an usher. It’s still really expensive living in 
London and, and every now and again someone comes in and 
asks ‘Are you going to be performing here soon?’ And I just have 
to, I just have to tell them that hopefully soon, hopefully soon 
because you never know what people are planning, um, but it 
was a lovely, it was a lovely story when it happened.
6	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the instructions and the flow chart. Make 
clear that all Sts should answer the first question about 
part-time / holiday jobs. If they answer ‘yes’, they should 
continue with the following questions, and then follow 
whichever route is appropriate (studying or working). 
If they answer ‘no’ to the first question, they should go 
straight to whichever of the second section applies 
to them.
	 Put Sts in pairs. Monitor while Sts interview each other. 
Correct any pronunciation errors they make when they 
use the vocabulary they have practised in the lesson, and 
help them with any new vocabulary they need. Make a 
note of any common mistakes, and have a correction spot 
at the end of the activity.
	 Get some feedback from a few individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to interview you first.
7	r  VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch an interview with a young 
woman, Milly Forrest, whose part-time job changed her 
life. Give Sts time to read the two questions.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the questions.
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts know what an usher is (= a 
person who shows people where to sit in a church, public 
hall, etc.). Model and drill its pronunciation /ˈʌʃə/. You 
might want to tell Sts that the Wigmore Hall is a famous 
concert hall in central London. It was built in 1901 and 
has 552 seats. It specializes in small orchestral concerts 
(chamber music) and solo performances. it is also  
well known for encouraging talented young performers at 
the beginning of their careers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any lexis before Sts watch the video.
She wants to be a classical singer.
While she was working part-time as an usher at the Wigmore 
Hall, Milly was asked to go on stage at short notice (in fact, 
because one of the performers was ill). The concert was a 
success and her story appeared in the press, which was good 
for her future career, and has inspired her to carry on.
A part-time job that changed a student’s life
I = interviewer, M = Milly Forrest
I	 Since it was first established in eighteen eighty-two, the Royal 
College of Music in London has trained many of the world’s most 
promising young musicians.  
This is Milly Forrest, a twenty-four-year-old Masters student who 
is training to be a classical singer at the Royal College. 
Today, Milly has a rehearsal and practice performance with her 
friend and accompanist, Joe. Many of the students here have 
already been playing and performing for years. And Milly is no 
different. 
M	 So, I’ve been singing from about the age of seven. For as long 
as I can remember…I’ve always loved music. Um, I’m not from 
a very musical family, um, so I’m not really sure where my voice 
has come from but, yeah, from an early age I, I knew that I loved 
being on stage and loved performing.
I	 She knew that if she won a place at the Royal College of Music, it 
would be a real chance to turn her passion into a profession.
M	 I had decided to, to do a Masters at the Royal College of Music 
probably three years ago…and when I got in − because it’s all 
audition-based − when I got in, er, I thought ‘Oh, OK, well maybe 
I’ve got a good chance then’.  
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 67@@
4B
67
4B
d	 Focus on the Useful language: writing a CV, covering 
letter, or LinkedIn profile box and go through it with the 
class. You could tell Sts that if the company abbreviation 
ends with a full stop, e.g. Apple Inc., then they should only 
use one full stop at the end of the sentence, e.g. A few 
years ago I worked for Apple Inc.
	 Tell Sts they are looking for a job, so they are going to 
write a profile for a website like LinkedIn. If they would like 
to do a real profile or update one they already have, they 
can go to the website and then print out their profile to 
give in.
	 Go through the plan with the class, highlighting that a 
summary should be brief and give a lot of information 
in just a few words. Sts should use Kate’s profile as 
their model to help them. If Sts have not had any work 
experience, tell them to invent the details.
	 Remind Sts to use the Useful language and Vocabulary 
Bank Study and work on p.157.
e	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their profile, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Sts should check their profile for mistakes before giving 
it in.
b	 Now focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–10.
	 Go through them with Sts and make sure they 
understand them.
	 Play the video again the whole way through, and get Sts 
to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind them to 
correct the false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 F (She is studying at the Royal College of Music.)
2	 F (She isn’t from a very musical family and she doesn’t know 
where her voice has come from.)
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (She looks after the audience, checks tickets, etc.)
6	 F (She had three days to prepare.)
7	 F (The audience smiled and clapped a lot.)
8	 F (After the concert everything went back to normal.)
9	 T
 10	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
8	WRITING  a LinkedIn profile
	 In this writing lesson, Sts practise writing a profile to post 
on LinkedIn or other career networking websites.
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A LinkedIn profile on p.118.
a	 Ask Sts if they have ever used LinkedIn or similar websites. 
If they have, ask if they found the website(s) helpful. 
Why (not)?
	 Now go through the instructions with the class. Focus on 
the beginning of the profile and put Sts in pairs to discuss 
the questions.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 Give Sts time to read the rest of the profile to check their 
answers in a. Tell them not to worry about the mistakes in 
the profile at this stage.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Shopping Spy Ltd is a website that helps shoppers find good 
shops and sales in London.
She is studying for a degree in Communications and Marketing.
c	 Now tell Sts to look at the spelling mistakes underlined in 
Kate’s profile and to correct them.
	 Check answers.
currantly  currently
Comunications  Communications
gradaute  graduate
profesion  profession
expierence  experience
collegues  colleagues
asisted  assisted
brouhgt  brought
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 68@@
68
	3&4	Revise and Check
‘Well, why?’ and ‘How come?’ and ‘Why is that?’ And it was very 
annoying.
I	 Have you changed much?
E	 Um, I’m still very inquisitive, but I kind of ask more of why, like, I 
want to know more about your intentions as opposed to just why 
is something the way that it is.
2
I = interviewer, K = Keith
I	 Are you good at taking photos?
K	 I’m OK at taking photos. I have this technique now where instead 
of taking a photo with my camera, I’ll take a video, um, and then 
I’ll take screen, screenshots from the video stills. For example, 
if my son’s playing football, whenever I try and take a photo, I’ll 
always miss really what I was trying to capture, but by taking a 
video I can get various stills of the exact shot that I want, so, so 
yeah, I’m OK.
I	 What kind of photos do you take?
K	 Um, I take a lot of photos of my children, um, I like a lot of action 
shots, so I’ll, I'll take photos of them doing things. Um, I like taking 
photos of nice places when I go anywhere, so scenic photos, that 
kind of thing.
I	 Do you have a camera, or do you use your phone?
K	 I always use my phone. Um, I do have a camera, but I’ve probably 
not used it in about five years. It was quite a good one as well, 
really expensive, but no, just the convenience of using my phone, 
and to be honest, it probably takes better photos.
3
I = interviewer, S = Shreeya
I	 How worried are you about plastic pollution?
S	 Um, yes, I would say I’m quite concerned about plastic pollution, 
um, the effect it has on sea life, the environment in general, um, 
and I think it’s good that businesses are taking it more seriously, 
too.
I	 Are you doing anything to try to use fewer plastic products?
S	 I tend to not…while holding a plastic cup, um, can I put this 
down for that,…yes, if I’m shopping, I’ll try to bring, um, a bag of 
my own, um, and if I have packed lunches for example, I’ll reuse 
the same container and I have a water bottle as well, so I don’t get 
plastic water, I, um, tend to refill it.
4
I = interviewer, E = Emma
I	 What did you study at university?
E	 Yeah, I’m studying at university now.
I	 What are you studying?
E	 Osteopathy.
I	 Why did you choose that subject?
E	 Um, because I used to be a competitive swimmer and, um, we, I 
used to get recurrent injuries and I was seeing a physiotherapist 
and I wasn’t really getting anywhere, and then somebody 
suggested to me to see an osteopath. I went to see an osteopath 
and my injuries improved really quickly and it inspired me to be 
an osteopath.
5
I = interviewer, T = Thomas
I	 Have you ever had a part-time job?
T	 Yeah, I’ve, you know, when I was in graduate school I bartended, 
waited tables, um, you know, for, for part-time.
I	 Did you enjoy them?
T	 I loved them, I loved them, each, each one, um, had different 
things, but it’s part of my personality I would say. I’ve never had a 
job where I said I didn’t like it, you know, I always tried to find the 
good in it. And when you’re bartending and waitering, you meet a 
lot of interesting people, you have a lot of good conversations, and 
you, you find, um, you meet a lot of people who, you know, I would 
say you’d see some of the bad of humanity and how they treat 
others, probably more so as a waiter than a bartender, you know.
I	 So people often complained, like about the bill?
T	 Yeah, and the service , and if their food’s late, yeah. It’s interesting. 
It was a lot of fun though. I had a good time.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4 
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  c    5  a    6  a    7  b    8  b    9  c    10  c    
11  a    12  c    13  b    14  b    15  c
VOCABULARY
a	 1  teenager    2  in his / her early twenties    3  toddler    
4  retired    5  in his / her late fifties    6  in his / her mid-forties
b	 1  photographer    2  flash    3  in front of    4  bottom right-
hand    5  background
c	 1  refuse collector    2  cardboard    3  lid    
4  bin bag    5  wrapper    6  landfill site
d	 1  covering    2  residence    3  qualifications    4  permit    
5  lectures    6  vacancies    7  attend    8  faculty
PRONUNCIATION
c	 1  jar /dʒ/    2  lecture /tʃ/    3  work permit /ɜː/    
4  vacancy /eɪ/    5  apply /aɪ/
d	 1  retired    2  opposite    3  photographer    4  recycle    
5  professor
CAN YOU understand this text?
b
1	 F (He sells food in boxes or jars and people bring their own 
containers.)
2	 F (They haven’t always been interested in environmental 
issues before.)
3	 T
4	 F (There’s a plastic-free shop in London.)
5	 F (The food industry is no longer saying that recycling will 
solve the problem.)
6	 T
7	 T
8	 T
r  CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    2  b    3  c    4  c    5  b
e 4.22
1
I = interviewer, E= Erica
I	 What kind of child were you?
E	 What kind of child was I? I was a very inquisitive child. I was the 
‘why’ child, so anything you told me, I always responded with, 
Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 69@@
	1A	
69
5A
	5A	 Screen time
	 Play the audio once the whole way through, pausing after 
each extract.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
a  5    b  4    c  3    d  2    e  6    f  1
e 5.1
1	 This is World Update. I’m Katy Lee. Here are tonight’s top stories. 
The Prime Minister has just announced that spending on 
education is to be increased…
2	 A	 Johnson! Have you been sleeping on the job again?
	
B	 No, Ms Lewis. I was just, er, resting my eyes.
	
A	 But there’s a pillow on your desk!
	
B	 Uh-oh! I did it again!
3	 A	 Yes…Yes…Where? OK, we’re on our way.
	
B	 What is it?
	
A	 They’ve found a body. Next to the canal.
	
B	 Do they think it’s her?
	
A	 They don’t know yet. Come on, let’s go.
4	 Here, deep in the African forest, lives the green mamba, one of 
the world’s most poisonous snakes. It spends much of its time in 
the trees, and adults can grow to a length of over two metres…
5	 A	 Mark, welcome to the programme.
	
B	 Thanks, Jake. It’s a pleasure to be here.
	
A	 Now I know you’re over here promoting your latest film, and in 
a minute, I’m going to ask you about it, but first…
6	 Now Parker on the ball…to Lennon…now to Dempsey, making 
a run. Lennon finds Dempsey; he’s got room here…Dempsey! Oh 
my word! That changes everything!
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Television on p.158.
Vocabulary notes
Types of programme
There may be some programme types that Sts are not 
familiar with or that don’t have a specific name in their L1, 
e.g. sitcom, so try to give as many examples as you can, 
from for example Netflix, that Sts might recognize.
Phrasal verbs
Highlight that phrasal verbs 1–4 are separable, i.e. you can 
also put the particle after the noun, e.g. Please turn on the 
TV OR Please turn the TV on, and if the object is a pronoun, 
it must go between the verb and the particle, e.g. Please 
turn it on.
Remind Sts that they can also use switch on / off or switch 
over, but not switch up / down.
	 Focus on 1 Types of programme and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.2
Television
1 Types of programme
7	 advert
6	 cartoon
11	 chat show
5	 cookery programme
8	 current affairs programme
 G   present perfect simple
 V   television
 P   /w/, /v/, and /b/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is television. Sts begin with a 
vocabulary focus on different kinds of TV programmes 
and common phrasal verbs used to talk about television. 
This is followed by a pronunciation focus contrasting 
three consonant sounds that Sts sometimes confuse or 
have problems producing: /w/, /v/, and /b/. The theme 
of television continues and Sts listen to seven speakers 
describing how they watch TV (i.e. on a device or a TV, 
binge-watch, etc.) and what they watch. Sts then revise and 
consolidate some important uses of the present perfect 
simple and expand their knowledge of different adverbs 
typically used with this form.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read an article about 
the popularity of foreign-language drama series in the UK. 
The lesson ends with a speaking activity in which Sts 
consolidate the vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation by 
talking about different TV series that they have just finished 
watching, have seen many times, etc.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect simple p.160 
Communicative  Soap opera p.188 (instructions p.174)   
Vocabulary  Television p.212 (instructions p.203)
For students
Workbook  5A
Online Practice  5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
•  DO YOU HAVE A TV IN YOUR LIVING ROOM? HOW BIG IS IT? 
•  DO YOU HAVE ANY OTHER TVS IN YOUR HOUSE? WHERE? 
•  WHO WATCHES THE MOST TV IN YOUR HOUSE?
Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to answer the 
questions.
Get feedback from different Sts, and tell them about  
your TV(s).
1	VOCABULARY  television
a	 e 5.1  Books open. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
know what an extract is (= a short piece of writing, music, 
film, etc. taken from a longer whole). Model and drill its 
pronunciation /ˈekstrækt/.
	 Now focus on the types of TV programme and explain / 
elicit that a sitcom is a ‘situation comedy’ (= a TV comedy 
series in which a group of characters are involved in 
amusing situations, e.g. Friends, The Office, The Big Bang 
Theory, etc.). You might also want to point out the 
pronunciation of the adjective live /laɪv/ in live sport.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 70@@
5A
70 5A
2	PRONUNCIATION  /w/, /v/, and /b/
Pronunciation notes
/w/, /v/, and /b/
These three sounds can be problematic for learners from 
a number of different first languages, for example in 
German and many Slavonic languages w is pronounced 
/v/ rather than /w/, and in other languages the /w/ 
sound doesn’t really exist at all. Spanish speakers often 
have problems distinguishing between /v/ and /b/. It 
is important that all learners are able to perceive and 
produce all three sounds clearly. The first exercise reminds 
Sts of the three sounds using the sound pictures and 
the phonetic symbols. The next three exercises focus 
on learners distinguishing between and producing the 
different sounds.
a	 e 5.4  Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the words 
and sounds: witch /w/, vase /v/, and bag /b/.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 5 .4
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.46
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words and sound for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts to watch your lips as you say we, 
TV, and be. As you say each word, point to your lips, and 
then ask Sts to tell you how the lips were used to make each 
sound. Elicit that:
1	 for /w/ the lips make a ‘kissing’ shape
2	 for /v/ the top teeth are in contact with the bottom lip
3	 for /b/ the top and bottom lips are pressed together in 
a line
b	 e 5.5  Focus on the pairs of words and make sure Sts 
know what they mean.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen. 
	 Ask if they can hear the difference.
e 5.5
See words in Student’s Book on p.46
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each pair for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
c	 e 5.6  Now tell Sts that this time, they will only hear one 
of the words in each pair and they must circle the one 
they hear.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  a boat    2  b V    3  b berry    4  b win    5  b bull    6  a why    
7  a vet    8  a wine
e 5.6
1	 boat
2	 V
3	 berry
4	 win
5	 bull
10	 documentary
9	 drama
4	 live sport
13	 period drama
2	 quiz show
1	 reality show
12	 the news
3	 the weather forecast
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on the series, soaps, and sitcoms box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Finally, do Activation and put Sts in pairs to answer the 
question.
	 Then get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words and phrases 
and look at the photos. Can they remember all the types of 
programme?
EXTRA IDEA   Draw a picture of a TV and remote control 
on the board and elicit what the different parts are, i.e. the 
remote (control), the screen, the speakers, the stand.
	 Now focus on 2 Phrasal verbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.3
2 Phrasal verbs
1	 turn on the TV 
2	 turn off the TV 
3	 turn up the TV 
4	 turn down the TV
5	 the programme is on now
6	 turn over to another channel
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover 1–6 and try to remember 
the meaning of the phrasal verbs in the list.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and get Sts to ask and answer 
the questions in pairs.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. You could find out with a show 
of hands if there is a favourite type of TV programme in 
class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 71@@
71
	 Play the audio once, pausing after each speaker. Then 
elicit the programme or kind of programme they 
mention. You could ask Sts if they have seen any of 
the programmes mentioned. If Sts don’t know, explain 
what the programmes are about: MasterChef is a TV 
cookery competition; Mad Men is a US drama series set 
in an advertising agency in Madison Avenue, New York; 
Brideshead Revisited is a UK period drama series; Strictly 
Come Dancing is a TV dance show where viewers vote for 
their favourite couple.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. You may 
want to write the names of the four programmes on the 
board before Sts listen.
Speaker 1  D    Speaker 2  E    Speaker 3  C    Speaker 4  F    
Speaker 5  B    Speaker 6  G    Speaker 7  A
e 5.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
I = interviewer, M = man, W = woman
1 
I	 How do you watch TV programmes, on a television or on another 
device?
M	 I watch programmes on TV if I’m at home, or on my laptop, or on 
my iPad. I might watch something on my phone if I was…I don’t 
know…I suppose when something has happened on the news, I 
might watch it live, or something like that.
2 
I	 Do you ‘two-screen’ while watching TV? What kinds of things do 
you do?
W	 Yes, I can often be guilty of perhaps checking emails on my 
phone, or perhaps even doing a bit of online shopping while I’m 
watching TV. In fact, yesterday I was watching MasterChef – you 
know, the cookery competition – and I bought some small cake 
tins that you needed to make…to make a chocolate thing that 
one of the contestants was making.
3 
I	 Do you normally watch live TV or catch-up?
M	 Both, though nowadays I watch more catch-up. But I watch the 
news live, and football or tennis – Wimbledon – things like that.
4
I	 Have you ever binge watched a TV series? How many episodes 
did you watch in one go?
W	 I haven’t done it for a long time, but I did once watch eight 
episodes in one sitting of the American series Mad Men. But as I 
say, it was a long time ago.
5 
I	 Do you use a streaming service like Netflix? What do you like 
about it?
M	 I have Netflix and I also buy things off Amazon Prime Video – is 
that a streaming service? I don’t really use them for films, more 
for TV series, like old ones I missed when they first came out. 
For example, a few months ago, I watched all the episodes of 
Brideshead Revisited, the original series from the eighties, because 
I didn’t see it then, but I’d heard that it was very good.
6 
I	 How often do you watch YouTube, or online channels like Apple? 
What kinds of things do you watch?
W	 I sometimes watch YouTube – it’s usually if I have a problem with 
my laptop or my phone and I want to find out how to fix it, and I 
sometimes…I sometimes use it for watching people cook recipes. 
In fact, I’ve just watched someone preparing a fish dish because 
I’m going to cook it this evening.
6	 why
7	 vet
8	 wine
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A say one of 
the options from the pairs of words in b, and Sts B have to 
indicate which word he / she heard. 
Make sure Sts swap roles. 
Throughout the activity, monitor, acting as the ‘judge’ when 
two Sts don’t agree on what they said or heard.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 Give Sts time to practise the sentences. Remind them to 
focus on the correct pronunciation of the sounds for the 
pink letters in the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model and drill each sentence first, before 
getting Sts to practise saying them.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 answers
a	 Focus on the instructions. Then put Sts in pairs, A and B. 
Sts A start by describing photo 1 and then Sts B describe 
photo 2. 
	 Finally, they discuss how the photos illustrate the way in 
which watching TV has changed over time.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to quickly revise vocabulary for 
describing a photo in Vocabulary Bank Photography  
on p.155.
b	 Focus on the task and the questionnaire. Before Sts do 
the task, you might want to focus on the definitions on 
the right and explain / elicit the meaning of slang (= very 
informal words and expressions that are more common 
in spoken language) and an idiom (= a group of words 
whose meaning is different from the meanings of the 
individual words). Point out that the first one (device) has 
been done for them.
	 Now give Sts time to read the questionnaire and complete 
the definitions with the highlighted words and phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation. You might want 
to point out that the plural of device is pronounced 
/dɪˈvaɪsɪz/.
2	 watch a TV programme or series on one device while using 
another at the same time
3	 a service that allows you to watch television programmes 
after the time when they were originally broadcast
4	 watch several episodes of a TV series one after the other
5	 a method of sending or receiving data over a computer 
network
6	 a television station
7	 a person who takes part in a game, quiz, or competition
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
c	 e 5.7  Focus on the photos and elicit what kinds of 
programmes Sts think they show. 
5A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 72@@
5A
72 5A
1	 has (the present perfect for a period of time from the past 
until now)
2	 bought (the past simple for finished past time)
3	 for (the present perfect for a period of time from the past  
until now)
4	 ago (the past simple for finished past time)
5	 just (the present perfect with just for recent past time)
6	 voted (the present perfect for past experiences without  
saying when)
7	 was (the past simple for finished past time)
e 5.8
1	 When something has happened on the news, I might watch  
it live.
2	 Yesterday I was watching MasterChef and I bought some small 
cake tins.
3	 I haven’t done it for a long time.
4	 For example, a few months ago, I watched all the episodes of 
Brideshead Revisited.
5	 I’ve just watched someone preparing a fish dish.
6	 I have voted several times for contestants, when they’ve done a 
really good dance.
7	 Once, I was addicted to a TV show.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check 
what the missing words are. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
time to discuss why each tense is used. Finally, elicit answers.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.140.
Grammar notes
Present perfect simple
At Intermediate Plus level, Sts will have seen the present 
perfect simple several times, and will have contrasted 
it with the past simple, but, along with future forms, it 
is an area where they make a lot of mistakes and need 
frequent practice, mainly because some of its uses do not 
correspond exactly with similar tenses in other languages. 
The most problematic use for Sts of most nationalities is 
with How long…? and for and since, where their L1 may 
use a present form, and Sts have tended to say, e.g. I work 
here for five years.
	 Focus on Revise the basics and use the chart to remind 
Sts of the form of the present perfect. 
	 Then focus on the example sentences and play audio 
e 5.9 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Refer Sts to the irregular past participles in the Irregular 
verbs list on p.165.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs. Encourage them to use contracted forms rather 
than full forms in b.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  for    2  I’ve already had    3  I’ve never been    4  since we were 
at university    5  already    6  they’ve been married    7  have you 
been    8  all his life    9  we went    10  just
b	
1	 A  Did you see that wildlife documentary last night?
	
B  No, I missed it.
2	 A  When did you get here?
	
B  I arrived at the weekend, so I’ve only been here for a few 
days.
7 
I	 Do you ever interact with TV shows by voting for contestants?
W	 I Not very often, but I do like Strictly Come Dancing and I have 
voted several times for contestants, when they’ve done a really 
good dance. And once, I was addicted to a TV show where the 
contestants were auditioning for a part in a West End musical, and 
I really liked one young singer, so I voted for him every week. And 
eventually, he won, and I remember shouting and jumping off the 
sofa when the results were announced!
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
that Speaker 1 answers question 1 in b, Speaker 2 
question 2, etc.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to write how each speaker 
watches TV. You could pause the audio after each speaker.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner and discuss how each 
speaker answered the question.
	 Check answers. You might want to point out how the 
last speaker uses the auxiliary do to add emphasis to her 
sentence ‘…, but I do like Strictly Come Dancing’.
Speaker 1
He watches TV programmes on a television, laptop, or iPad at 
home. And if he’s out, maybe on his phone.
Speaker 2
She often checks emails or does online shopping while 
watching TV.
Speaker 3
He watches live TV and catch-up, but more catch-up.
Speaker 4
She doesn’t binge-watch very often, but she once watched 8 
episodes of a series (Mad Men).
Speaker 5
He uses a streaming service, like Netflix. He likes being able to 
watch old films and TV series that he didn’t watch when they 
first came out.
Speaker 6
She watches YouTube if she has a problem and wants to find out 
how to fix it and for recipes.
Speaker 7
She has sometimes voted for contestants on Strictly Come 
Dancing, and once voted for a contestant who was 
auditioning for a TV show.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Sts now take turns to interview each other and find out 
about their partner’s television habits when watching a TV 
series. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to ask and answer the 
questions in b, giving as much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   If there’s time, the class could interview you.
4	GRAMMAR  present perfect simple
a	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to see if 
they can remember any of the missing words.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and to say why each 
tense was used.
b	 e 5.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and elicit why either the present perfect or 
the past simple is used in each one.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 73@@
73
e	 Focus on the instructions and three titles. Make sure 
Sts know the meaning of foreign. Model and drill its 
pronunciation.
	 Give Sts time to read the first paragraph or read it aloud to 
the class.
	 Check the answer.
Why is the UK in love with foreign TV series?
f	 Now focus on the Glossary and go through it with the 
class. Go through 1–5, making sure Sts understand all  
the lexis.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and choose the correct 
options.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  b    2  a    3  a    4  c    5  b
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
g	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the question.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if foreign TV series or films in their 
country are dubbed or subtitled. Then ask which they prefer 
and why.
6	SPEAKING
a	 Give Sts time to complete as many boxes as possible.
b	 Focus on the Expressing enthusiasm box and go 
through it with the class. Make sure Sts understand all the 
expressions, especially the informal phrase to be hooked 
on sth (= enjoying sth very much, so that you want to do 
it, see it, etc. as much as possible). Model and drill the 
intonation of the phrases, to show Sts how we use extra 
stress on the key words to demonstrate enthusiasm, 
e.g. I think it’s absolutely brilliant! I adore the main the 
character, etc.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and give them time 
to discuss the questions in each box they completed.
	 Monitor and help where necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Write the following statements on the 
board and get Sts to discuss them in groups. 
1	 YOU ENJOY A SERIES MORE IF YOU WATCH IT WEEKLY AND DON’T	
	
BINGE-WATCH. 
2	 CHILDREN UNDER THE AGE OF FIVE SHOULDN’T WATCH ANY 	
	
TELEVISION AT ALL. 
3	 TV SCREENS SHOULD BE BANNED FROM BARS AND RESTAURANTS. 
4	 YOU ENJOY WATCHING LIVE SPORT ON TV MORE IF YOU WATCH IT 	
	
WITH OTHER PEOPLE. 
5	 BOOK ADAPTATIONS WORK BETTER AS TV SERIES THAN AS FILMS. 
6	 THE NEWS ON TV IS NOT OBJECTIVE, AS MOST CHANNELS ARE	
	
CONTROLLED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
Get some feedback from various groups.
3	 A  Have you checked the match results?
	
B  It hasn’t finished yet. It started late.
4	 A  Bad news – Ben’s had a bike accident.
	
B  Oh no! When did that happen?
5	 B  I think she’s just gone out for lunch.
6	 A  Have you ever beaten him at tennis?
	
B  No, but I won a set last time.
7	 A  Has Marcus already started his new job?
	
B  Yes, his first day was last Monday.
8	 A  How long have you had a motorbike?
	
B  Not long! I bought it six months ago.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the statements and the example. Tell Sts 
that they should only change the bold words in the 
statements to make them true for themselves.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to think about their sentences.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss each one and ask 
each other follow-up questions.
	 Highlight that Sts should use the present perfect simple 
at the beginning, but if they later refer to a specific 
time in the past, they need to use the past simple, e.g. 
I’ve watched about four hours of TV, I think. I watched 
MasterChef and…
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could model the activity first by 
choosing one of the statements and then eliciting follow-up 
questions.
5	READING  speculating based on visual clues
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the images and the instructions and get Sts to 
do the matching activity in pairs. Tell them to try to find 
clues, e.g. what languages the original titles look like or 
the actors, to help them.
 !   Don’t ask Sts if they have seen any of the dramas as they 
will be discussing this later.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication TV dramas, A on p.108, B on p.112.
	 Tell the class that Sts A will be reading about TV dramas 
A–D, and Sts B about TV dramas E–H. 
	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. You might want to explain / elicit 
the meaning of where it’s set in b.
	 When Sts have finished a and b, they should do c and take 
turns to tell each other about each series.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
	 Check answers to b.
A  Denmark    B  Spain    C  France    D  Italy    E  France    
F  Sweden / Denmark    G  Argentina    H  Brazil
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you have seen any of 
the series, you could tell the class.
5A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 74@@
	1A	
74
	5B	 A quiet life?
1	READING & SPEAKING  understanding 
problems and solutions
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the 
introduction to the article. Give Sts time to read it and 
answer questions 1–3.
	 Check the answer to the first question and elicit opinions 
for the other two.
1	 Because people are leaving to go and work in the cities and 
birth rates are falling.
b	 Focus on the instructions and phrases A–D, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Give Sts time to read the first paragraph and complete 
the gaps.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts, in pairs, to describe the 
photographs before they read the rest of the article.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  B    2  D    3  C    4  A
c	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
what a mayor is (= the head of a town, usually elected). 
Model and drill its pronunciation /meə/.
	 Give Sts time to read the second paragraph and complete 
the tourist information.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
The mayor’s idea was to charge people an entrance fee to visit 
the town.
Entrance fee:
Monday–Saturday €3
Sunday and public holidays €5
You can also book a private tour and you can buy refreshments.
d	 Now tell Sts to read the rest of the article and then answer 
questions 1–4.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could tell Sts that there are now more than 
120 Albergo Diffuso.
1	 It was in ruins, with only 70 inhabitants.
2	 He was a Swedish-Italian millionaire who visited the village. 
His idea was to buy the houses and restore the buildings as 
hotel rooms.
3	 He buys everything for the hotel rooms from local people, 
including food and room accessories, so he is keeping local 
crafts and the economy alive.
4	 Now people are using the houses, and the economy has been 
revived; the village is alive again.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the three questions.
	 Monitor and help with any vocabulary.
 G   present perfect continuous
 V   the country
 P   vowel sounds, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The country, nature, and farming are the main topics of this 
lesson. In the first half of the lesson, Sts read an article about 
some Italian villages which are becoming ghost towns and 
what some local mayors are doing to prevent this from 
happening. Sts then discuss what they read and whether 
any of the solutions are good and come up with other ideas 
to help towns and villages survive. Next, Sts learn words and 
phrases related to the country. These are then recycled and 
practised in a pronunciation focus on vowels that can be 
pronounced in different ways.
In the second half, Sts listen to two British people who 
moved to the country and had very different experiences. 
This leads to Sts talking about someone they know who has 
moved from the city to the country or vice versa. They also 
imagine themselves moving and what they would enjoy and 
miss most. Next, they revise the form and uses of the present 
perfect continuous, and then practise it orally with the 
correct sentence stress in the pronunciation focus. Finally, Sts 
write an email in which they practise the grammar from the 
lesson.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect continuous p.161 
Communicative  Why did you write…? p.189-190  
(instructions p.174) 
Vocabulary  The country p.213 (instructions p.203)
For students
Workbook  5B
Online Practice  5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
VILLAGE   TOWN   CITY
Get Sts, in pairs, to try to write a definition for each word. 
Check their definitions. You may want to tell them that in 
Britain a town has to have a cathedral in order to be called 
a city.
a village = a small community in a rural area
a town = a place with many shops, houses, etc. where people 
live and work. It is larger than a village, but smaller than a city.
a city = a large, important town
Elicit names of towns, cities, and villages in the region where 
you are working, and if your Sts are from different places, do 
a class survey to find out whether they live in a village, town, 
or city. Also ask Do you like living there? If not, where would you 
prefer to live?
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 75@@
75
e	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The country on p.159.
Vocabulary notes
Nature
Make sure Sts practise the pronunciation of the heading 
Nature /ˈneɪtʃə/ as many Sts have problems with 
this word.
Point out that a wood is a smaller area than a forest. Wood 
is also the material that comes from trees.
Elicit that the adjective from mud is muddy.
On a farm
Elicit that a male cow is a bull (Sts should know this word, 
as it is the example word in the Sound Chart for the /ʊ/ 
sound).
Highlight the silent b in lambs. You may want to point out 
that we often use cock instead of cockerel.
	 Focus on 1 Nature and get Sts to do a individually or in 
pairs.
	 e 5.12  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.12
The country
1 Nature
19	 branch
15	 bush
9	 cliff
14	 fence
6	 field
8	 gate
17	 grass
4	 hedge
3	 hill 
11	 lake 
2	 leaf
7	 mud
1	 path
10	 rocks
16	 sticks
13	 stones
18	 stream
20	 valley
12	 well
5	 wood
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Get Sts to do Activation by covering the words, looking 
at the photos, and saying the words. They could do this 
individually or in pairs.
	 Focus on the the country and the countryside box and 
go through it with the class.
EXTRA IDEA   Write the following pairs of words on the board 
and get Sts to say what the difference is.
A BUSH AND A TREE; A FENCE AND A HEDGE; A HILL AND A MOUNTAIN;  
A LAKE AND A STREAM; A GATE AND A DOOR; A PATH AND A ROAD; 
ROCKS AND STONES; A STICK AND A BRANCH; A FOREST AND A WOOD
	 Now focus on 2 On a farm and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs.
	 e 5.13  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could find out 
with a show of hands which village most Sts would like  
to visit.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do all or some of the questions as a  
whole-class activity.
2	VOCABULARY  the country
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit ideas and 
opinions. Encourage Sts to use It could be or It might be 
when they speculate.
b	 e 5.10  Tell Sts to listen to a woman talking about her 
life in the village in the photo. They must check their 
answer to a.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
The photo shows a village in Turkey.
e 5.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
I used to live in a village in the province of Sakarya. It was an 
amazing place to live – just so beautiful. There’s a large lake nearby 
and the hills are covered with pine trees – people go to picnic 
there. The coast is also not far away. When I lived there, it was as if 
time had stood still. People worked in the fields. Some things were 
annoying…there was no running water or electricity – we had our 
own well and generator – and there was only one shop. We had to 
wait for a minibus from the nearest town to bring fresh bread and 
the newspapers every morning! I worked in a school in a nearby 
town – in fact, the one that sent the bread and papers. I used to 
think, when I was living there, that there wasn’t much choice of 
things to do, things to buy, but I made my own entertainment – I 
played tennis, went for walks, played the piano. In the end, I had to 
move for work, to Istanbul, which is the biggest and noisiest city in 
Turkey, and now I really miss the fresh food and fresh fish, the peace 
and quiet.
c	 Give Sts time to read the four questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs before playing the audio 
again and give them time to see if they can remember any 
information from the first listening.
	 Now play the audio again. You could pause it after each 
question is answered to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
1	 It was very beautiful; the coast wasn’t far away.
2	 There was no running water or electricity, and only one shop. 
There wasn’t much choice of things to do and buy.
3	 In Istanbul
4	 The fresh food, fresh fish, the peace and quiet
d	 e 5.11  Before playing the audio, get Sts to see if they can 
remember what the missing words are.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand all the lexis.
1  lake    2  hills    3  fields    4  well
e 5.11
1	 There’s a large lake nearby…
2	 …the hills are covered with pine trees…
3	 People worked in the fields.
4	 …we had our own well and generator…
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 76@@
76
a	 Focus on the pairs of words. Give Sts two or three minutes 
to decide if the vowel sounds are the same or different in 
each pair of words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit answers to a before playing the 
audio.
b	 e 5.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and elicit the sound picture for each one.
(sound words shown in brackets)
1	 S (tree /iː/)
2	 D: bush (bull /ʊ/), mud (up /ʌ/)
3	 S (car /ɑː/)
4	 D: grow (phone /əʊ/), cow (owl /aʊ/)
5	 S (fish /ɪ/)
6	 D: rock (clock /ɒ/), stone (phone /əʊ/)
7	 D: lamb (cat /æ/), grass (car /ɑː/)
8	 S (tree /iː/)
e 5.15
See words in Student’s Book on p.51
	 Finally, get Sts to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before getting Sts to practise saying the 
words, play the audio again, pausing after each pair of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  listening for point  
of view
a	 Focus on the title of the article, From the city to the country 
and sometimes back again, and the introduction. Read it as 
a class and then do the questions as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the photos and tell Sts that Liz Jones and 
Bob Ayres moved to the country. Before Sts read each 
paragraph to find out why these people moved to the 
country, you might want to explain / elicit the meaning 
and pronunciation of idyllic /ɪˈdɪlɪk/ (= peaceful and 
beautiful) and shooting here (= a situation in which a 
person is shot with a gun).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Liz
She wanted somewhere quieter, simpler, more beautiful to live.
Bob
He and his wife had stressful jobs; they had often talked about 
moving to the country.
c	 e 5.16  Focus on the instructions and the extracts. You 
might want to explain / elicit the meaning of shooting in 
Liz’s extract (= the sport of shooting animals and birds 
with guns). Point out the nesting herons in the photo.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
	 Check answers.
e 5.13
2 On a farm
5	 barn
3	 cockerel
9	 cow
1	 donkey
6	 farmhouse
4	 hens
7	 lambs
2	 sheep
8	 tractor
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.14  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
1  grow    2  planted    3  harvested    4  pick
e 5.14
In the UK, especially in the east of England, a lot of farmers grow 
cereals – for example, wheat – vegetables, and fruit. Most crops are 
planted in the early spring and are harvested in the summer, for 
example, wheat in August, and most potatoes from June onwards. 
Soft fruits like strawberries are usually ripe in June and July, and 
many farms invite people to come and pick their own fruit.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Go through the text with Sts, checking that they 
understand all the words in bold. If necessary, use Sts’ 
L1 to clarify. Find out if any words are similar in your Sts’ 
language(s). If so, do they mean the same?
EXTRA IDEA   Depending on where your Sts live and what 
kind of farming / countryside there is locally, you may want 
to teach some more words and phrases to help them to talk 
about their local situation.
	 For Activation, get Sts to cover the words in a, look at the 
photos, and say the words.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
3	PRONUNCIATION  vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
In this focus, Sts distinguish between a number of 
common vowel sounds which should be familiar to them 
from previous levels of English File. The main problem Sts 
have is when a vowel or a combination of letters can be 
pronounced in different ways, as in the examples in the 
exercise.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 77@@
77
sheep were less destructive to the land, so we kept with the sheep, 
better for the land. So we started with four sheep, which we kept in 
the garden at first, and then we bought a field, and then we bought 
ten more sheep and sold six for meat, and that was the start of our 
sheep business. Now we’ve got sixty-eight sheep and seven fields. 
At the moment, we’ve got twenty-five sheep that are expecting 
lambs, ready for the next season. In addition to that, we’ve got 
free-range hens which we rescued from battery farms. It hasn’t 
all been easy. Um, it rains a lot where we live now, and um, it gets 
incredibly muddy, and of course the work with the animals – it can 
get physically very hard. At first, we had a little bit of resistance – 
there were some local farmers who didn’t really like newcomers – 
but we’ve always employed local people and we buy food in the 
local shops, and we try and engage with the local community as 
much as we possibly can. We sell our meat and eggs to neighbours 
and friends, and we produce wool from the sheep as well now. We 
haven’t really ever considered moving back, because we really enjoy 
it. We loved life in the city, but we would never think about going 
back now.
e	 Give Sts time to look at 1–8 and see if they can remember 
who each one refers to.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and mark each 
question with the person’s initials or Bo for both.
	 Check answers.
1  L    2  L    3  B    4  B    5  L    6  Bo    7  B    8  B
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
g	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to go to Communication 
City or country? on p.106.
	 Then tell Sts they should answer the top question Do you 
know anyone who... and then one set of questions if they 
live in a large town or city or the other set of questions 
if they live in a village or small town in the country. You 
could demonstrate the activity by answering one set of 
questions first.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do a quick revision of the form of the 
second conditional, which Sts revised in Lesson 4B. Write on 
the board: 
IF I MOVED TO THE COUNTRY, I’D MISS THE RESTAURANTS AND SHOPS.  
I WOULD ENJOY THE PEACE AND QUIET.
	 Monitor and help with any vocabulary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
5	GRAMMAR  present perfect continuous
a	 Focus on the photos and what the people are saying. Get 
Sts to circle the correct forms.
b	 Get Sts to compare with a partner and explain their 
choices.
	 Check answers.
1	 I’m fixing (We use the present continuous for actions that 
are in progress now. The man is in the middle of fixing the 
tractor.)
2	 I’ve been working (We use the present perfect continuous for 
continuous or repeated actions that started in the past and 
have either just finished or are still in progress. Here the man 
has been working in the fields all day and has just stopped.)
Liz
1  shop    2  Mars    3  hated    4  view    5  stars
Bob
6  donkey, horse    7  sheep    8  muddy    9  hard    10  farmers
e 5.16
Liz
1	 you have to drive miles to find a shop
2	 they look at you as if you were from Mars
3	 another thing I hated was the shooting
4	 an amazing view and a pair of nesting herons
5	 I sat outside underneath millions of stars
Bob
6	 my wife always wanted to have a donkey or a horse
7	 so we started with four sheep
8	 it gets incredibly muddy
9	 it can get physically very hard
10	 there were some local farmers who didn’t really like newcomers
	 Now play the audio again for Sts just to listen to the 
extracts and decide who stayed and who moved back to 
the city.
	 Either do the question as a whole-class activity, or get Sts 
to discuss it in pairs and get some feedback. Encourage 
Sts to give their reasons, but don’t tell them if they are 
correct. You could get Sts to show their opinion with a 
show of hands.
d	 e 5.17  Focus on the Glossary and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen to Liz and Bob talking 
about their experiences, and to check their answer to the 
question in c. 
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Bob stayed, and Liz moved back to London.
e 5.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
Liz
When I moved in, the house was cold and absolutely filthy, and 
the cooker didn’t work. I discovered everything in the countryside 
is more expensive: you have to drive miles to find a shop, where 
everything costs twice as much as in my local supermarket in 
London. Local restaurants are really expensive, and if you tell the 
waiter that you’re a vegetarian, they look at you as if you were from 
Mars. I never fitted in. I think that in the country, if you’re a woman, 
you’ll never be accepted unless you’re a full-time mum. Another 
thing I hated was the shooting! I love animals – I had two horses 
and two dogs – and I just couldn’t pass a group of men with guns, 
shooting rabbits and deer, without getting out of my car and saying, 
‘Do you really have nothing better to do on a Saturday morning?’ 
That didn’t make me very popular. I became so lonely I often used 
to sit in my car and listen to the kind voice of the satnav lady. After 
five years, I decided to go back to London. I’d learnt that an amazing 
view and a pair of nesting herons were not enough to make me 
happy. On my last night in the country, I sat outside underneath 
millions of stars and I thought to myself, ‘I’ve come to the end of a 
five-year prison sentence.’ I promised myself I would never, ever  
go back.
Bob
The first thing we had to do was find new jobs. Jean got part-time 
work with a local company that sells meat products, and I did work 
as a lawyer. Two years later, we had a barn built, and my wife always 
wanted to have a donkey or a horse, but in the end we thought 
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 78@@
78
6	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  sentence 
rhythm
Pronunciation notes
The rhythm of English, with its combination of stressed 
and unstressed syllables, can become especially difficult 
for learners when a verb tense requires the presence of 
auxiliary verbs, as is the case with the present perfect 
continuous. Some Sts may also have difficulty with the 
contracted form of have, and the weak form of been /bɪn/. 
If so, it is worth focusing specifically on these points to help 
with the overall rhythm.
These exercises give Sts the opportunity to practise getting 
the sentence rhythm correct and an opportunity to speak 
using the present perfect continuous.
a	 e 5.19  Focus on the task and then play the audio, 
pausing after each sentence to give Sts time to complete 
sentences 1–10. Remind them to use contractions when 
possible.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  ’ve been working    2  haven’t been sleeping    
3  have been making    4  ’ve been thinking    5  ’ve been arguing  
6  haven’t been watching    7  ’ve been feeling    8  ’ve been 
doing    9  ’ve been going out    10  ’ve been spending
e 5.19
1	 I’ve been working hard this week.
2	 I haven’t been sleeping well lately.
3	 My neighbours have been making a lot of noise recently.
4	 I’ve been thinking about getting a new phone.
5	 I’ve been arguing with my family a lot recently.
6	 I haven’t been watching much TV lately.
7	 I’ve been feeling very stressed for the last few weeks.
8	 I’ve been doing a lot of exercise this month.
9	 I’ve been going out a lot recently.
10	 I’ve been spending a lot of time on social media.
b	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm.
c	 Focus on the task and the example. Tell Sts that if the 
sentence is not true for them, they should make it 
negative, e.g. 1 isn’t true for me. I haven’t been working hard 
this week because…
	 Give Sts a few minutes to decide what is true or not for 
them and to think of reasons.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to do the task. 
	 Monitor and help with the rhythm of the present perfect 
continuous verbs.
	 Get feedback by asking a few Sts about some of the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity yourself 
to show Sts exactly what they have to do.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to think about what 
they are going to say.
	 Focus on the example, highlighting that the student 
listening must show interest. 
	 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell Sts A to start. Then 
make sure they swap roles.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.141.
Grammar notes
Present perfect continuous
Sts should have met the present perfect continuous at 
Intermediate level. This form is difficult for many Sts, partly 
because a period of time up to now (I’ve been learning 
English for three years) is expressed with a present tense 
in many Sts’ L1, and also because their L1 may not have 
continuous tenses. The present perfect continuous form 
and uses are revised here, with an emphasis on adverbs 
and expressions like all day, recently, etc.
It is important that Sts are really comfortable manipulating 
the present perfect continuous, and feeling confident 
with when to use it, before getting them to choose 
between the simple and continuous forms. This is focused 
on in English File Upper-intermediate.
•	 Rule 1: Remind Sts that we use the present perfect 
simple, not the present perfect continuous, with non-
action verbs (e.g. be, know, love).
•	 Rule 2: Elicit some clear examples of actions with 
visible present results, e.g. He’s hot and sweaty; he’s been 
working out at the gym. They’re exhausted; they’ve been 
looking after their grandchildren all day, etc. Remind Sts 
that if it is a short finished action that has a present 
result, it will be in the present perfect simple, e.g. I’ve cut 
myself. NOT I’ve been cutting myself.
	 Focus on Revise the basics and use the chart to revise 
the form of the present perfect continuous. Remind Sts 
that we normally contract have and has in spoken English.
	 Then focus on the example sentences and play audio 
e 5.18 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm.
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the work and live box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs. Encourage them to use contracted 
forms rather than full forms.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 i  I’ve been sitting in a traffic jam for two hours.
2	 b  No, thanks. I’ve been drinking too much caffeine lately.
3	 f  I hope so. We’ve been looking for a flat we can afford.
4	 e  No. They’ve been eating biscuits all afternoon.
5	 g  Yes, she’s been learning it for a long time.
6	 h  It’s great – I’ve been taking pictures all day.
7	 a  She’s been watching a sad film on TV.
8	 c  I don’t think so. It’s been snowing very heavily.
b
1  I’ve been living    2  she’s been travelling    3  I haven’t been 
doing    4  I’m staying    5  he’s driving    6  I’ve been waiting    
7  it’s been raining    8  I’m trying    9  I’ve been seeing    
10  It hasn’t been working
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 79@@
79
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity yourself 
to show Sts exactly what they have to do.
7	WRITING  an informal email
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An informal email on p.119.
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read Bob’s email 
and answer the two questions. Tell them not to worry 
about the gaps in the email.
	 Check answers.
The weather
He says it’s a problem because they can’t get to the supermarket.
b	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to read the email 
again before completing the gaps with verbs from the list 
in the present perfect continuous. Remind them to use 
contractions, which are common in informal emails.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  haven’t been studying    2  ’s been snowing    
3  ’ve been trying    4  ’ve been listening    5  ’s been working    
6  ’ve been moving    7  ’ve been waiting    8  have…been doing
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Check answers.
1  Glad you’re well.    2  Hope you haven’t been studying too 
hard.    3  Miss you lots
	 Now focus on the Useful language: informal emails box 
and go through it with the class. You could point out that 
in the sentences without the pronoun I, e.g. Glad you’re 
well, it can be inserted and have the same meaning (i.e. 
I’m glad you’re well). Likewise, in the sentences with the 
pronoun I, e.g. I’m sorry to hear that…, it can be omitted 
(i.e. Sorry to hear that…).
d	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to think of a friend or 
family member they would like to send an email to.
	 Then focus on the plan and go through it with Sts. 
Encourage them to make brief notes on what they will 
write.
e	 Now get Sts to write the email, following the plan they 
made in d. Remind them to use the Useful language to 
help them. Sts could write an actual email to send to a real 
person if they would like to.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their email, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Remind Sts to check their email for mistakes before giving 
it in.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to write and send emails to each other.
5B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 80@@
	 1	
Practical English
EPISODE
80 PE3
	 5	
Practical English
Rob tells Jenny she should go to the police. He also tells her to 
go and stay at Luke’s flat and to go to the police with him.
e 5.20
N = narrator, R = Rob, J = Jenny
N	 Day two. Five past nine in the evening. Jenny’s at Henry’s house. She 
has just heard on the news that Andrew Page – the man she met at 
the airport – was attacked soon after she left him. She immediately 
phones Rob, who is still in Alaska, to tell him about it, and also to tell 
him that Henry still hasn’t come home.
R	 He was attacked?
J	 That’s right. The police found him at the airport.
R	 You’re sure it’s the same person?
J	 Definitely. I saw his picture. His name’s Andrew Page and he’s a 
scientist.
R	 And you spoke to him?
J	 He helped carry my bags! I mean, I could have been the last 
person to see him before it happened.
R	 I think you should go to the police.
J	 I know. And Rob, there’s something else.
R	 What is it?
J	 Well, I don’t want to worry you, but your dad hasn’t come home. 
We were supposed to have dinner at seven.
R	 What time is it now?
J	 It’s a little after nine.
R	 What? That is worrying. Dad’s usually really punctual.
J	 Should I call the police?
R	 I think you should. It’s really not like him.
J	 OK, and Rob?
R	 Yeah?
J	 Oh, it’s nothing.
R	 What is it?
J	 I know this seems odd, but the house feels strange.
R	 What do you mean?
J	 I don’t know, but I don’t like being alone here.
R	 Well, it’s late and you’re tired.
J	 That’s true. But I don’t think I’ll be able to sleep here.
R	 Why don’t you ring Luke? You could stay with him, and you could 
go to the police together and tell them about Dad.
J	 OK, I think I’ll do that.
R	 I’ll ring you later.
J	 OK. Rob, I’ll be fine. Don’t worry. Bye.
b	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–5.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing as necessary to give 
Sts time to answer the questions. Play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Yes, she is because she saw his picture on the news and he 
told her his name.
2	 At seven
3	 It’s a little after nine. Rob is worried because Henry is usually 
really punctual.
4	 She says it feels strange.
5	 She doesn’t think she’ll be able to sleep in Henry’s house.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
	 Now focus on the last question and, with a show of hands, 
find out how many Sts answer yes or no. Then encourage 
them to give reasons why (not).
Function    making a police report; describing someone’s 
appearance and routine
Language  He’s average height and build; He has grey hair and 
glasses, etc.
Lesson plan
In this third Practical English lesson, the functional focus is 
on key expressions used in reporting a missing person to the 
police.
In the first scene, Jenny phones Rob to tell him about the 
worrying events – first, the news reports about the attack 
on the man she met at the airport, and then the fact that 
Henry still hasn’t come back. Rob advises her to go and stay 
at Luke’s flat and to go with him to the police to report both 
incidents. In the next scene, Jenny and Luke go to the police 
station to make the report. The suspense builds in the third 
scene when Luke finally manages to get into Jenny’s laptop, 
only to find that the username is not Jenny, but A. Page, the 
name of the man Jenny met at the airport and who was 
attacked shortly afterwards. Then Jenny receives a video 
message from Henry, who has been kidnapped by people 
who want the laptop. Jenny is also warned not to go to the 
police again.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 3 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test 
Progress Test Files 1–5
For students
Workbook  Practical English 3 
Can you remember? 1–5
Online Practice  Practical English 3 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 3, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 2. Ask What’s wrong with Henry’s car? What 
other strange things have happened? Who is Andrew Page and 
why is he in the news? Where is Henry at the end of the  
episode?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 2.
1	r A WORRIED PHONE CALL
a	 e 5.20  Books open. Focus on the photos and ask Where 
is Jenny? Who’s she talking to? How does she look?
	 Now focus on the instructions and the question.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
EPISODE
	 3	
Practical English  Time to tell the police
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 81@@
81
b	 Focus on the conversation on pp.54–55. Elicit who says the 
You hear phrases (the police officer) and who says the 
You say phrases (Jenny and Luke). You could tell Sts that 
the sentences in italics are the ones Luke says.
	 Give Sts time to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Then play 
the video / audio again and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  missing    2  take    3  describe    4  last    5  wearing    
6  unusual    7  plans    8  routine    9  remember    
10  else    11  worry
	 Now go through the conversation and deal with any new 
vocabulary. Check that Sts know the meaning of turns up 
here (= arrives).
c	 e 5.22  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell 
Sts they’re going to hear some of them again and 
repeat them. Encourage them to copy the rhythm and 
intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary, for Sts to listen 
and repeat the phrases.
e 5.22
La	 You also said that your father-in-law – Henry Walker – hasn’t 
returned home yet. How long has he been missing?
J	 He was supposed to be home three hours ago. (pause)
***
La	 OK. Can you describe Mr Walker?
J	 He’s sixty-two, I think. (pause) He’s average height and build. 
(pause) He has grey hair and glasses. (pause) I don’t know what 
colour his eyes are. (pause)
La	 When did you last see him?
J	 This morning. Around ten. (pause)
La	 Where were you?
J	 At his house in Long Crendon. (pause)
La	 And do you remember what he was wearing?
J	 Oh, just a brown jacket, a dark green shirt, and jeans. (pause)
La	 Do you remember anything unusual about the last time you  
saw him?
J	 Yes, actually. (pause) We were going to go to Oxford…but Henry’s 
two front tyres had been punctured. (pause)
***
La	 And Jenny, do you remember seeing anything unusual when you 
got back to the house this afternoon?
J	 Well, there was my suitcase. (pause) The airport had returned my 
lost luggage and the lock was broken. (pause)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Put Sts in groups of three, A, B, and C. A is the police 
officer, and B and C are reporting the missing person. 
Get Sts to read the conversation on pp.54–55 aloud, and 
then take it in turns to swap roles so that everyone has a 
chance to be the police officer.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Reporting a missing person, A on 
p.108, B on p.113.
2	r MAKING A POLICE REPORT
a	 e 5.21  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where are Jenny and Luke? Who do you think the woman 
is? What is Luke showing her? Why?
	 Now tell Sts to focus on the questions.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to answer the questions with a partner.
	 Play the video / audio again if necessary, and then check 
answers.
The police officer asks how long Henry’s been missing; for his 
description; the time when Jenny last saw him; what he was 
wearing; what his plans were for the day; about his normal 
routine.
They describe Henry as 62, average height and build, grey hair, 
glasses, brown eyes; last seen wearing a brown jacket, dark 
green shirt, and jeans.
e 5.21
N = narrator, La = Laing, J = Jenny, L = Luke
N	 Day two. Ten p.m. Jenny and Luke are at Oxford Police Station, in  
the police interview room. Jenny has told the inspector, DCI Laing, 
about her meeting with Andrew Page. Now she is going to tell her 
about Henry.
La	 And that was the last time you saw Mr Page?
J	 Yes. Is he going to be OK?
La	 We don’t know yet, I’m afraid. You also said that your father-in-
law – Henry Walker – hasn’t returned home yet. How long has he 
been missing?
J	 He was supposed to be home three hours ago.
La	 OK. It’s a bit early to report him missing, but I’ll take a statement. 
So, your name’s Jenny Zielinski.
J	 That’s right.
La	 And you’re staying at The Grange, Marsh Lane, Long Crendon.
J	 Yes.
La	 OK. Can you describe Mr Walker?
J	 He’s sixty-two, I think.
L	 Yeah.
J	 He’s average height and build. He has grey hair and glasses. I 
don’t know what colour his eyes are.
L	 They’re brown. Here is a photo of him.
La	 When did you last see him?
J	 This morning. Around ten.
La	 Where were you?
J	 At his house in Long Crendon.
La	 And do you remember what he was wearing?
J	 Oh, just a brown jacket, a dark green shirt, and jeans.
La	 Do you remember anything unusual about the last time you  
saw him?
J	 Yes, actually. We were going to go to Oxford, but Henry’s two 
front tyres had been punctured.
La	 Really? So you left for Oxford and he stayed to fix the car?
J	 Yes.
La	 Do you know what his plans were for the rest of the day?
J	 No.
La	 Can you give me some idea of his normal routine?
J	 Not really…
L	 Well, he’s an academic. He teaches at the university a few days 
a week, but he often works from home. He goes on a lot of long 
walks, but never this late.
La	 And Jenny, do you remember seeing anything unusual when you 
got back to the house this afternoon?
J	 Well, there was my suitcase. The airport had returned my lost 
luggage and the lock was broken.
La	 Is there anything else?
J	 There were some books on the floor.
L	 Really? That’s weird. Henry’s normally really tidy.
La	 OK. Try not to worry – we’ll look into this. In the meantime, 
perhaps you should stay with Luke, and if you think of anything 
else, or he turns up, give me a call.
PE3
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 82@@
82
H	 There’s one last thing that they want me to tell you. Don’t go to 
the police again. If you go to the police, you know what’ll happen. 
Now Jenny, please don’t worry. Tell Rob his old man will be in his 
study again soon.
N	 Jenny and Luke look at each other in shock.
J	 We need to call Rob.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
sentences 1–8.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary, to give 
Sts time to circle the correct answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  safer    2  isn’t    3  a formula    4  a video message    5  laptop   
6  today’s    7  not to go    8  to give Rob a message
	 Elicit / Explain that his old man is an informal way of saying 
his father.
	 Now focus on the final questions and get Sts to speculate 
about the answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 5.24  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  letting    2  mean    3  no    4  message    5  all right    
6  carefully
e 5.24
1  Thanks for letting me stay.
2  What does it mean?
3  I have no idea.
4  It’s a message from Henry!
5  As you can see, I’m all right.
6  Listen carefully.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  5    B  1    C  6    D  4    E  3    F  2
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully. Give them 
time to read the situation and prepare what they are 
going to say / ask. When they are ready, tell Sts B that they 
are the police officers and that they should start. Tell them 
to use the form to ask Sts A questions about the missing 
person.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Sts then swap roles in c. Give them time again to prepare.
	 When they have finished, get feedback. Ask Sts if they 
thought the police officer was helpful.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could elicit (some of) the questions 
that the police officers will need to ask and write these on 
the board. You could also allow Sts to make notes next to 
their role cards.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 3.
3	r A THREATENING MESSAGE
a	 e 5.23  Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. What are Luke and Jenny looking at? What is on Jenny’s 
phone?
	 Now focus on the questions. Play the video / audio once 
the whole way through for Sts to watch or listen and 
answer the questions.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Explain the meaning of username  
(= the name you use in order to use a computer program 
or system), cracked (= solved) here, and encrypted  
(= information put into a special code, usually to prevent 
others from looking at it).
The good news is that Luke has managed to get into the laptop.
The bad news is that Henry has been kidnapped by people who 
want the laptop.
e 5.23
N = narrator, J = Jenny, L = Luke, H = Henry
N	 Day three. Eight a.m. They are at Luke’s house. Luke is awake and 
working on Jenny’s laptop. He’s still trying to get into it. Jenny, who 
was sleeping in the spare room, has just got up.
J	 Good morning.
L	 Hi.
J	 Thanks for letting me stay. I feel a lot safer here.
L	 What? Oh, no problem.
J	 I tried Henry again. Still no answer. I wonder if…
L	 Yes! I’ve done it! I’m in.
J	 What?
L	 I’ve cracked the security code on your computer.
J	 That’s great, Luke, but Henry…
L	 Wait a minute, that’s not right. The username says A Page…and all 
the files are encrypted.
J	 A Page? Are you sure?
L	 Let me just see if I can open the files. What the…? Jenny, take a 
look at this. It’s a formula or something.
J	 What does it mean?
L	 I have no idea.
J	 It’s a message from Henry!
L	 What?! What does it say?
J	 It’s a video. Hang on.
H	 Hello, Jenny. As you can see, I’m all right. I can’t tell you where I 
am. But listen carefully. These people want some documents on 
your computer. They want you to leave it at the house. To prove 
that I’m OK, here’s a copy of this morning’s paper.
N	 On the video screen Henry looks very tense and worried. He seems to 
be in a darkish room. He holds up a newspaper. On the front, there’s 
a large picture of Andrew Page and the headline reads: Oxford 
scientist attacked at airport.
PE3
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 83@@
	1A	
83
6A
	6A	 What the waiter really thinks
1	VOCABULARY  at a restaurant
a	 Books open. Focus on the phrases and give Sts time to 
decide who says each one.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand each one.
1  W    2  W    3  C    4  W    5  C    6  W    7  W    8  C    9  C    10  C
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs before checking 
answers.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank At a restaurant 
on p.160.
Vocabulary notes
Things on the table
Highlight the difficult consonant cluster in corkscrew, 
which has four consonant sounds together, and give extra 
practice of this word.
You may want to explain the difference between a cup 
and a mug (a cup is smaller and usually comes with a 
saucer). You could also teach the word cutlery /ˈkʌtləri/  
(= the collective noun for knives, forks, and spoons).
Things people do in restaurants
You may want to teach set the table as a synonym for lay 
the table, and as the US English expression.
	 Focus on 1 Things on the table and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.1
At a restaurant
1 Things on the table
11	 bowl
2	 candle
5	 corkscrew
19	 cup
14	 fork
6	 glass
18	 jug
12	 knife
16	 mug
13	 napkin
3	 oil and vinegar
10	 plate
7	 salt and pepper
21	 saucer
4	 serving dish
9	 spoon
8	 tablecloth
15	 teapot
20	 teaspoon
17	 tray
1	 wine glass
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation and elicit answers from the class, 
encouraging Sts to use vocabulary from a.
 G   obligation, necessity, prohibition, advice
 V   at a restaurant
 P   word pairs with and
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is how to behave in restaurants, 
with a focus on complaining and tipping – the latter is first 
related to restaurants, but then extended to all services 
where people sometimes tip. The lesson begins with a 
vocabulary focus on restaurant language and common verb 
phrases. This is followed by a pronunciation spot on food 
and restaurant-related word pairs with and, such as oil and 
vinegar. Next, Sts read an article about how to complain 
successfully in restaurants. The first half ends with Sts 
listening to three people talking about bad experiences in 
restaurants, and Sts then discuss their own experiences of 
bad service.
The second half of the lesson starts with the grammar. A text 
about tipping in restaurants in different countries revises 
and consolidates modals and other phrases used to express 
obligation, necessity, prohibition, and advice. This is followed 
by an interview with an American woman talking about the 
very different rules for tipping in the USA. Sts then discuss 
tipping in general – who and when to tip, how much, etc. 
The lesson ends with a writing focus where Sts write a 
restaurant review.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  obligation, necessity, prohibition, advice p.162 
Communicative  What’s the problem? p.191–192  
(instructions p.175) 
Vocabulary  At a restaurant p.214 (instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook  6A
Online Practice  6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts how often they eat out and do a class survey, e.g. 
more than once a week, about once a week, only on special 
occasions. 
Then ask them to think of a restaurant where they have 
enjoyed eating out for a special occasion, like a birthday or 
anniversary. Elicit the names and descriptions of a couple 
of places and ask Sts to say why they liked going there (the 
food, the atmosphere, etc.). 
If you think your Sts eat out quite often, you could get them 
to discuss their places in pairs, and then get feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 84@@
6A
84
2	PRONUNCIATION  word pairs with and
Pronunciation notes
At this stage, Sts will be well aware that what is written 
and what is pronounced in English are often not the same 
thing. These exercises focus on the word and, which is 
typically pronounced in its weak form, and can be heard 
as /ən/, as in the photograph in a.
The exercises aim to get Sts to correctly recognize the 
different weak form pronunciations of and in natural 
speech. If they can comfortably pronounce /ən/ where 
appropriate, this will help them to be more fluent when 
speaking in English.
a	 Focus Sts’ attention on the photo. Get them to suggest 
what the n stands for and why it is written like that.
It stands for and.
It is written like that to reflect the pronunciation of and when it is 
unstressed (/ən/).
b	 e 6.3  Focus on the phrases and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 6.3
See phrases in Student’s Book on p.56
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts are having problems with /ən/, get 
them to write out the phrases as a single word, but with no 
letter d in and, e.g. fishanchips, oilanvinegar, etc. They can 
then try to pronounce what they have written as one word.
c	 Focus on the Word pair order box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other what they 
can see in each photo.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answers before playing the 
audio in d.
d	 e 6.4  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.4
1	 bacon and eggs
2	 bread and butter
3	 strawberries and cream
4	 ice and lemon
5	 tea and biscuits
6	 milk and sugar
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
3	READING  understanding the main point in a 	
	 paragraph
a	 Focus on the title of the article, How to complain in 
restaurants…without losing your cool, and make sure Sts 
know the meaning of losing your cool (= becoming angry).
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could also tell Sts if 
you have ever ‘lost your cool’ and what happened.
	 Finally, focus on the food, plate, dish, meal, and course 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on 2 Things people do in restaurants and 
get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.2
2 Things people do in restaurants
waiters
4	 lay the table
1	 take an order
5	 recommend a dish
6	 carry a tray
2	 serve customers
3	 pour the wine
customers
9	 book a table
8	 order food
7	 try the wine
 11	 send something back
 12	 ask for the bill
 10	 leave a tip
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the verb phrases 
and look at the photos. Can they remember the verb 
phrases?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them to discuss the differences 
between each pair of words or phrases.
	 Check answers.
1	 A cup is a small container shaped like a bowl, usually with 
a handle, used for hot drinks like tea and coffee, whereas a 
glass is a container made of glass, usually used for cold drinks.
2	 A plate is a round, flat dish that you eat food off, whereas a 
saucer is a small, shallow round dish that a cup stands on.
3	 A jug is a container with a handle and a lip, for holding and 
pouring liquids, whereas a mug is a tall cup for drinking 
from, usually with straight sides and a handle, used without a 
saucer.
4	 A tablecloth is a piece of material used to cover a table, 
whereas a napkin is a piece of material or paper used at 
meals to protect your clothes, and clean your lips and fingers.
5	 A plate is a round, flat dish that you eat food off, whereas a 
dish is a flat, shallow container for serving from.
6	 A meal is an occasion when people sit down to eat food, 
whereas a course is any of the separate parts of a meal.
7	 Lay the table is to arrange knives, forks, plates, etc. on a table, 
ready for a meal, whereas clear the table is to take away the 
dirty plates, etc. after a meal.
8	 Take an order is when the waiter writes down what the 
customer wants, whereas order food is when the customer 
asks the waiter for food.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could ask Sts to ask and answer 
about a few more pairs, e.g. spoon and teaspoon, pour the 
wine and try the wine.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 85@@
85
6A
e 6.5
1
We ordered some grilled sardines to share, and after a few minutes, 
the waiter came with a big plate of fried sardines and put them 
down on our table.
2
We ordered very simple things like lasagne, which is easy to just 
heat up.
3
…and there was a vegan and a coeliac – you know, someone who 
can’t eat wheat…
…there was even a woman who said she didn’t like onions…
There was also a little boy and I got the kitchen to make a plain 
omelette for him.
b	 e 6.6  Tell Sts they are going to hear the full stories this 
time. First, give Sts time to read the questions in the chart. 
They will need to copy the chart onto a piece of paper.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if 
you need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen, e.g. 
brasserie.
Speaker 1 
A customer.
At a restaurant in Portugal.
That they were charged for food they hadn’t ordered but the 
waiter gave them by mistake.
He took the fried sardines off the bill after a long argument.
Speaker 2 
A customer.
At a famous brasserie in Paris.
That they had to wait for their food for ages and then the waiters 
were aggressive when they asked about the food.
They got their food, ate it, and left.
Speaker 3 
A waiter.
At a restaurant in London.
The very small tip a woman left even though he had gone to a 
lot of trouble with the complicated food orders.
He left the tip on the table.
e 6.6
(script in Student’s Book on pp.127–128)
1
I remember we once went to a restaurant in Portugal – beautiful 
location, upstairs overlooking the River Douro. We ordered some 
grilled sardines to share, and after a few minutes, the waiter came 
with a big plate of fried sardines and put them down on our table. 
And we thought, well, we’d ordered grilled sardines, but hey, they’re 
really busy and these look really nice. So we each took a fried sardine 
and ate it, at which point the waiter came back and said, ‘These 
aren’t yours’ and took them away, and in a few minutes came back 
with a plate of grilled sardines. So this was all fine, and we had a nice 
meal, but when we got the bill we saw that we’d been charged for 
both the fried sardines and the grilled sardines. So we complained 
to the waiter and then to the manager and said, you know, ‘This was 
your mistake.’ But the manager said, basically, ‘You ate them, so you 
have to pay for them’ and we had quite a long argument. Eventually, 
when we said that we wanted to make a formal, written complaint, 
very reluctantly he agreed to take them off the bill. We didn’t leave 
a tip.
b	 Focus on the question and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of sympathize (= feel sorry for). Model and drill 
its pronunciation /ˈsɪmpəθaɪz/. Tell Sts that if they can 
answer this question correctly, they have understood the 
overall message and tone of the whole article.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the question.
	 Check the answer. Elicit some examples from the article to 
support their answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words.
He sympathizes with restaurant staff – the article says ‘the 
waiters are often innocent victims’ of bad management; they are 
often overworked.
c	 Focus on headings A–H and make sure Sts understand the 
idiom put yourself in their shoes (= imagine yourself in their 
situation) and the noun expertise /ekspɜːˈtiːz/. Also check 
Sts understand wholemeal (para 6).
	 Now get Sts to read the article again and complete it with 
the headings.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  C    2  F    3  A    4  E    5  B    6  H    7  D    8  G
d	 Now tell Sts to focus on the highlighted words and work 
out the meaning of over- and under- from the context.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
over- = more than necessary
under- = less than necessary
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could teach a few more words with 
over- and under- prefixes, e.g. overcharge / undercharge, 
overpaid / underpaid, overrated / underrated. Point out that 
not all words with the prefix over- have an under- equivalent, 
e.g. overcrowded, overpriced, overworked.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING
a	 e 6.5  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
that they are only going to hear extracts this time.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and write the food words they hear. You may want 
to pre-teach coeliac /ˈsiːliæk/ (= a person who cannot eat 
food containing gluten). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Speaker 1: grilled sardines, fried sardines
Speaker 2: lasagne
Speaker 3: wheat, onions, a plain omelette
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 86@@
6A
86
Grammar notes
Sts will have seen most of these modals and other 
expressions in earlier levels of English File and should be 
fairly comfortable with their forms and basic uses. Here 
the emphasis is on contrasting their uses and expressing 
them in a range of tenses.
You may want to remind Sts that should, ought to, 
and must are modal verbs. They don’t add -s in the 
third person and don’t have any other forms (e.g. past, 
infinitive). They can be used to talk about the present and 
the future.
Obligation and necessity
Rule 2: Remind Sts not to use to after must, e.g. NOT You 
must to be careful. 
No obligation / No necessity
Here Sts learn to use needn’t, which has some grammatical 
characteristics of a modal. Needn’t and don’t need to have 
the same meaning, but don’t need to is a full verb.
Highlight that unlike don’t need, needn’t must be followed 
by a verb, e.g. We don’t need any more eggs, but NOT We 
needn’t any more eggs.
Prohibition
You could point out that mustn’t and can’t mean the 
same thing (= something is not allowed), though the 
prohibition is usually stronger with mustn’t.
Highlight that the first t in mustn’t /ˈmʌsnt/ is silent. 
Model and drill the pronunciation.
A typical mistake is confusing mustn’t (prohibition) and 
don’t have to (not necessary / not obligatory), e.g. Today is 
a public holiday, so we mustn’t go to work. You don’t have to 
text while you’re driving.
Advice
Remind Sts that the letter l in should /ʃʊd/ and shouldn’t 
/ˈʃʊdnt/ is silent.
	 Focus on the example sentences for obligation and 
necessity and play audio e 6.7 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. You might 
want to point out the weak form of must in You must pay 
him back as soon as possible. Then go through the rules 
with the class.
	 Repeat for no obligation / no necessity e 6.8, 
prohibition e 6.9, and advice e 6.10.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  don’t have to    2  f    3  shouldn’t    4  f    5  f    
6  don’t need to    7  mustn’t    8  f    9  f    10  oughtn’t to
b
1	 You mustn’t turn your phone on until the plane has landed.
2	 Here’s the form. You have / need to sign it at the bottom.
3	 I think perhaps you ought to buy a new table,…
4	 We don’t have to leave until 2.30…
5	 She needn’t come if she doesn’t want to. Nobody will mind.
6	 Our journey back was a nightmare. We had to wait hours for 
the bus.
7	 You must / should read his new book! You’ll love it.
8	 You oughtn’t to drink so many fizzy drinks. They’re really not 
good for you.
9	 Do I have / need to write a thank-you letter or can I just…?
2
We went to lunch one Sunday in a place, a Parisian brasserie called 
Delaville. It’s a beautiful place – it’s from about nineteen hundred, 
with wonderful old furniture, mirrors, and all that – really nice. We 
ordered very simple things like lasagne, which is easy to just heat 
up, but we waited and waited, and it didn’t come. The place was 
crowded, but not completely full, and there were quite a few waiters, 
but when we realized that we had been waiting for two hours, we 
went to speak to them, and we asked them, ‘What about our food? 
Have you forgotten us?’ And instead of apologizing, they were really 
aggressive with us, so we became more and more angry with them. 
And finally, we got our dishes and ate them and left. We should 
have left earlier, but we kept thinking that the food would come, 
and also it was too late to find somewhere else. But it was a terrible 
experience because it was a very famous place – very – with a good 
reputation, where all the famous people go. But that’s the type of 
service they offer. First, I thought maybe they were treating us like 
that because we’re not famous, but in fact, I heard lots of other 
people complaining.
3
I had a table recently at the restaurant I’m working at in London, and 
I went to all sorts of trouble with them. It was a group of six and there 
was a vegan and a coeliac – you know, someone who can’t eat wheat 
– and anyway, I went through the menu with them and explained 
what they could have – there was even a woman who said she didn’t 
like onions, so I had to check all the dishes to make sure they didn’t 
have any. There was also a little boy and I got the kitchen to make 
a plain omelette for him. Anyway, one of them, an elderly woman, 
asked for the bill, and she paid in cash, and when I came back with the 
change, she said, ‘Don’t worry about that; you’ve been great. Keep it.’ 
It was sixteen p. I mean, I know service was included, but in that case, 
much better not to tip at all. I left the sixteen p on the table.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.127–128, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Get Sts to answer questions 1–3 in pairs. Encourage them 
to think about their experiences in informal places like 
cafés and takeaways as well as restaurants.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could do 
question 3 as a whole-class activity.
5	GRAMMAR  obligation, necessity, prohibition, 	
	 advice
a	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
 !   Make sure Sts only talk about what they do and not the 
situation regarding tipping in their country, as they will be 
doing this next.
b	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to read 
the article and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to discuss their answers in pairs.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. If your country isn’t 
mentioned in the article, you could tell Sts how much 
people usually tip.
c	 Focus on the instructions and remind Sts to use the 
context to help them. Sts could do this individually or 
in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  you have to    2  you don’t have to, you needn’t    
3  You mustn’t    4  you should    5  you shouldn’t
Other verbs are: 1) must, 4 and 5) ought to / ought not to
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.142.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 87@@
87
6A
e 6.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
P = presenter, S = Sally
P	 In many countries, tipping is an optional extra. But in the USA, it’s 
a serious business! There are no actual laws on tipping, but the 
unwritten rule is that you should always leave a tip in a restaurant 
unless you want to deal with some very unhappy waiters. But 
how much is reasonable, and who exactly do you have to tip? 
Sally from the US is here to help us. Hello, Sally.
S	 Hi.
P	 So first of all, why is it so important to leave a tip?
S	 I absolutely get that in countries where servers are paid well, you 
shouldn’t have to tip at all, unless you want to because the service 
was great. But in the US, many servers earn just two to three 
dollars per hour for their services because it’s assumed that the 
tips will make it up to the minimum wage, which varies between 
the different states, but is generally around eight dollars per hour. 
Now, I know you may think this is wrong, and many Americans, 
myself included, would agree, but that is the situation right now, 
until the law changes.
P	 And how much should you tip?
S	 A normal gratuity is around fifteen to twenty per cent of the 
check. But it can be as much as twenty-five per cent for amazing 
service, or in very expensive retaurants. It sounds a lot, but servers 
work really hard and I think generally they deserve it!
P	 OK, so it doesn’t happen often, but what about if the service is 
bad? Do you still have to tip?
S	 I’d say you do, but if it really was bad maybe just ten per cent 
– that will give the message. And if you feel you don’t want to 
leave even that, then you should probably call the manager and 
complain, and explain why you’re not leaving a tip.
P	 Do you need to tip even if the restaurant has already added a 
service charge to your bill?
S	 There’s no automatic service charge added in the US, but 
some restaurants will add a gratuity to your check if you’re in 
a big group of eight people or more, if it’s a public holiday, or 
sometimes if you’re in a busy tourist area. You don’t have to leave 
any more money if the check already includes the service charge.
P	 Do you have to tip for fast food or takeaway coffee?
S	 No, no. If you buy food or drinks over the counter, people don’t 
usually leave any gratuity, but there’s always a tip jar close by if 
you’d really like to!
P	 And what should you do in bars?
S	 Well, take lots of dollar bills with you because the normal gratuity 
in bars is one dollar a drink. Order and pay for your drink at the 
bar, and leave the dollar bill on the bar. Don’t worry about putting 
it in the bartender’s hand.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 1–6.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete 
the missing numbers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  2 (to) 3    2  7.25    3  15 (to) 20    4  25    5  10    6  1
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts can remember 
the meaning of fair (they saw it in Lesson 4B).
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to circle the correct 
options in sentences 1–7. You might want to check that 
they know the meaning of mediocre (= not very good, of 
only average standard). Model and drill its pronunciation  
/miːdiˈəʊkə/.
	 Check answers.
1  You shouldn’t    2  You mustn’t    3  You oughtn’t to    
4  You have to    5  You shouldn’t    6  You don’t have to    
7  You needn’t
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts if there are any statements in 
1–7 that they disagree with.
6	LISTENING  understanding prices and 	
	 percentages
a	 e 6.11  Focus on the instructions. You could ask Sts 
what they know about tipping in the USA and what they 
remember from the article they read in 5b (i.e. that in the 
US ‘there’s no upper limit’ when tipping).
	 Focus on the British words in the list and tell Sts to listen 
to the two extracts.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to hear 
what American words the woman uses in the extracts for 
the British equivalent in the list.
	 Check answers. Point out that Americans do in fact 
sometimes use the words tip and waiter, but often use the 
US alternatives.
tip = gratuity   
bill = check   
waiter or waitress = server   
note = bill
e 6.11
1
Presenter	 And how much should you tip?
Sally	
A normal gratuity is around fifteen to twenty per cent of 
the check. But it can be as much as twenty-five per cent for 
amazing service, or in very expensive retaurants. It sounds 
a lot, but servers work really hard and I think generally they 
deserve it!
2
Presenter	 And what should you do in bars?
Sally	
Well, take lots of dollar bills with you because the normal 
gratuity in bars is one dollar a drink.
b	 e 6.12  Focus on the question and tell Sts they are now 
going to listen to the whole interview.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
You don’t have to tip if the service is absolutely terrible, if the bill 
says ‘gratuity included’, or for fast food / takeaway coffee.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 88@@
6A
88
d	 Tell Sts they are going to write a review for a website 
about a café, bar, or restaurant. If they haven’t been to one 
recently, tell them to invent the details.
	 Now focus on the two possible plans and go through 
them with Sts. Encourage them to make brief notes on 
what they will write about.
e	 Sts write their review, following the plan they’ve 
made. Remind them to use the Useful language and 
Vocabulary Bank At a restaurant on p.160 to help them.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their review, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Sts should check their review for mistakes before giving 
it in.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to post their corrected 
reviews on a website like TripAdvisor.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and photos, and either put Sts in 
pairs to answer the two questions, or do them as a whole-
class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
A  hairdresser, cuts people’s hair   
B  taxi driver, drives people to their destination   
C  porter, carries luggage   
D  masseur, gives massages   
E  bar tender, makes drinks   
F  tour guide, takes people on tours   
G  delivery person / courier, delivers parcels   
H  chambermaid / cleaner, cleans hotel rooms, other people’s 
homes or offices
b	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to answer the 
questions. You could demonstrate the activity by 
answering one or two of the questions yourself.
	 Get some feedback.
8	WRITING  a restaurant review
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A restaurant review on p.120.
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the two 
restaurant reviews for Bistro Giacomo. Remind them to try 
to guess new words from context as they read.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
They agree that the service and the food were good. 
Rafael thinks the atmosphere was lively and the prices were 
reasonable, but Zoe thinks the music was too loud, the tables 
were cramped, and the prices were too expensive.
b	 Focus on the instructions and questions 1–4. Get Sts to 
read the reviews again and then answer the questions 
individually or in pairs.
	 If Sts worked alone, get them to compare with a partner.
	 Check answers to 1–4 and then elicit opinions for the final 
question in bold.
1  Zoe    2  Rafael    3  Rafael    4  Zoe
c	 Focus on the Useful language: describing restaurants 
box and go through it with the class, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. dreadful.
	 Now tell Sts to read the reviews again and work out the 
meaning of the highlighted words and then put them in 
the correct gaps in the Useful language box. Tell them to 
read the whole sentence as the context will help them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner. 
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
2  cramped    3  delicious    4  fresh    5  tasty    6  reasonable    
7  pricey
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to add more words and 
expressions to the chart, both positive and negative. Elicit 
their ideas and write them on the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 89@@
	1A	
89
	6B	Do it yourself
1	READING  checking hypotheses
a	 Books open. Focus on the question and make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
	 Then put Sts in pairs and tell them to discuss possible uses 
for the items in the photos.
	 Elicit some ideas for which item could work for each use, 
but don’t tell Sts yet if they are correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Tell Sts to read the blog to check their ideas in a.
	 Check answers. Find out if any Sts got all the answers 
correct. You could also find out if any Sts had heard of 
any of the ideas in the blog, or already done some of the 
things suggested.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the blog the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted verbs.
A  to keep insects away
B  to make your hair shiny
C  to get rid of smells
D  to make towels soft 
E  instead of shaving cream
c	 Give Sts time to read the blog again and try to guess the 
meaning of the highlighted verbs. Encourage them to use 
the context to work out meaning.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts could work in pairs.
d	 Individually or in pairs, Sts now match the highlighted 
verbs in the blog to definitions 1–10.
	 Check answers, and model and drill pronunciation.
1  rinse    2  rub    3  absorb    4  apply    5  seal    6  place    
7  crumple    8  restore    9  keep away    10  stuff
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words on the left, read 
the definitions, and see if they can remember the verbs.
e	 You could do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs or small groups and then get some feedback.
2	GRAMMAR  can, could, and be able to
a	 Focus on the task and then get Sts to complete the five 
tips from Marina’s blog with the correct form of can or be 
able to.
	 Check answers.
1  be able to    2  can    3  been able to    4  can    5  can’t
	 Finally, ask Sts if they had heard of any of these tips before. 
If not, do they believe them? If so, which might they try?
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.143.
 G   can, could, and be able to
 V   DIY and repairs, paraphrasing
 P   consonant clusters
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is DIY (do-it-yourself) and things that 
people do around the house, e.g. repairing things that are 
broken and assembling flat-pack furniture. The lesson begins 
with an article about everyday items that we have in our 
homes and which have more uses than we expect. Sts revise 
and extend the uses of can, could, and be able to for ability, 
possibility, permission, and deduction. This leads into an 
extended speaking and writing activity in which Sts think of 
solutions to problems.
The second half begins with a vocabulary focus on words 
and phrases used to talk about DIY and repairs around 
the home. This is followed by a pronunciation focus on 
consonant clusters. The new vocabulary is consolidated 
through a listening and speaking activity about IKEA, the 
well-known Swedish store which sells flat-pack furniture, 
and some people’s (bad) experiences of trying to assemble 
furniture. Finally, Sts watch a documentary about the history 
of flat-pack furniture.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  can, could, and be able to p.163 
Communicative  What can I do? p.193  
(instructions p.175) 
Vocabulary  DIY and repairs p.215 (instructions p.204)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The history of flat-pack furniture
For students
Workbook  6B
Online Practice  6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following jobs on the board:
CLEANING THE OVEN  PAINTING  CHANGING A LIGHT BULB
CHANGING THE SHEETS  PUTTING A PICTURE ON THE WALL  IRONING
Mime any verb phrases that Sts are not sure about. Tell Sts 
that these are among the most hated household jobs in 
the UK. 
Put Sts in pairs and tell them to find out who does these 
household jobs in their partner’s home. 
Ask them if there are any jobs in the list that they have never 
done themselves.
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 90@@
90
c	 Focus on the task and point out the two different groups 
of verb prompts and the examples. Tell Sts that they 
should make sentences beginning with the phrases 1–5 
and use the prompts, e.g. I think everybody should be able 
to give first aid.
	 Give Sts time to think about their sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could give Sts enough time to write 
their five sentences.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other their 
sentences. Encourage them to react and to ask for more 
information where possible.
	 Finally, get some feedback from various pairs. Find out 
whether Sts mostly agreed or disagreed with their partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by completing 
one or two statements yourself.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the sentence stems 
with their own ideas.
3	SPEAKING & WRITING
a	 Focus on the instructions and go through the list of 
problems, making sure Sts understand phrases like power 
cut, etc.
	 Now focus on the Responding to other people’s 
suggestions box and go through it with the class. Model 
the responses with natural intonation.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss their ideas for 
solving the problems. 
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to use expressions 
from the box.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
Possible ideas
•	 red wine – put salt or white wine on it
•	 screw in glasses – put nail varnish over the end of the screw
•	 pen mark on your jeans – rub it with hairspray
•	 the heel breaks – break off the other heel, so both shoes are 
the same / find a quick-repair heel bar
•	 freezer power cut – don’t open the door; cover it with towels 
to keep the temperature the same
•	 phone in toilet – put it in a bowl of rice to soak up the liquid
•	 zip breaks on suitcase – have your case wrapped in plastic 
film / buy some luggage straps or string to tie round them
•	 car nearly out of petrol – drive very slowly, and take your car 
out of gear when you’re going down a hill
•	 shoelace breaks – use string, or the wire from your earphones, 
or cut the remaining one in half
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by choosing one 
of the problems and telling the class your own solution.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they know any other practical 
solutions for household problems.
b	 Focus on the task. Tell Sts to choose their best solution to 
a problem from a and write a paragraph about it.
	 Tell Sts to start by describing the problem and then 
offering a solution. They could refer back to the blog in 1b. 
Encourage them to use the expressions they practised in 
the grammar focus.
	 Sts should check their paragraphs for mistakes and then 
swap them with another student to read.
Grammar notes
Sts will have met these forms before, so this grammar 
focus should be mainly revision and consolidation, 
although Rule 5 will probably be new. The emphasis here 
is on the use of these forms in various functions.
You may want to remind Sts that can and could don’t add 
-s in the third person and don’t have any other forms (e.g. 
infinitive). They can be used to talk about the present and 
the future.
Ability, possibility, and permission
Rule 1:
•	 Emphasize that can is the natural and most common 
form to use when the meaning is know how to, e.g. I can 
swim. Remind Sts not to use to after can.
•	 The conditional form could is often used as an 
alternative to would, for instance in 2nd or 3rd 
conditional sentences, e.g. If I had more experience, I 
could get a good job. If you hadn’t tried to book so late, 
you could have got a table.
Rules 3–5:
•	 Sts will focus on when to use be able to rather than  
can / could.
•	 Highlight that we often use can when we’re talking 
about decisions and future arrangements, e.g. I can 
meet you for coffee after class. The doctor can see you next 
Monday. In most other cases we use will be able to for 
the future, for instance when we talk about a skill or 
ability that we don’t have now, but will have in future, 
e.g. I’ll be able to speak basic Spanish when the course is 
over (NOT I can speak basic Spanish…).
	 Focus on the example sentences for ability, possibility, 
and permission and play audio e 6.13 for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for deduction e 6.14.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  g He can sew    2  g you can phone / you’ll be able to phone   
3  f    4  g You can’t be    5  f    6  g she might be able to help   
7  f    8  g Will I be able to use    9  g I was able to get    10  f
b
1	 This screw is much too short – it can’t be the right one.
2	 I hate not being able to try things on.
3	 If we could afford it, we’d eat out every week.
4	 Could / Can you see if they have these jeans in my size?
5	 If it doesn’t fit you, you should be able to change it.
6	 They couldn’t / weren’t able to find the book anywhere in 
the UK, so they ordered it from a US website.
7	 I’ve never been able to pronounce her name correctly.
8	 Fifty pounds for two pairs of socks? They can’t cost that much!
9	 I spent ages looking for the right paint, and in the end I was 
able to find the perfect colour.
10	 She’s got a beautiful voice. I’d love to be able to sing like that.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 91@@
91
	 Point out the Paraphrasing box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Remind Sts that in the first part, A is the customer and 
B is the shop assistant. Tell Sts B to start by saying Can I 
help you?
	 To demonstrate, you could role-play the first exchange 
with a strong student in front of the class.
	 The customers should write the names below the three 
items after hearing them from the shop assistant, who 
should spell the words if necessary.
	 Sts then swap roles, and A is the shop assistant, B the 
customer.
	 Get feedback from various pairs to see how well they 
communicated what they wanted to buy. Model and drill 
the pronunciation of all the objects that both A and B 
were given.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get some Sts to role-play their exchange 
in front of the class after they have done this in pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank DIY and repairs on 
p.161.
Vocabulary notes
In a shed: tools and other things for repairs
Sts might have come across the term cable, e.g. a 
computer cable, so you might want to explain the 
difference between cable (= set of wires, covered in plastic 
or rubber, that carries electricity, telephone signals, etc.) 
and wire (= metal in the form of thin thread).
Verb phrases
Highlight the unusual sound-spelling of sew /səʊ/.
	 Focus on 1 In a shed: tools and other things for repairs. 
Point out that a shed is a small building used for storing 
tools, gardening equipment, bicycles, etc. Get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.16  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.16
DIY and repairs
1 In a shed: tools and other things for repairs
 15	 brick
 11	 bucket
9	 drill
5	 hammer
2	 ladder
 14	 nail
 10	 padlock
6	 paintbrush
 12	 piece of wood
8	 rope
7	 screwdriver
 13	 screw
4	 spanner
3	 tap
1	 tile
 16	 wire
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA IDEA   If there’s time, put Sts in small groups of three 
or four and get them to read each other’s work. Each group 
votes for the best one. The winners from each group read 
their paragraphs to the class, and the class votes for a winner.
4	VOCABULARY  DIY and repairs, paraphrasing
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Focus on the photo and 
the questions. Elicit that the shop is a DIY store and sells 
tools and materials for DIY. Find out how many Sts go to 
DIY stores from time to time.
b	 e 6.15  Focus on the instructions and the four objects 
at the bottom of the photo. Model and drill their 
pronunciation. Tell Sts that the man wants to buy two of 
these things.
	 Tell Sts to cover the conversation in c. Alternatively, you 
could write the four objects on the board and get Sts to 
close their books.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and choose the two items.
	 Check answers.
He wants to buy some screws and a light bulb.
e 6.15
A	 Excuse me.
B	 Yes, can I help you?
A	 Yes, please. I’m looking for some…Sorry, I don’t know the word. 
They’re the things that you put into wood. I want to make some 
shelves.
B	 You mean screws?
A	 Ah, yes, that’s it. And I need one more thing. My lamp doesn’t 
work. I need a new, er…
B	 Light bulb?
A	 Yes, thank you.
B	 You’ll find them both over there, behind the gardening things.
c	 Tell Sts to uncover the conversation. Focus on the 
instructions and give Sts time to read the conversation. 
Tell them to complete each gap with one word as they 
listen.
	 Play the audio again, pausing as necessary to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Check answers.
1  	looking    2  word    3  things    4  lamp    5  work
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to try to complete the missing 
words first and then play the audio for them to listen and 
check.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to practise the conversation with a 
partner.
d	 Refer Sts back to A’s expression They’re the things that 
you put into wood from the conversation in c. Tell Sts that 
it’s very common, even in your own language, to forget 
the exact word for something, e.g. a tool, and when this 
happens, people explain what they want using other 
words. They are now going to practise doing this.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication What’s it called?, A on p.109,  
B on p.112.
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully and make 
sure they understand what they have to do. 
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 92@@
92
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
5	PRONUNCIATION  consonant clusters
Pronunciation notes
Consonant clusters are two or more consonant sounds 
that come together in a word, either at the beginning 
of the word (script, spring, struggle), in the middle 
(sunglasses, describe), or at the end of the word (pounds). 
They can also occur if a word that ends in two consonant 
sounds is followed by a word beginning with one or more 
consonant sounds. Clusters are common in languages like 
Polish or Russian and will not be difficult for learners of 
English from such language backgrounds.
In contrast, for learners whose first language does not 
have so many clusters, including Arabic, Spanish, Turkish, 
or Portuguese, this area of pronunciation will be difficult. 
Faced with a problematic cluster, learners usually apply 
one of two strategies:
•	 they insert a short vowel (usually /ɪ/ or /ə/), so that screw 
sounds like /ɪskruː/ or /sɪkruː/, and paintbrush sounds 
like /ˈpeɪntəbrʌʃ/.
•	 they delete one of the consonant sounds, so that screw 
sounds like crew, for example, and paintbrush sounds 
like /ˈpeɪnbrʌʃ/ or /ˈpeɪnrʌʃ/.
If learners can pronounce a cluster without adding small 
vowels or deleting consonant sounds, this is ideal. If they 
need to add a small vowel, this is usually comprehensible. 
If they delete any of the consonants, this is not generally 
comprehensible.
a	 e 6.19  Focus on the Consonant clusters box and go 
through it with the class. Use the examples in the box to 
demonstrate the concept of consonant clusters.
	 Point out that words like card or walk do not contain 
clusters. Although both end in two consonant letters, r 
and l are silent in these words; a cluster refers to two or 
more consonant sounds that come together.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. Focus their attention on the clusters shown with 
the pink letters.
e 6.19
See words in Student’s Book on p.62
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
b	 Focus on the sentences and point out that sometimes 
clusters are created when a word ends in a consonant 
sound and the next word begins in one or more 
consonant sounds.
	 Individually or in pairs, Sts practise saying the sentences.
	 Finally, get individual Sts to say the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model each sentence first for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Then put Sts in pairs to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words and look at the 
photos to see if they can remember what they are.
	 Now focus on 2 In a drawer: useful things around the 
house and make sure Sts know how to pronounce drawer 
/drɔː/. Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.17
2 In a drawer: useful things around the house
2	 box of matches
7	 drawing pin
8	 fuse
6	 glue
11	 handle
4	 light bulb
5	 needle and thread
9	 penknife
10	 Sellotape
1	 string
 12	 tape measure
3	 torch
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words and look at the 
photos to see if they can remember what they are.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may want to teach other things for 
the shed / drawer, e.g. a saw, elastic bands, etc.
	 Now focus on 3 Verb phrases and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 6.18  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Point out that you can also mend sth 
made of material or paper that’s torn, such as clothes or a 
page of a book.
e 6.18
3 Verb phrases
1	 c  change a light bulb or a wheel
2	 g  drill a hole in a wall or in a piece of wood
3	 h  mend something that’s broken
4	 i  put together flat-pack furniture
5	 f  put up shelves or curtains
6	 e  set up a new wi-fi network or a home cinema system
7	 b  sew a button on a shirt
8	 a  stick something together with glue or Sellotape
9	 d  tie two things together, for example, your shoelaces or two 
pieces of string
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the verb phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover verbs 1–9, look at the 
phrases, and say the verbs.
	 Finally, focus on the Synonyms box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 93@@
93
all going to look. The guy in the store said they were easy to put 
up, that it wouldn’t take long, etc., etc., and I’m quite handy – quite 
practical – so I thought, ‘No problem’ – though I admit my girlfriend 
was a bit sceptical. Anyway, when we got home, I thought I’d 
assemble one cupboard, just to see how easy it was going to be. It 
was a nightmare. The instructions were incomprehensible – it took 
me the whole afternoon just to do this one cupboard, and when it 
was finished, I realized I’d put the door handle on the wrong way 
round. In the end, we had to pay someone to come and do it all for 
us. But at least they looked good.
3
I have lots of things from IKEA – it’s great for students because, 
generally speaking, it’s pretty cheap. Anyway, I bought a table 
there with my boyfriend not long ago. We started putting the table 
together, and at one point we had three legs screwed in. Then we 
reached for the screws to attach the fourth leg – and realized there 
were no more screws. We had to take off the other three legs, take 
one screw off every one of them and reassemble the table. So now 
at least it has four legs, but it’s rather wobbly, and I’m not very happy 
with it. It does annoy me when they don’t give you the right number 
of nails or screws or whatever, and it’s not the first time it’s happened 
to me. Now I always check before I bring stuff home.
e	 Give Sts time to go through questions A–G and to 
compare with a partner to see what they remember. 
Remind them that there is one item they do not need. 
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each speaker. 
Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
A   3    B  1    C  2    D  1    F  3    G  2
f	 e  6.21  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
read the five extracts. Elicit who said each one (Speaker 
1 said extracts 1 and 2, Speaker 2 said extracts 3 and 4, and 
Speaker 3 said extract 5).
	 Then play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to say how they think the 
words are spelled and then writing them on the board. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
1  swearing    2  take, pieces    3  handy    4  wrong way    
5  wobbly
e 6.21
1	 After hours and hours, and a lot of swearing, I finally managed to 
put it together.
2	 So I had to take it to pieces, move all the bits into the bedroom…
3	 I’m quite handy – quite practical – so I thought, ‘No problem’…
4	 I realized I’d put the door handle on the wrong way round.
5	 So now at least it has four legs, but it’s rather wobbly…
	 Now get Sts, in pairs, to guess what the words mean. Tell 
them to read the whole sentence as the context will help 
them guess.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with script 6.20 on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
6	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding an 
anecdote
a	 Focus on the first question. You could tell Sts that the 
company is called IKEA because I and K are the initials of 
Ingvar Kamprad, the company’s founder; E is for Elmtaryd, 
the farm where Ingvar Kamprad grew up; and A is for 
Agunnaryd, the name of a village near his hometown.
	 Then do the questions as a whole-class activity, or get Sts 
to answer in pairs and then get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the cartoon and elicit answers from the class. 
Possible answer
Self-assembly (or flat-pack) furniture isn’t as easy to put together 
as some people think.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to read the beginning of an article 
about IKEA. Tell them to look at the title, It looks so easy at 
first…, and speculate about what the article will say (i.e. it 
probably won’t be so easy).
	 Give Sts time to read the beginning of the article once all 
the way through. They should find the answers to the two 
questions and either underline them in the text or make 
notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 one in ten Europeans now sleeps in an IKEA bed, and its 
catalogue is in more homes than any other publication, 
including the Bible and the complete works of Shakespeare.
2	 the frustrating one-way system used to navigate the stores; 
the strange names given to the products; the problem of 
getting the furniture home and trying to put it together
d	 e 6.20  Tell Sts they are going to listen to three people 
tell a short anecdote about an experience with flat-pack 
furniture. Focus on the two questions.
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1: a wardrobe; yes
Speaker 2: kitchen cupboards; yes
Speaker 3: a table; not really (it’s wobbly)
e 6.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
1
I love IKEA. Especially the bookshelves. We have several. And I’m 
usually pretty good at putting their stuff together. But I have had a 
few problems over the years. I remember I once had some trouble 
with a wardrobe. After hours and hours, and a lot of swearing, I 
finally managed to put it together. But I’d assembled it in my study, 
next to the bedroom, which was where the wardrobe was going, 
because I had more space there. And when my husband and I tried 
to move it into the bedroom, we couldn’t get it to fit through the 
door. So I had to take it to pieces, move all the bits into the bedroom, 
and start all over again. I suppose it was my fault, though, not IKEA’s. 
And the wardrobe looked very nice and has lasted for ages.
2
About three years ago, my girlfriend and I went to IKEA to buy a 
kitchen. The units were cheap and cheerful, but they also looked 
quite well-designed, and we were very excited by how good it was 
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 94@@
94
Today almost everybody has a flat-pack wardrobe, table, or 
bookcase. But did you know there are entire flat-pack rooms? You 
can have a flat-pack bedroom, bathroom, or kitchen. You can even 
build an entire house out of flat-pack!
There are many reasons why this type of furniture has been 
successful. Manufacturers are able to produce it quickly and 
transport it easily, so it’s cheaper and more convenient than other 
furniture. And while it might look complicated at first, it is generally 
very well designed, so it’s very, very easy to put together. In fact, 
anyone can do it!
I’m nearly finished, and I’ve only been working on it for a few 
minutes! I haven’t used these bits, but they’re probably not 
important. So, what do you think?
c	 Now tell Sts they are going to watch the documentary 
again and this time they must answer questions 1–7. 
Give Sts time to read the questions and see if they 
can remember any of the answers. They could do this 
individually or in pairs.
	 Play the video again the whole way through. You could 
pause the video after Sts have heard about Sauder and 
the birth of flat-pack furniture (see *** in the script), and 
elicit answers to questions 1–3.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Complicated instructions and missing parts
2	 Benches and coffee tables
3	 They displayed it at a furniture show in Chicago.
4	 He was finding it very difficult to fit a table into his car.
5	 He took the legs off, put it in the car, and put it together again 
at home.
6	 Manufacturers are able to produce it quickly and transport 
it easily; it’s cheaper and more convenient; it’s generally very 
well designed and easy to put together.
7	 There are some bits he hasn’t used.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
g	 Focus on the instructions and go through the questions, 
making sure Sts understand the different meanings.
	 Then focus on the Describing a process box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to use the questions in 
the box to guide them. If your Sts haven’t done any of 
these things themselves, tell them to talk about a time 
somebody they know did them, e.g. a family member.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model the activity first by talking about 
one of the topics yourself. You could pick up on some of the 
natural language typical of telling anecdotes in f.
7	r  VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary about the 
history of flat-pack furniture. Go through questions 1–6, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. patented, etc.
	 Give Sts time, in pairs, to try to guess the answers.
b	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and check their answers in a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Find out if any Sts got all the answers correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1  b    2  c    3  b    4  a    5  a    6  c
The history of flat-pack furniture
Hi there, I’m Daniel. I’ve just bought a new bookcase. All I need to do 
is put it together. It shouldn’t be difficult. After all, all I need to do is 
follow the instructions.
OK…this might not be as easy as I thought. I don’t know why I’m 
surprised. People have warned me about flat-pack furniture!
Almost everybody has a story about complicated instructions and 
missing parts. But it’s incredibly popular, and today most people 
own at least one piece of flat-pack furniture. So, how has this 
concept come to dominate the entire furniture industry? Well, the 
story begins with a man called Erie J. Sauder.
Sauder owned a furniture business in Ohio in the nineteen thirties. 
He made benches, but with the spare wood he made small coffee 
tables. Because Sauder used leftover wood, the tables were cheap 
but high quality. In nineteen forty, two travelling salesmen noticed 
these tables. They really liked them. So they took one and displayed 
it at a furniture show in Chicago. A few days later they returned with 
an order for twenty-five thousand tables!
Sauder had to transport all of these new tables to Chicago, so he 
invented furniture that he could take apart and put into boxes. 
This made it easy to transport, and people could put it together at 
home. He patented the idea in nineteen fifty-one, and the ready-to-
assemble furniture industry was born.
***
But the idea didn’t become popular immediately. Five years later, a 
Swedish man named Gillis Lundgren was moving some furniture. He 
had never heard of ready-to-assemble furniture, and he was finding 
it very difficult to fit a table into his car. But then he realized that if 
he took the legs off, he would be able to put it in the car and put it 
together again at home. He discussed the idea with his employers, 
a small, local firm…called IKEA. They loved it and decided to focus 
their entire business on it.
IKEA launched their first flat-pack product in nineteen fifty-six. Today, 
it’s the largest furniture retailer in the world, generating sales of over 
twenty-seven billion euros a year. So it’s safe to say that the flat-pack 
concept has been a huge success. 
6B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 95@@
	1A	
95
	5&6	Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  b    5  a
e 6.22
1
I = interviewer, R = Rafael
I	 How much TV do you watch?
R	 I watch a fair amount of television, maybe at least one, maybe 
two, three hours a day.
I	 Do you think you watch too much TV?
R	 Maybe, since I fall asleep in front of it.
I	 What kind of shows do you watch most?
R	 Some news, um, some entertainment, late night talk shows and 
then some French TV or some drama.
2
I = interviewer, M = Melanie
I	 Would you like to live in a city or in the country?
M	 I live in Brooklyn, New York, so I live in a different borough.
I	 Would you like to move to the country?
M	 I lived in a place that was more country than here, and while 
I found it really peaceful, I didn’t find it that stimulating, so I 
definitely would prefer to live in a city, at least, at least right now, 
you know, I’m twenty-five, I kind of want lots of things going on. 
You know.
3
I = interviewer, R = Royce
I	 What is more important to you when you eat out, the food or the 
service?
R	 The food is much more important when I go out to eat. If the 
service is bad, I can forgive that.
I	 Is there anything that waiters do that really annoys you?
R	 Um, mostly just when they’re, um, when you can’t get their 
attention and when they ask you how things are when you’ve just 
taken a big bite of food.
4
I = interviewer, J = Julia
I	 Do you usually tip in restaurants and taxis?
C	 Um yes, I usually tip in restaurants and taxis.
I	 How much?
C	 Um, I usually just do the standard, like the twenty per cent, yeah.
I	 Are there any situations where you feel embarrassed to tip?
C	 Um, sometimes I’m embarrassed to tip at hair salons, or if I’m 
getting my nails done, which I almost never do, but just cos I’m 
not sure how much.
5
I = interviewer, L = Lynn
I	 Are you good at DIY?
L	 Yes, I’m really good and I love renovating and refurbishing, and 
doing everything myself, and I mean really by myself because I 
don’t invite friends or anyone, I just do it alone and I love it.
I	 What was the last thing you did?
L	 The last thing was my bedroom. I renovated my bedroom. It was 
waiting for three years to be renovated. Yes, that’s the last thing I 
did.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Video  Can you understand these people? 5&6
Quick Test 6
File 6 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    2  a    3  c    4  a    5  b    6  c    7  c    8  b    9  a    
10  a    11  c    12  b    13  b    14  a    15  c
VOCABULARY
a
1	 barn (the others are farm animals)
2	 episode (the others are types of TV programmes)
3	 rope (the others are tools)
4	 tray (the others are cutlery)
5	 saucer (the others are things you drink out of)
b
1  turn    2  soap    3  forecast    4  current    5  box
c
1  leaves    2  stream    3  valley    4  pick    5  lamb
d
1  ladder    2  torch    3  thread    4  screws    5  set up
e
1  ask    2  leave    3  take    4  sew    5  change
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  drama /ə/    2  valley /l/    3  wood /ʊ/    4  knife /n/    
5  bucket /ʌ/
d
1  programme    2  documentary    3  vinegar    4  recommend    
5  screwdriver
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
2	 watch a video
b
1  wasn’t able    2  recipes    3  alone    4  themselves    5  so    
6  filmed    7  how
Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 96@@
96
	1A	
	7A	 Take your cash
1	VOCABULARY  cash machines
Vocabulary notes
Cash machine instructions
These vary slightly from machine to machine, depending 
on which bank they belong to, but the ones on p.67 are 
fairly standard.
a	 Books open. Get Sts to look at the image and if you didn’t 
do the Optional lead-in, elicit / explain what a cash 
machine is (= a machine in or outside a bank, etc., from 
which you can get money from your bank account by 
using a special plastic card).
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time, in pairs, to work 
out what the missing words are. 
	 Check answers to the first question. You could also check 
Sts know the meaning of temporarily (= to last a short 
time).
1  cash machine    2  out    3  order
	 Now get Sts, in their pairs, to discuss the other two 
questions.
	 Get some feedback. 
b	 Tell Sts they are going to read a text about the history of 
the cash machine. Go through questions 1–4, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis. The text explains the meaning 
of ATM and PIN. You might want to check Sts know the 
meaning of digit (= any of the numbers from 0 to 9).
	 Give Sts time to read the text and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Highlight that PIN is always pronounced /pɪn/, 
not P-I-N. Elicit more ideas for question 4 (e.g. check your 
balance, deposit money, pay in cheques, etc.).
1	 Because his bank was closed when he needed some cash.
2	 Because Barron’s wife said that she could only remember four 
digits.
3	 £10 in £1 notes
4	 Print a bank statement, top up your phone, print photos
c	 Focus on the instructions and the cash machine 
instructions A–I. The formal terms used on the cash 
machine screens are focused on in e.
	 Give Sts time to match the instructions to the screens.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
d	 e 7.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. For 4A you might want to make it clear to 
Sts that other transactions, such as checking your balance, 
can be chosen.
1  F    2  C    3  G    4  A    5  H    6  E    7  D    8  I    9  B
e 7.1
How to use an ATM to withdraw cash
1	 F	 A  Insert your card. 
B  Put your card into the machine.
2	 C	 A  Select your language.  
B  Choose the language you want.
 G   phrasal verbs
 V   cash machines, phrasal verbs 
 P   linking
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is money. The lesson starts with a 
vocabulary focus on cash machines, where Sts learn the 
history of its invention and some useful lexis for using cash 
machines in English. This is followed by a listening about two 
news stories about ATMs. Sts finally talk about their own use 
of cash machines.
In the second half, Sts go to the Vocabulary Bank to learn 
more new phrasal verbs, and revise the ones from Files 
1–6. This leads into the grammar focus on phrasal verbs. 
The three types of phrasal verbs (separable, no object, and 
inseparable) are revised and practised. In Pronunciation, Sts 
practise linking in phrasal verbs. Then they consolidate what 
they have learned in a speaking activity. Finally, Sts read a 
short article about the relationship between money and 
happiness, and then true stories about people giving money 
away to help others.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  phrasal verbs p.164 
Communicative  Talking of money… p.194 
(instructions p.175) 
Vocabulary  Phrasal verbs p.216 (instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook  7A
Online Practice  7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board:
•	 GO TO THE BANK 
•	 USE ONLINE BANKING 
•	 USE A CASH MACHINE
Ask Sts How often do you…?, using the prompts on the 
board.
Now write on the board:
•	
 POINT 
•	 HOLE IN THE 
 
•	 AT
Ask Sts to try to complete the three other terms for cash 
machine. 
Check answers and ask Sts to guess why it’s also called a hole 
in the wall (a hole in the wall was originally a cash machine 
installed in a hole in the wall outside a bank, but it is now 
sometimes used to refer to any cash machine). You could tell 
Sts that ATM stands for Automated Teller Machine – a teller 
is a person whose job is to receive and pay out money in 
a bank.
cash point    hole in the wall    ATM
7A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 97@@
97
Story 2
And finally on Texas News this Wednesday evening, the man who got 
trapped inside an ATM. Customers who were using an ATM in Corpus 
Christi earlier today got a big surprise. While they were withdrawing 
money from the machine, several people received handwritten 
notes, asking for help.  
A man, who asked not to be named, had locked himself in while he 
was changing the lock to the ATM room at the bank. Unfortunately, 
he’d left his cell phone and the swipe card he needed to get out of 
the room outside, in his van. When he realized that he couldn’t get 
out and couldn’t phone for help, he started passing notes through 
the ATM receipt slot to customers who were taking out cash. One of 
them read, ‘Please help. I’m stuck in here and I don’t have my phone. 
Please call my boss!’
At first, the customers thought the notes were a trick. But eventually, 
one of them called the police. When the police arrived, they heard 
a very quiet voice coming from inside the ATM. An officer went 
into the bank, broke down the door to the room behind the cash 
machine, and found the man. Senior Officer Richard Olden said, ‘We 
thought it was a joke. It was just crazy that somebody was stuck in 
the ATM. Luckily, the man is OK.’
b	 Give Sts time to read the questions. You could put Sts in 
pairs and see if they can remember any of the answers.
	 Play the audio, pausing after the first story to give Sts time 
to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary. Repeat the process for Story 2.
	 Check answers.
Story 1
1	 They rushed to take money out of the machine.
2	 200 residents for 2 hours
3	 Middle aged, and a few children
4	 Because people started pushing into the queue
5	 Switched off the ATM, and posted a message on Twitter to 
stop people from coming
6	 It wasn’t the customers’ fault and they didn’t have to pay the 
money back.
Story 2
1	 He was changing the lock to the ATM room.
2	 His phone and his swipe card
3	 Because he couldn’t get out of the room and he couldn’t call 
for help.
4	 By passing notes through the machine to people who were 
taking money out
5	 That it was a trick
6	 They broke down the door and found the man.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the two extracts and answer the question as a 
whole-class activity.
Possible answers
The villager probably didn’t want other villagers to know that  
he / she had spoken to the press.
The man who was stuck in the ATM was probably very 
embarrassed.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions, 
giving as much information as possible.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary. You will 
probably need to pre-teach the expression It swallowed 
my card, as this is one of the most common problems that 
people have with cash machines.
3	 G	 A  Enter your PIN.  
B  Key in your four-digit PIN. Then press ENTER.
4	 A	 A  Select a transaction.  
B  Choose ‘Withdraw cash’ from the main menu. 
5	 H	 A  Select the account type.  
B  Choose the bank account you want to use.
6	 E	 A  Select or enter the amount.  
B  Choose or key in the amount of money you want to take out. 
Then press ENTER.
7	 D	 A  Remove your card.  
B  Take your card out of the machine.
8	 I	 A  Take your cash.  
B  Take your money out of the machine within thirty seconds.
9	 B	 A  Do you want a receipt?  
B  Decide if you want a receipt, and press YES or NO.
e	 Focus on the instructions and point out that 1–5 are 
formal words that appear on the cash machine screen. Sts 
must match them to phrasal verbs a–e. Tell Sts to look at 
the screens in c to help them.
	 Check answers.
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  e    5  d
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING  listening for 
news facts
a	 e 7.2  Tell Sts they are going to listen to two different 
news stories about cash machines.
	 Focus on the pictures and the questions.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the two questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Story 1: The cash machine gave double the amount of cash 
people had keyed in.
Story 2: The cash machine gave their money and notes asking 
for help.
Both stories have a happy ending because in Story 1 the people 
were allowed to keep the cash, and in Story 2 the man who was 
sending the notes was able to get out.
e 7.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
Story 1
Tonight we’re going to start with a good news story – well, good 
news for some people! Yesterday, bank customers in a village in 
Hampshire were thousands of pounds richer after an ATM started 
giving out double the money people had asked for.
When people heard the news, they rushed to take money out of 
the faulty machine, and long queues formed. For two hours, around 
two hundred residents continued to withdraw money. It was mostly 
middle-aged people, but a few children arrived on their bikes with 
their parents’ bank cards. One villager, who asked not to be named, 
said that some people had used five or six bank cards and had got 
three hundred pounds free with each card. At first, people thought 
it was funny, but then some people became a bit aggressive when 
other people started pushing into the queue.
Finally, after two hours, the police arrived and switched off the ATM. 
They even posted a message on Twitter to stop more people 
arriving. They warned that receiving too much money from a cash 
machine might be a crime, and that the bank would ask people to 
pay back the money. However, later the bank said that it wasn’t the 
customers’ fault and that no one would have to return the money.
7A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 98@@
98
	 Now focus on 2 Phrasal verbs with away and back and 
go through the box The meaning of the particle with 
the class.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.4
2 Phrasal verbs with away and back
away
1	 Don’t run away! I won’t hurt you.
2	 The boss will be away until the end of next week. He’s at a 
conference in Mexico.
3	 Please put your toys away. They’re all over the floor.
4	 If you take a paracetamol, it’ll take the pain away!
back
5	 I’m sorry, but I’m confiscating your phone. You’ll get it back at the 
end of day.
6	 He’s out, I’m afraid. Could you call back in about half an hour?
7	 A  Where are you going?
	
B  Just to the shops. I’ll be back in ten minutes.
8	 That’s my book! Give it back.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the sentences and try to 
remember the phrasal verbs from the list.
	 Finally, focus on 3 More phrasal verbs with take and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.5
3 More phrasal verbs with take
1	 Sorry, I can’t come tonight. I’m taking my girlfriend out for dinner.
2	 They’re taking on ten new interns at Radio London. Why don’t we 
apply?
3	 I take after my mother. We’re both very outgoing.
4	 The plane took off twenty minutes late.
5	 Unfortunately, my company was taken over by a multinational 
firm, and I lost my job.
6	 Take off your shoes, please. I’ve just cleaned the floor.
7	 You need to take the keyboard apart to clean it properly.
8	 I need to do more exercise. I think I’ll take up cycling.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the sentences and try to 
remember the phrasal verbs from the list.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the instructions and point out that in 1–4 each 
sentence is repeated three or four times, but with a 
different word order. Tell Sts to decide which sentences 
have the correct word order.
	 Check answers.
1	 He gave away his money. He gave his money away. He gave it 
away.
2	 We asked for the bill. We asked for it.
3	 She got up early.
4	 I’m looking forward to my holiday. I’m looking forward to it.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.144.
	 Don’t over-correct, but encourage Sts to communicate.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Choose one of the questions and answer it 
yourself, giving as much information as possible.
3	VOCABULARY & GRAMMAR  phrasal verbs
a	 Focus on the task and get Sts to choose the odd one out.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could elicit / explain the meaning of the two 
phrasal verbs that can be used with the bold noun.
1  settle down    2  close down    3  look round    
4  set up    5  grow up
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Phrasal verbs on p.162.
Vocabulary notes
Many Sts worry that there are so many phrasal verbs, 
some even with more than one meaning, that they 
will never manage to learn them all. It is important to 
encourage Sts to learn them bit by bit, ideally in a context, 
and to just treat them like any other vocabulary item.
Common phrasal verbs with two meanings that Sts 
should know are take off (clothes and a plane) and give up 
(stop doing sth or surrender).
Here they have been grouped in three different ways, 
according to the topic, according to the particle, and 
according to the verb, as different Sts find some ways 
easier to remember. Some of these phrasal verbs have 
come up before, so Sts shouldn’t feel too overwhelmed.
	 Focus on the Phrasal verbs revision box and check that 
Sts remember the meaning of the different verbs.
	 Remind Sts of the difference between the three types, 
but don’t spend too long on this, as Sts will be practising 
the grammar of phrasal verbs in d. Tell Sts that a good 
dictionary will tell them if a phrasal verb that takes an 
object is Type 2 or 3. Point out to Sts that the green, red, 
and blue text in sections 1–3 corresponds to the Type 1, 2, 
3 colour-coding in the information box.
	 Now focus on 1 Phrasal verbs to do with money and 
get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.3
Phrasal verbs 
1 Phrasal verbs to do with money
1	 e	 If I lend you the money, can you pay me back next week?
2	 f	 I need to take out some money. Where’s the nearest cash 
machine?
3	 b	 I won’t be able to pay off my student loan until I’m forty-five.
4	 c	 He’s so generous. When he won the lottery, he gave nearly all 
the money away.
5	 d	 Nowadays it’s difficult for couples to live on only one salary.
6	 a	 I had to live off my parents while I was at university.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover definitions a–f, read the 
sentences, and see if they can remember the meaning of the 
coloured phrasal verbs. Or Sts can cover sentences 1–6 and 
try to remember the phrasal verbs from the meanings a–f. 
They could do this individually or in pairs.
7A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 99@@
99
b	 e 7.9  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 7 .9
1	 c	 The machine says ‘Insert your card’. Put it in.
2	 f	 Your shoes are really dirty. Take them off.
3	 d	 Waiter, I can’t finish this steak. Take it away.
4	 b	 This chicken’s past its sell-by date. Throw it away.
5	 a	 The rubbish is beginning to smell. Take it out.
6	 e	 It’s probably on Wikipedia. Look it up.
c	 e 7.10  Tell Sts they must listen and repeat a–f, paying 
attention to the linkers. Elicit / Explain that the preposition 
in a phrasal verb is unstressed unless it comes at the end 
of a sentence or phrase, e.g. When did you set off?
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
e 7.10
See a–f in a in Student’s Book on p.68
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying sentences a–f. This will help them for the next activity.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts to look for linking in sentences 1–6 in a, 
e.g. says insert, shoes are really, etc.
d	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs, A and B.
	 Sts B (books open) should start by reading a sentence 
from 1–6, and Sts A (books closed) should answer using 
one of the sentences in a–f from memory.
	 Monitor the linking in a–f as Sts are doing the task. Make 
sure they swap roles.
e	 e 7.11  Focus on the instructions and the example.
	 Play the audio, pausing at the first beep, and elicit the 
response from the class.
	 Now play the rest of the audio, pausing at the beep in 
each sentence.
e 7.11
1	 You owe me money. (pause) Pay me back.
2	 The music’s too loud. (pause) Turn it down.
3	 There’s a towel on the floor. (pause) Pick it up.
4	 No one’s watching the TV. (pause) Switch it off.
5	 Your clothes are everywhere. (pause) Put them away.
6	 Here’s the form. (pause) Fill it in.
7	 I can’t hear the TV. (pause) Turn it up.
8	 Those shoes would look great on you. (pause) Try them on.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts find it difficult to say the second 
sentence after hearing the sentence on the audio, give them 
more time and tell them to write the answer. After they have 
heard the last sentence on the audio, get them to compare 
their answers with their partner. Play the audio for Sts to 
listen and check. Finally, play the audio again, and ask Sts 
to try to say the correct response without looking at their 
written answers.
Grammar notes
Phrasal verbs are always difficult for Sts, mainly because 
there are so many, and because even when Sts think they 
know the meaning of a phrasal verb, they then discover 
that it may have several more meanings. However, the 
grammar of phrasal verbs is not difficult, and Sts should 
have seen the rules before.
Type 1: Highlight that as in Type 3, the verb and particle 
in these phrasal verbs are never separated, e.g. by a time 
adverbial (NOT He came three days later back).
The phrasal verbs used in the exercises have all been 
taught before and should be known.
	 Focus on the example sentences for Type 1 phrasal 
verbs with no object and play audio e 7.6 for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for Type 2 phrasal verbs with an object – 
separable e 7.7 and Type 3 phrasal verbs with an 
object – inseparable e 7.8.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  f    2  sent it back    3  f    4  live off their parents    
5  took it back    6  f    7  paid her back    8  f    9  grew up in 
Wales    10  out of these trousers
b
1	 Could you pick them up at the airport?
2	 I’m really looking forward to it.
3	 No, they closed it down a month ago.
4	 Please take it away.
5	 No, and I’ve been looking for them for half an hour!
6	 I gave it away.
7	 I’m going to throw it away.
8	 She was with her husband for 20 years, and she looked after 
him during his final illness.
9	 No, but I’ve asked for it.
 10	 Could you turn it up a bit?
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
4	PRONUNCIATION  linking
Pronunciation notes
This exercise gives more practice of linking, especially 
the linking between a word that finishes in a consonant 
sound and a word beginning with a vowel, which is very 
common with phrasal verbs.
a	 Focus on the Linking box and go through it with the 
class. Highlight that with words ending in -w, the w is not 
normally pronounced (new, throw, etc.), but if the word is 
followed by a word beginning with a vowel, as in throw 
away, the w is pronounced. You could write some more 
phrases on the board for Sts to practise saying, e.g. NEW 
AGE, I SAW IT, and CAN I BORROW A PEN?, etc.
	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to match 1–6 to a–f.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
7A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 100@@
100
1  C    2  B    3  D    4  A    5  H    6  E    7  G    8  F
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA IDEA   Focus Sts’ attention on the money expressions 
in the article, e.g. a six-figure salary, handed over (money), 
donate regularly, frugal, etc.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Giving it away, A on p.110, B on p.113.
	 Give Sts time to read their articles and answer the five 
questions.
	 When they are ready, tell Sts A to share their story with 
their partner by using the answers to the questions. Then 
they should swap roles.
	 Finally, get Sts to answer the question in d.
	 You could elicit the two stories from the class as well as 
have a vote of hands for the question in d.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
f	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of the adjective inspiring (= exciting and 
encouraging you to do or feel sth). Model and drill its 
pronunciation.
	 In pairs or small groups, get Sts to ask and answer the 
questions.
	 Elicit some feedback from the class.
5	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand the 
lexis, e.g. a missed call.
	 Put Sts in pairs to answer the questions, giving as much 
information as possible. Monitor to check that Sts are 
using the phrasal verbs correctly.
	 Get feedback by eliciting answers to the different 
questions from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering one 
or two of the questions yourself.
6	READING  understanding the conclusions of 
research
a	 Focus on the six ways of spending money and make sure 
Sts know what they all mean.
	 Give Sts time to choose the three that would make them 
the happiest.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner. Tell them to explain 
their choices if possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts Can money buy you happiness? and elicit 
opinions from the class. Have a vote with a show of hands 
to see what the majority thinks. You could also tell the class 
what you think.
b	 Tell Sts they are now going to read a short article that 
looked at some research into the relationship between 
money and happiness. Point out the Glossary and go 
through it with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
•	 buying a birthday present for a friend
•	 giving a donation to charity
•	 giving a few coins to a homeless person
Because spending money on others makes you happier than 
spending it on yourself or paying bills.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Focus on the instructions. You could elicit some ideas 
from Sts why someone would choose not to work for a 
charity.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the article to find the 
answer. Tell them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer. Then elicit Sts’ opinions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
He decided not to work for a charity because he thought that 
if he donated a large part of his salary, he would make a bigger 
difference.
d	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the article again and 
complete the gaps with verb phrases A–H.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
7A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 101@@
101
	1A	
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss the 
questions.
	 Elicit some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   With a small class, or if you think your Sts 
don’t go out much, you may want to do this as a whole-class 
activity.
b	 e 7.12  Focus on the instructions. Play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
	 Play it again, pausing after each conversation for Sts to 
match it to an event and to answer the question.
	 Check answers. You could write the answers on the board 
to help Sts with the next activity.
1  a sporting event (during)    2  a concert (after)    
3  a play (before)
e 7.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.128) 
1
Hi. Yeah, not bad… Yeah, it’s half-time… One–all. Yeah, there’s a 
really good crowd. The stadium’s packed… No, no trouble. The 
Liverpool fans are making a bit of a noise, but nothing major… OK, 
I’ll call you when it’s over. With a bit of luck, we’ll be in the semi-final 
in an hour’s time.
2
A	 So, tell me all about it!
B	 It was absolutely brilliant. We were in the second row, just near 
the stage, and when he was singing – I swear – a few times he 
looked right at me!
A	 Did he sing Baby Baby?
B	 Of course! All the best songs. It was just an amazing performance.
A	 Were Sandy and Annette there?
B	 Yeah, we met for a drink in the interval.
A	 Gosh, you’re so lucky you got tickets!
3
A	 OK, I’m looking for tickets now…There’s a matinee at three o’clock 
and then it’s on again in the evening at eight.
B	 Let’s go at eight if we can get seats.
A	 Well, there aren’t any in the stalls, but there are two upstairs in the 
circle, in the second row.
B	 OK. Go for it. It’s a small theatre anyway, so we should have a 
good view wherever we sit.
A	 OK. Right, we’ve got them. We can pick them up at the box office.
c	 Focus on the instructions. If you didn’t write the answers 
on the board for b, elicit from the class which event each 
speaker was talking about (speaker 1: a sporting event, 
speaker 2: a concert, speaker 3: a play).
	 Give Sts time, in pairs or individually, to number some of 
the words if possible.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation for Sts to 
write 1, 2, or 3 in the boxes.
	 Check answers, and elicit the meaning where necessary.
!  Don’t drill the pronunciation yet as this will be done in e.
box office  3    crowd  1    half-time  1    interval  2    matinee  3    
performance  2    stadium  1    stage  2    stalls / circle  3
d	 Focus on the chart headings and elicit / explain what a 
musical is.
	7B	Shall we go out or stay in?
 G   verb patterns
 V   live entertainment
 P   homographs
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is entertainment, both going out to 
see something and staying at home. The first half of the lesson 
focuses on going out, specifically on live entertainment. Sts 
begin with a vocabulary focus which provides the lexis to talk 
about live entertainment. Next, the pronunciation focus looks 
at homographs – words with the same spelling but different 
pronunciations, e.g. live and row, or spelled and pronounced 
the same way, e.g. stalls. Sts then listen to three people talking 
about a live event they went to, but didn’t enjoy. The first half of 
the lesson finishes with Sts talking about their own experiences 
of going to live events, and then writing about it.
In the second half, Sts begin with the grammar focus, which 
revises and extends their knowledge of verb patterns with 
gerunds and infinitives. This is followed by an article about 
a café in Oxford where people have something to eat and 
drink, and play board games. The lesson ends with Sts 
talking about what they like to do with friends in their free 
time if they go out or stay in.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  verb patterns p.165 
Communicative  Talk for 30 seconds p.195 
(instructions p.176)
For students
Workbook  7B
Online Practice 7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board:
SATURDAY NIGHT WITH FRIENDS: GO OUT OR STAY IN?
Elicit that stay in = stay at home.
Now ask for a show of hands to answer the question. Elicit 
the advantages and disadvantages of the two options and 
write them on the board.
1	VOCABULARY  live entertainment
Vocabulary notes
Although crowd is usually used in the context of a sport 
like football, where there is a large number of people 
watching, it can also be used for a huge concert given, 
e.g. in a sports arena.
The final whistle = the end of any sports match where the 
referee has a whistle, e.g. football, basketball, etc.
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions. Make sure Sts 
understand the meaning and pronunciation of a live event. 
You could remind them of the term live sport, which they 
saw in Lesson 5A.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 102@@
102
3	 differently: a row /rəʊ/ = a number of people standing or 
sitting next to each other in a line; b row /raʊ/ = a serious 
disagreement
4	 same: a stage = a raised area, usually in a theatre, etc., where 
actors, dancers, etc. perform; b stage = a period or state that 
sb passes through while developing
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs and get them to do the 
activity without the audio. Then play the audio to check 
answers. Finally, play it again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 Focus on the Homographs box and go through it with 
the class. Make sure the two types are clear.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to identify the type of 
homograph in sentences 1–4 in a.
	 Check answers.
Sentences 1 and 3 are type 2.    Sentences 2 and 4 are type 1.
c	 Focus on the six words in the list and definitions 1–6. Point 
out that 1–6 have two definitions each and Sts have to 
match them to words in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
d	 e 7.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and elicit in which three pairs of words the 
pronunciation is different.
bear  5    close  1    lie  6    minute  4    second  2    wind  3
Pronunciation is different in 1, 3, and 4.
e 7.15
1	 close [= /kləʊz/], close [= /kləʊs/]
2	 second, second
3	 wind [= /wɪnd/], wind [= /waɪnd/]
4	 minute [= /maɪˈnjuːt/], minute [= /ˈmɪnɪt/]
5	 bear, bear
6	 lie, lie
3	LISTENING  predicting the outcome of a story
a	 Focus on the questions and the words in the list. Do this 
as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then get 
some feedback. You could tell the class your preference.
b	 e 7.16  Focus on the task and then play the audio, 
pausing after each speaker to give Sts time to answer the 
questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 (The men’s quarter final) tennis matches at the Wimbledon 
tennis championships in London
2	 A play (The Woman in Black) in Oxford
3	 A (Leonard Cohen) concert in (the velodrome) in Valencia
e 7.16
1 Andy
A few years ago, I went to Wimbledon, the tennis championships 
which take place in June in south-west London. And it’s quite 
difficult to get tickets, but I was very lucky and got two tickets for 
the men’s quarter-final matches on Centre Court, which are usually 
fantastically exciting, with lots of big names. The tickets were very 
expensive, but I was really pleased because they were right in the 
front row.
	 Get Sts to first put the words from c in the correct 
columns, and then add the words in the list in d.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to only write the words from c in 
the correct columns, and check answers. 
Sporting event: crowd, half-time, stadium
Play, musical, or concert: interval, matinee, performance, stage, 
stalls / circle
Both: box office
Then get Sts to add the words in the list to the chart.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs.
e	 e 7.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and elicit the meaning of any of the words 
in d that you think Sts may be unsure about. You could 
tell Sts that box office can be used for both categories, but 
ticket office is more common in sport. Also, stadiums are 
sometimes used for other purposes, e.g. a concert.
e 7.13
Sporting event  crowd, half-time, stadium, extra time, final whistle, 
opponent, score, spectators 
Play, musical, or concert  interval, matinee, performance, stage, stalls / 
circle, audience, curtain, plot, scene
Both  box office, arena, fans, programme, row, tickets
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time, in pairs, to practise saying 
the words.
2	PRONUNCIATION  homographs
Pronunciation notes
Homographs
There are many homographs of type 1 – many of which 
Sts will have met before as words with more than one 
meaning, e.g. book (verb and noun), well (adverb and 
noun), etc.
Type 2, where the pronunciation changes, is more 
unusual, but it is important when Sts come across 
these words to point out the different meanings and 
pronunciation.
a	 e 7.14  Focus on sentences 1–4. Play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 7.14
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.70
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after 1 for Sts to listen 
and repeat both sentences. 
	 Ask Sts what the highlighted words mean in each 
sentence and whether they are pronounced the same or 
differently.
differently: in a it’s the adjective /laɪv/ and in b it’s the 
verb /lɪv/
	 Then repeat the same process for 2–4.
2	 same: a fan = a person who admires sb / sth or enjoys 
watching or listening to sb / sth very much; b fan = a 
machine with blades that go round to create a current of air
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 103@@
103
3	 Clive
I went with a group of friends, and when he came on stage and 
started singing, I was amazed at how great his voice still was. 
We were having a wonderful evening, but then when he was on 
his fourth song, one of his old classics called Bird on the Wire, he 
suddenly collapsed on the stage! The other musicians all rushed up 
to help him and carried him off. We waited there, hoping that he was 
OK and that the concert would continue, but after almost an hour, 
there was no announcement – nothing – and we thought maybe 
he’d died. Finally, someone came on and said that he’d been taken 
to hospital and so the concert wouldn’t continue. We went home 
terribly disappointed. I’d waited all my life to hear him sing live, and 
we just got three and a half songs. Luckily, he recovered, and went 
on with his tour, but he never came back to Valencia, and then he 
died in twenty sixteen, so I never got to hear him live again.
d	 e 7.18  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the three 
stories again. Focus  on the chart and give Sts time to see 
if they can remember any of the information.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to give 
Sts time to tick the relevant boxes.
	 Check answers. Some Sts might not tick went with a family 
member for Andy as they might not consider a partner as 
part of their family.
Who…?
Andy
Cathy
Clive
1  went in the evening
f
f
2  had very good seats
f
f
3  went to an outdoor event
f
f
4  went with a family 
member
f
f
5  waited for a long time for 
something to happen
f
f
e 7.18
(script in Student’s Book on pp.128–129)
See scripts 7.16 and 7.17 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.128–129, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Focus on the question and make sure Sts understand 
frustrating (= causing you to feel annoyed and impatient). 
Do this as a whole-class activity.
4	SPEAKING & WRITING
a	 Focus on the instructions and the prompts, and give Sts 
time to make some notes or think about what they are 
going to say.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
time to tell each other about their live event, using their 
answers to the prompts in a. Encourage Sts to ask each 
other for more information and to give as much detail as 
possible.
	 For the question Would you like to have gone to your 
partner’s event?, get Sts to answer yes or no and then 
explain why (not). Make sure Sts understand the question, 
but don’t focus specifically on its structure at this time, as 
the aim here is to encourage fluency.
2 Cathy
Once, when my daughter was about fourteen, our local theatre, the 
Playhouse in Oxford, put on a play called The Woman in Black. It’s a 
classic ghost story, full of suspense and quite scary – it’s been made 
into a film starring Daniel Radcliffe, you know, who played Harry 
Potter. Anyway, I decided to take my daughter, and I got quite good 
seats in the stalls, so she could see well.
3 Clive
I’d been a fan of Leonard Cohen since I was a teenager, but I’d never, 
ever heard him sing live. But then, in – I think – about two thousand 
and nine, I read that he was going to do a world tour and that he was 
coming to Valencia in Spain, where I lived. I was really excited, and I 
thought, ‘Even though he’s in his mid-seventies, I’m finally going to 
get to hear him!’ The concert was in September in the velodrome in 
Valencia, so in the open air.
c	 e 7.17  Focus on the instructions and give Sts time, in 
pairs, to think of different reasons why each speaker in b 
didn’t enjoy the event they went to.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen to the rest of each 
story and find out if any of their predictions were correct.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers. Find out if any Sts predicted correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 It rained, so the matches were cancelled.
2	 Some schoolchildren spoilt the atmosphere by screaming.
3	 Leonard Cohen collapsed during the fourth song and was 
taken to hospital.
e 7.17
1	 Andy
And on the day, my partner and I, we got up and drove to 
Wimbledon – it took about two hours. And as we were driving, it 
started to rain – the weather forecast was for showers, and at that 
time, there was no roof on Centre Court, and the players couldn’t 
play if it was raining. But we got there, parked the car, and went in 
and found our seats and sat under our umbrella. Play was supposed 
to start at two o’clock, and at half past one the rain stopped. Then 
at two o’clock, the players came on and the atmosphere was 
brilliant. And then at two fifteen…the rain started again! The match 
was stopped and the court was covered over, and that was all the 
tennis we saw all day. We just sat there for four hours, hoping to see 
some more, but in the end, we just went home, very cold and very 
disappointed. It was a very expensive fifteen minutes.
2	 Cathy
When we got there, we found our seats and sat down. The theatre 
wasn’t full, but then just before the play was going to start, the rows 
of seats in front of us suddenly filled up with a group of about thirty 
teenagers. They were obviously a school group, and they were a bit 
noisy, but I thought they’d settle down when the play started. So 
the curtain went up and the audience went very quiet, and there 
was spooky music, and the tension started to grow. But then, every 
time anything happened onstage, the teenage girls in front of us 
screamed, even though nothing was really happening yet, so then 
we couldn’t hear what the actors were saying for a few minutes until 
they quietened down again. In fact, they carried on doing this all 
the way through the first half, and it totally ruined the atmosphere 
for absolutely everyone. Their teachers obviously said something to 
them during the interval, or maybe someone had complained, but 
they weren’t much better during the second half. It basically ruined 
the whole evening.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 104@@
104
	 Focus on Revise the basics and use the example 
sentences to elicit the basic rules for using infinitives with 
or without to, and gerunds. Refer Sts to the list of Verb 
patterns on p.164. Get Sts to go through the list quickly in 
pairs, checking that they know what the verbs and other 
phrases mean. Encourage them to get a feel for which 
verb forms go with each pattern, rather than attempting 
to memorize the list all at once.
	 Tell Sts to go back to p.145.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for verbs + 
infinitive (with or without to) and play audio e 7.20 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for verbs + gerund (verb + -ing) e 7.21 and 
verbs + object + infinitive (with or without to) e 7.22.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 We went to the box office to pick up the tickets.
2	 Going to a live sporting event is much more exciting than 
watching it on TV.
3	 I hate not being able to visit my family more often, but they 
live so far away.
4	 I tried to buy tickets for the concert, but I didn’t manage to 
get any.
5	 Nowadays, it’s cheaper to go to the theatre than to a football 
match.
6	 She moved from London to a small village and she really 
misses going to plays and exhibitions.
7	 They told me not to sit in the front row.
8	 We needn’t hurry. Amy’s always late.
9	 I can’t afford to live in the city centre.
10	 Now it’s difficult to imagine not having a mobile phone.
b
1	 They persuaded me to go to the cinema.
2	 He refused to help her.
3	 Karen’s teacher let her leave school early.
4	 My husband wants me to go to the dentist’s.
5	 The police made him move his car.
6	 I spend 20 minutes a day practising the piano.
7	 They invited us to have dinner with them.
8	 We’ve given up going to concerts.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and go through 1–8 with the 
class. Stress that Sts must complete the sentences with 
verb phrases, not with nouns. Set a time limit for Sts to 
complete the sentences. You may want to get them to 
write their sentences on a piece of paper.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Choose one of the sentences and show Sts 
what they should and shouldn’t do, e.g. I’d like to be able to 
afford to go on a luxury holiday. NOT I’d like to be able to afford 
a luxury holiday.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences to 
their partner.
	 Get feedback from various pairs to find out how many 
were the same.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Sts now tell each other their sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts to express their answer 
correctly, write on the board: 
I’D LIKE / I WOULDN’T LIKE TO HAVE GONE TO…BECAUSE…
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to write about 
their event.
	 Monitor and help if necessary. You could set this for 
homework if you don’t want Sts to spend too much class 
time writing.
5	GRAMMAR  verb patterns
a	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to complete the 
sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 7.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  to go, say    2  watching    3  stay, to spend, studying    
4  going, being    5  going, staying (to stay would also be 
acceptable here as it refers to a specific event, but it is not worth 
bringing up unless Sts mention it)
e 7.19
1	 If a friend asked me to go to a classical music concert, I think I’d 
say no.
2	 I love watching films in 3D – they’re much better than ordinary 
ones.
3	 My parents didn’t use to let me stay out late during the week 
when I was young. They wanted me to spend my evenings 
studying.
4	 I hate going to clubs. I don’t like being in places where there are 
lots of people and noise.
5	 I never feel like going out on New Year’s Eve. I prefer staying in.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss whether 
the sentences in a are true for them. Tell them to give as 
much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.145.
Grammar notes
Verb patterns with gerunds and infinitives (both with 
or without to) will already be familiar to Sts. However, 
because there are no real rules to know whether a verb 
is followed by a gerund or infinitive, it is a grammar area 
where Sts always need a lot of practice.
You may want to remind Sts that certain verbs, e.g. start, 
begin, and continue can be followed either by an infinitive 
(with to) or a gerund, with no difference in meaning.
Remind Sts that the verbs like, love, hate, and prefer are 
usually followed by a gerund, although the infinitive (with 
to) is also possible. After would like, would love, would hate, 
and would prefer, we always use the infinitive (with to), e.g. 
I would love to go to Australia.
Some verbs, e.g. stop, remember, and forget, may be 
followed either by an infinitive (with to) or a gerund, but 
with a difference in meaning. This point will be dealt with 
at Upper-intermediate.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 105@@
105
1	 Games and customers are very different today (customers are 
young professional people).
2	 More women are playing games.
3	 The growth of video games has made playing games a 
normal thing for adults to do.
f	 Focus on phrases 1–7 and tell Sts to read the second part 
of the article again and work out what they mean.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss each phrase.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
1	 it is thriving = it’s doing well
2	 young professional couples = couples where both people 
work and have a profession, e.g. doctors, lawyers, etc.
3	 rather than going out to the pub = instead of going to 
the pub
4	 much wider appeal = more different kinds of people like 
them
5	 one of the biggest factors = one of the most important 
reasons
6	 not just staring at screens = not just looking at phones, 
tablets, etc.
7	 in the real world = not in the virtual world
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
g	 Focus on the questions. Do this as a whole-class activity, 
or put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and the two lists, If you go out and If you 
stay in. Make sure Sts understand all the activities.
	 Get Sts to mark the activities they like or don’t like doing 
with friends. Highlight that they should add one of their 
own to each list.
b	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
compare their lists. Monitor and help while Sts are talking, 
encouraging them to give reasons to justify what they say.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
c	 Focus on the question. Tell Sts what you did last time you 
spent an evening with friends. Then get Sts to do the 
same with a partner. Encourage them to give as much 
detail as possible.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6	READING  understanding descriptions of games
a	 Focus on the five games and the types of game. Find out 
if any Sts have played any of the games.
	 Give Sts time to match them.
b	 e 7.23  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
Candy Crush is a video game.
Dungeons and Dragons is a role-playing game.
Poker is a card game.
Scrabble is a board game.
Sudoku is a brain-training game.
e 7.23
Candy Crush is a video game where you have to move pieces to 
make a row or column of at least three matching pieces.
Dungeons and Dragons is a role-playing game in which you control 
a single character and have adventures by interacting with other 
players’ characters.
Poker is a card game where you bet on the values of the cards 
people hold in their hand.
Scrabble is a board game in which you have to score points by 
putting letters onto a board to make words.
Sudoku is a brain-training game where you have to complete a grid 
of eighty-one squares with the numbers one to nine.
c	 Focus on the article and the photo of the café, and give 
Sts time to read the first part of the article and answer the 
two questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the phrases 
in f.
It’s a café where people play board games.
The café’s name comes from wanting a drink (thirsty) and 
the pieces gamers play with (meeples, a word invented by 
combining my + people to describe wooden people used as 
counters in some games).
d	 Focus on the task, photos A–E of games, and 
questions 1–5.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and answer the 
questions.
	 Check answers.
1  C    2  D    3  B    4  E    5  A
e	 Tell Sts they are now going to read the rest of the article 
and they need to find three reasons why, according to the 
article, board games have become popular again.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before Sts read the second part of the 
article, get them to speculate on why board games have 
become popular. They then read the article to see if their 
ideas are mentioned.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
7B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 106@@
	 1	
Practical English
EPISODE
106
e 7.24
N = narrator, J = Jenny, R = Rob, L = Luke, H = Henry
N	 Day three. Eight fifteen a.m. Jenny and Luke have just discovered that 
Henry has been kidnapped. They Skype Rob immediately.
J	 Rob, are you OK?
R	 Yes…no…I don’t know.
J	 What are you going to do?
R	 I need to get to England as soon as possible. I wish I was there 
with you now.
J	 Me too. I just don’t know what to do. Should we go back to the 
police?
R	 I don’t think so. You heard what they said. They’re obviously 
watching you and I don’t want them to hurt Dad!
L	 And we can’t just give them the laptop. We know what they’re 
capable of.
R	 You’re right. You know, there’s something bothering me about 
Dad’s message. It’s the words he used.
J	 What do you mean?
R	 I’m not sure. Can you play the end of the message again for me?
H	 Please don’t worry. Tell Rob his old man will be in his study again 
soon.
R	 That sounds strange.
L	 What sounds strange?
R	 His old man.
L	 Why is that strange? He is your dad!
R	 But he’d never call himself my old man. It’s just not like him.
J	 So what are you saying? That he said it deliberately?
R	 I think it could be a clue.
J	 But old man? What on Earth can that mean?
R	 I don’t know. But I’m sure it means something.
J	 You know, there was something else. I could hear something in 
the background.
L	 Like a generator or something?
J	 Not just that. At the beginning of the video. It sounded like a 
church bell ringing.
L	 That could be anywhere.
J	 You’re right.
R	 Anyway, I need to try and get a flight to London.
J	 OK. Good luck. We’ll call you later.
R	 Bye, guys.
J	 Bye.
L	 Well, you definitely can’t go back to Henry’s house now.
J	 You’re right. I’ll need to find a room in a hotel or a B&B.
L	 Don’t be silly. You can stay here as long as you like.
J	 Won’t Simon mind?
L	 Simon? No, he’ll understand. And we’ve got the spare room.
J	 Are you sure?
L	 Of course I’m sure.
J	 Thanks, Luke. That’s very nice of you.
L	 No worries. I’ll tell you about the house.
b	 Now focus on 1–7 and go through them with the class.
	 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen again 
and mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind them 
to correct the ones that are false.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1	 F (Rob doesn’t think they should ask the police for help 
because the kidnappers are watching them and he doesn’t 
want them to hurt Henry.)
2	 T
3	 F (Rob noticed something strange about what his father said.)
4	 F (The phrase that really surprises Rob is his old man.)
5	 T
6	 F (He hasn’t booked a flight, but he’s going to try.)
7	 F (She’s going to continue to stay at Luke’s.)
Function  asking about and explaining house rules, 
suggesting and agreeing on a plan of action
Language  Do you mind if I…?; You can’t…; 
You mustn’t…, etc.
Lesson plan
In this fourth Practical English lesson, the functional focus is 
on explaining house rules when people share a flat or house.
In the first scene, Jenny and Luke tell Rob the bad news 
about his father’s kidnapping. After hearing Henry’s video 
message, Rob tells them not to go to the police. Meanwhile 
Luke invites Jenny to stay on at his house as it isn’t safe for 
her to be at Henry’s. In the next scene, Luke explains the 
house rules as agreed by Luke and his flatmate Simon, and 
Jenny agrees to them. In the final scene, Luke and Jenny 
are discussing a plan of action when Rob rings on Jenny’s 
phone. Rob thinks the clue old man may be connected to 
something in Henry’s study and urges them to return to 
Henry’s house to search. Jenny and Luke form a plan to go 
back to the house after dark.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 4 
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 4 
Can you remember? 1–7
Online Practice  Practical English 4 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 4, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 3. Ask What did Jenny and Luke tell the police 
inspector? What did Luke find on Jenny’s computer? What’s 
happened to Henry?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 3.
1	r ROB GETS INVOLVED
a	 e 7.24  Books open. Focus on the photo and ask Sts what 
they think is happening.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the question. Elicit / 
Explain the meaning of clue (= a piece of evidence or 
some information that helps solve a mystery).
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
The two clues are Henry’s sentence ‘his old man will be in his 
study again soon’, and the sound of a church bell ringing.
EPISODE
	 4	
Practical English  Is it a clue?
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 107@@
107
b	 Tell Sts to uncover the conversation, and give them time 
to read it and to think about what the missing words 
might be.
	 Play the video / audio again and get Sts to complete the 
gaps. Play it again, pausing if necessary, after the gapped 
words.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  you can’t    2  meat    3  problem    4  anything    5  connect    
6  Sure    7  password    8  else    9  OK    10  course    11  mustn’t   
12  do, mind    13  Sorry    14  anything    15  should    16  so
	 Now go through the conversation and deal with any new 
vocabulary.
c	 e 7.26  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in 
the conversation in b. They should listen and repeat the 
phrases, copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing after the beep for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
e 7.26
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on pp.74–75
d	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to practise the 
conversation in b.
	 Monitor and help, encouraging Sts to pay attention to 
rhythm and intonation.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Renting a room, A on p.109, B on p.114.
	 Go through instructions a–c with the class and make sure 
Sts understand the situation. Give enough time for Sts A 
to decide what other rule they might have and Sts B to 
decide what else they want to ask about. When they are 
ready, tell Sts A to start. Monitor and help.
	 When they have finished, focus on instructions d–f and 
give Sts time to prepare before they do the role-play.
	 Get feedback after the role-play. Find out how many Sts 
managed to rent a room.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they have ever rented a room or lived 
in a hall of residence (e.g. at university). If so, what rules did 
they have to follow?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson Practical English 4.
3	r TAKING A RISK
a	 e 7.27  Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where are Jenny and Luke? How do they look?
	 Now focus on the instructions. Play the video / audio once 
the whole way through for Sts to watch or listen.
	 Check answers.
They’re going to go back to Henry’s house to try to find 
something in the study that Rob thinks might explain the ‘old 
man’ clue.
	 Now focus on the last two questions and get Sts to 
speculate about the answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r TALKING ABOUT HOUSE RULES
a	 e 7.25  Focus on the task and Rules for guests. Give 
Sts time to read sentences 1–6, making sure they 
understand them.
	 Get Sts to cover the conversation in b on pp.74–75. Play 
the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch or listen and complete the rules.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Explain the meaning of eco-friendly 
(= not harmful to the environment) and dryer (= a 
machine for drying clothes).
1  smoking    2  meat, meat    3  password    4  eco-friendly    
5  hot    6  dryer, washing line
Luke asks Jenny to move her car because the kidnappers might 
see it and recognize them.
e 7.25
N = narrator, L = Luke, J = Jenny
N	 Luke and Jenny are in the kitchen.
L	 It’s a great location, and the rent is cheap, but Simon can be a bit 
difficult.
J	 Oh, right.
L	 He’s got a few rules. After all, it is his house.
J	 That’s fine.
L	 To start with, it’s a no-smoking house.
J	 Great.
L	 And he’s a strict vegetarian, so you can’t cook meat or leave meat 
products in the fridge.
J	 Uh-huh.
L	 He just feels really strongly about not eating meat.
J	 That’s not a problem.
L	 What about you? Is there anything you need?
J	 There is one thing – could I connect my phone to your wi-fi?
L	 Sure. The password is lukeandsimonrule, all lower case, all one 
word.
J	 Got it.
L	 Anything else?
J	 Yeah. I have some clothes I need to wash. Is it OK if I use your 
washing machine?
L	 Of course you can. But Simon prefers us to use the eco-friendly 
detergents. There’s some in the cupboard.
J	 Cool.
L	 Oh, and you mustn’t use a hot water programme. He’s very keen 
on saving energy.
J	 OK, and do you mind if I use your dryer, too?
L	 Sorry, we don’t have one, but you can hang it out on the  
washing line.
J	 Great. Is there anything else I should know?
L	 No, I don’t think so – oh! You should probably move your car.
J	 I guess Simon doesn’t like cars, either.
L	 Well, no, but it’s not that. We know the kidnappers have been 
watching us, right? They might see it and recognize us.
J	 You’re right. I’ll move it right away.
L	 Look, I’ll come with you and we can get a coffee. There’s a nice 
café around the corner.
J	 Thanks, Luke.
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 108@@
108
	 Now focus on the last question and get Sts to speculate 
about what will happen at the house.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 7.28  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  such    2  so    3  news    4  keep    5  business    6  get
e 7.28
1	 It’s all such a mess.
2	 I hope so. I just don’t know.
3	 Any news?
4	 I know, but I’ll keep trying.
5	 I’ve been thinking about Dad’s message. That ‘old man' business.
6	 Did you get that?
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  5    B  3    C  6    D  1    E  4    F  2
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
e 7.27
N = narrator, J = Jenny, L = Luke, R = Rob
N	 Day three. Eleven a.m. Jenny and Luke are in a café.
J	 Oh, I hope we’re doing the right thing.
L	 What do you mean?
J	 Maybe we should just go to the police.
L	 We can’t. You heard what the kidnappers said.
J	 I know, I know…but it’s all such a mess. What will we do if we 
can’t find him?
L	 We will!
J	 I hope so. I just don’t know.
L	 Is that Rob?
J	 Yes. Rob, hi!
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Any news?
R	 It’s snowing really heavily and there aren’t any flights to London. I 
don’t know when I’m going to get back.
J	 Oh, Rob, that’s terrible!
R	 I know, but I’ll keep trying.
J	 Is there anything we can do?
R	 Yes, actually. I’ve been thinking about Dad’s message. That old 
man business.
J	 What about it?
R	 He must be telling us where he is. It’s the only explanation.
J	 But what can we do about it? We don’t know what it means.
R	 Well, Dad also mentioned something about his study, didn’t he?
J	 Yeah, but…
R	 I’m sure I remember something about an old man – it’s the name 
of a book or a painting or something – and I think it’s in the study.
J	 Henry’s study?
R	 Yeah. Listen, Jenny, I think you’ll have to go back there.
J	 Back to Henry’s house? But we know they’re watching.
R	 I know, and I’m really sorry, but it’s our only chance.
J	 You’re right. Luke and I will figure something out.
R	 Thanks, Jenny. I wish I was there to help.
J	 Don’t worry, we’ll be OK. Talk to you soon.
R	 Bye, Jenny. And be really careful!
J	 Did you get that?
L	 Yes, but we can’t go to the house now. If they’re there, they’ll see 
us immediately.
J	 We’ll have to go when it’s dark.
L	 But they still might see us.
J	 We can sneak in the back way. There’s a footpath.
L	 Good idea. I know that way really well. I used to play around there 
when I was a kid.
J	 We’ll need flashlights, though.
L	 I’ve got some.
J	 OK. We’ll have to be careful, but we just might be able to do this!
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–6. 
	 Go through the British and American English box with 
the class.
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing if necessary, to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Point out that when Rob says that old man 
business, he means the topic or situation. People often use 
the word business in this way. Elicit / Explain the meaning 
of sneak in (= go in secretly, to avoid being seen).
1	 Luke is more optimistic at the beginning.
2	 No, he hasn’t. There are no flights to London because of  
the snow.
3	 He thinks they might refer to the name of a book or painting, 
or something else in Henry’s study.
4	 He thinks they need to go back to Henry’s house.
5	 They’re going to use a footpath at the back of the house.
6	 He used to play there when he was a child.
PE4
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 109@@
	1A	
109
	8A	Treat yourself
Finally, focus on 4 and elicit that with the meaning in 3, the 
noun is a treat. Explain that anything can be a treat, from a 
holiday to a cake.
1	GRAMMAR  have something done
a	 Books open. If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, start by 
focusing on the title and explaining what it means. Focus 
on the photos and the questions. Do this as a whole-class 
activity, or put Sts in pairs and then check answers.
1  B    2  A    3  C    4  D    5  E    6  F    7  H    8  G
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the difference between the photos 
in each pair, i.e. in one of the photos, the person is doing 
something him- / herself; in the other photo, someone else 
is performing the task or service for the person.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.146.
Grammar notes
Have something done will be a new grammar point for 
many Sts. This structure is a type of passive.
Highlight that we normally use this form without by (i.e. 
by somebody), although we occasionally say who ‘the 
doer’ is, e.g. I had my hair cut by the new stylist at the salon. 
Encourage Sts not to overuse by.
Tell Sts that we can also say get something done, e.g. I’m 
getting my car repaired tomorrow. The meaning is the same 
as have something done.
	 Focus on the example sentences for have something 
done and play audio e 8.1 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Using get instead of have box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 Have you had your eyes tested recently?
2	 We don’t need to have the roof repaired.
3	 I would never have my teeth whitened.
4	 My sister told me not to have my hair cut short.
5	 It’s too expensive to have the carpets replaced.
6	 He’s going to have his photo taken.
7	 My children had their faces painted at the festival.
8	 We ought to have the air conditioning fixed.
9	 I had my car cleaned at the shopping centre.
10	 I have to have my passport renewed before I go on holiday.
b
1	 She needs to have her car serviced.
2	 He’s having his front door replaced.
3	 I’m having the lock changed.
4	 They should have their windows cleaned.
5	 She ought to have her shopping delivered.
6	 He doesn’t want to have his photo taken.
7	 She’s having her portrait painted.
8	 He wants to have his suit dry-cleaned.
 G 	 have something done
 V 	 looking after yourself
 P 	 sentence stress
Lesson plan
The main topic of this lesson is looking after yourself, both in 
terms of physical fitness and appearance. In the first half of 
the lesson, the structure have something done is presented 
and then practised in a pronunciation focus on sentence 
stress. Sts then talk in pairs about various services they have 
done. The theme of looking after yourself continues with the 
topic of hair. Sts go to the Vocabulary Bank and learn specific 
vocabulary related to hairdressing and hairstyles. After that, 
Sts listen to an interview with a London hairdresser. Finally, 
Sts talk about their own experience of haircuts and hairstyles.
In the second half, Sts return to the Vocabulary Bank and 
focus on words and phrases related to fitness and beauty 
treatments. This leads into Reading & Listening, where Sts 
read the introduction to an article about two journalists who 
spend a day at a health spa, trying different spa treatments. 
Sts read about one of the treatments, and then listen to the 
journalists’ thoughts on two more. The lesson ends with Sts 
talking about ways of looking after yourself. Then, in small 
groups, they have to create and present a campaign to help 
young people eat healthily.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  have something done p.166 
Communicative  Do it yourself? or Have it done? p.196  
(instructions p.176)  
Vocabulary  Looking after yourself p.217  
(instructions p.204)
For students
Workbook  8A
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following sentences on the board:
1	 SOME DOCTORS RECOMMEND A HOT LEMON AND HONEY DRINK TO 
TREAT A SORE THROAT.
2	 DON’T TREAT ME LIKE A CHILD! I’M 17 YEARS OLD! 
3	 ON MY BIRTHDAY, MY BOYFRIEND TREATED ME TO DINNER AT MY 
FAVOURITE RESTAURANT.
4	 MY COLLEAGUES INVITED ME TO A SPA TO CELEBRATE MY 
ENGAGEMENT. IT WAS A REAL TREAT.
Focus on 1 and elicit the meaning of treat (= give medical 
attention). Repeat for 2 (= behave in a particular way 
towards sb). Ask what the noun would be for these uses of 
treat and elicit treatment.
Now focus on 3 and elicit what treat means here (= do sth 
nice for sb, and where it costs money, paying for it).
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 110@@
110
3	VOCABULARY & LISTENING  looking after 
yourself; understanding interview questions
a	 Focus on the photos and the questions. Elicit / Teach the 
name of any specific styles, e.g. 1 a comb-over,  
3 dreadlocks, 6 a perm. Do this as a whole-class activity, or 
put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Looking after 
yourself, Part 1 on p.163.
Vocabulary notes
At the hairdresser’s or barber’s
You may want to tell Sts that you can also say pigtails 
instead of bunches and crew cut is an alternative phrase for 
buzz cut.
Point out that a barber’s is only for men, whereas a 
hairdresser’s caters for both genders.
Explain that a treatment involves putting a product on 
your hair to make it soft or shiny; highlights are when small 
strands of hair are dyed lighter than the rest, and lowlights 
are when they are dyed darker.
	 Focus on 1 At the hairdresser’s or barber’s and get Sts 
to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.3
Looking after yourself
1 At the hairdresser’s or barber’s
4	 bunches
5	 a buzz cut
3	 a fringe
1	 a parting
6	 a ponytail
2	 plaits
11	 have your hair bleached
7	 have your hair curled
10	 have your hair dyed
8	 have your hair put up
9	 have your hair straightened
13	 have a blow dry
12	 have a perm
14	 have a shave
16	 have a treatment
17	 have a trim
15	 have highlights
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words / phrases, look 
at the photos, and test themselves.
	 Focus on Activation and either get Sts to answer the 
questions in pairs, or do it as a whole-class activity.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
	 Tell them they will be doing the sections Keeping fit and 
Beauty treatments in the second half of the lesson.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the photo of Dino Karveli, a 
hairdresser who has a salon in London.
	 Give Sts time to read the information about Dino Karveli.
	 Put Sts in pairs and focus on the questions that the 
interviewer is going to ask Dino Karveli. Get Sts to read 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Tell Sts to cover sentences 1–8 in a, look at the photos, 
and say what is happening. They could do this individually 
or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (sentences 
1–8 covered) describe photos A–D whilst Sts B (sentences 
1–8 uncovered) help with vocabulary if necessary. They then 
swap roles for photos E–H.
2	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  sentence 
stress
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts or elicit that the words which are stressed 
more strongly in sentences are those that carry key 
information, like nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. In 
this structure, have is a main verb, not an auxiliary, so it is 
stressed, e.g. I’m having my hair cut tomorrow.
a	 e 8.2  Focus on the sentences and give Sts time to 
read them.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat, copying the rhythm.
e 8.2
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.76
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs, and get them to say whether any 
of the sentences are true for them.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could tell the 
class if any of the sentences are true for you.
b	 Focus on the two groups of questions, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis in the prompts, e.g. dyed, fortune, 
etc. Then tell Sts that the first group is in the present 
simple and the second group in the present perfect, 
although when they describe an experience for the 
second group, they will be using the past simple. Give an 
example if necessary.
	 Put Sts in pairs. Get them to ask and answer the questions. 
Encourage them to give as much detail as possible and to 
ask follow-up questions. Monitor the sentence stress and 
the correct use of the structure. Sts could answer about 
people in their family as well (or instead).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to ask you one question from each 
group to demonstrate the activity.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts. Get them to tell 
you about their partner, e.g. Juan had his photo taken by a 
professional photographer when he…
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 111@@
111
D	 I love everything. There really isn’t anything I don’t like. And I do 
everything: cut, colour, highlights, straightening. Nowadays, some 
hairdressers specialize in maybe just colour, or just styling, but I 
think it’s important to do everything.
I	 What do you think are important qualities for a hairdresser?
D	 Well, as I just said, I think being able to do everything – colour, 
styling, cutting – is very important. I don’t believe in specializing 
in just one area.
I	 Any other important qualities?
D	 I think you need to be sociable, to be able to talk to people, calm 
them down if they’re stressed, listen to them if they want to talk.
I	 Do you enjoy that?
D	 Yes, I do. The sociable side of hairdressing was one of the things 
that attracted me to it. Even women who want to tell me all their 
problems – I don’t mind it at all; it doesn’t distract me.
I	 Are women clients very different from men?
D	 Yes, definitely. They are normally the ones who want to talk, and 
they are much more worried – stressed – about their hair. Men are 
more quiet and relaxed, and they’re not normally very fussy about 
their hair.
I	 What do you do if a client doesn’t like the results?
D	 I try to correct it immediately. That’s easy if it’s the colour – less 
easy if it’s a cut.
I	 Have you ever had a really bad experience, I mean one where you 
couldn’t correct it?
D	 Only once, when I was still at college. I cut a woman’s hair shorter 
than she was expecting it – not much, only about one centimetre 
shorter, but she burst into tears – and I couldn’t correct that.
I	 Is it true that hairdressers always want to cut off more hair than 
their clients want?
D	 I think maybe it is. Many hairdressers want to make the hair 
healthier, and cut off all the parts that are, you know, damaged. 
Or sometimes they have a style in mind and they just want to do 
it. But obviously, normally I try to do what the customer wants. 
You have to be flexible. That’s another important quality in a 
hairdresser.
I	 So, if you completely disagreed with what a client wanted, would 
you still do it?
D	 Well, if a client wanted a treatment that I thought was going to 
damage her hair – for example, if she wanted to have her hair 
bleached when it was already in bad condition – then I would 
say no. But if it was a question of style – for example, a woman 
who wanted to have her head shaved completely – I would try to 
convince her that it wasn’t a good idea, but if she insisted, I would 
do it. It’s her choice after all.
I	 Do you have any tips for having good hair?
D	 Yes – use good products, ones which are right for your type of 
hair. I notice that a lot of people take a lot of trouble choosing 
the right face cream – you know, for dry skin, or problem skin. For 
day, for night, and so on. But with shampoo, they just buy the first 
one they see in the supermarket.
I	 Thank you very much, Dino. I won’t forget this.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could have a class 
vote for the last question.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the phrase to have a bad hair day and elicit its 
meaning. Ask Sts if they have the same or a similar phrase 
in their language.
to have a bad hair day = have a day when everything seems to 
go wrong (similar to how you feel on a day when your hair 
doesn’t look good)
	 Then ask Sts if they have had one recently. You could tell 
the class if you have.
each question and try to guess what the missing words 
might be.
d	 e 8.4  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
1  choose    2  training    3  love    4  hate    5  qualities    
6  women    7  men    8  results    9  experience    10  cut    
11  disagreed    12  tips
e 8.4
I	 Dino, what made you choose hairdressing?
I	 What sort of training did you do?
I	 What sort of things do you love or hate doing in hairdressing?
I	 What do you think are important qualities for a hairdresser?
I	 Are women clients very different from men?
I	 What do you do if a client doesn’t like the results?
I	 Have you ever had a really bad experience?
I	 Is it true that hairdressers always want to cut off more hair than 
their clients want?
I	 If you completely disagreed with what a client wanted, would you 
still do it?
I	 Do you have any tips for having good hair?
	 Now tell Sts to take a few moments to think about 
possible answers to the interview questions, and imagine 
what Dino Karveli might say.
e	 e 8.5  Tell Sts they are going to hear the whole interview 
with Dino Karveli. Focus on the task and give Sts time to 
read sentences 1–10.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind 
them to correct the ones that are false.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to explain why the F answers 
are false. Ask Sts if they predicted any of Dino’s answers 
correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
1	 F (He wasn’t a barber, but Dino doesn’t say what his father’s 
job was. His aunt was a hairdresser.)
2	 T
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (He thinks women get more stressed.)
6	 F (It’s easy.)
7	 T
8	 T
9	 F (He says no to treatments.)
10	 F (You need to use good hair products.)
e 8.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
I = interviewer, D = Dino
I	 Dino, what made you choose hairdressing?
D	 Er, I always liked it from when I was child. I remember being taken 
to the barber’s by my dad when I was a child in Greece, and I 
really loved the atmosphere there.
I	 He wasn’t a barber himself, though?
D	 No, but my aunt was a hairdresser.
I	 What sort of training did you do?
D	 When I came to London, I went to the Vidal Sassoon Academy.  
It was a two-year course – absolutely fantastic, very intense. I 
loved it!
I	 What sort of things do you love or hate doing in hairdressing?
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 112@@
112
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words / phrases, look 
at the photos, and test themselves.
	 Focus on 3 Beauty treatments and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.7  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.7
3 Beauty treatments
5	 manicure
4	 pedicure
6	 facial
1	 massage
3	 waxing
2	 fake tan
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrase, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Finally, do Activation as a whole-class activity, 
encouraging Sts to give as much information as possible.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words, look at the 
photos, and test themselves.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the task and then give Sts time to read the 
information on the advert in a.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other what they 
would do if they had a day at the Wellbeing Centre.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6	READING & LISTENING  understanding 
whether people are being positive or negative
a	 Focus on the task and then either read the introduction 
and the treatments as a class, or give Sts time to read 
individually.
	 Give Sts time to answer the first question, and check the 
answer.
They went to the spa to try out the treatments and write about 
them, and find out if men can enjoy them.
	 Now get Sts to speculate which of the three treatments 
the two journalists will like best. Check Sts understand 
hydrated.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read about the 
facial.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Stephen thought that the treatment took too long, and he was 
bored.
Joanna liked all the different processes and felt great afterwards.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
b	 Focus on the questions. Then give Sts time to discuss 
them in pairs.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts could ask you one or two of the 
questions first.
5	VOCABULARY  looking after yourself
a	 Focus on the photos on the Wellbeing Centre advert and 
elicit from Sts what they can see. Do the questions as 
a whole-class activity. Tell the class whether or not you 
would like to go there, and why (not).
b	 Tell Sts to go back to Vocabulary Bank Looking after 
yourself, Parts 2 and 3 on p.163.
Vocabulary notes
Keeping fit
If Sts aren’t sure about the difference between yoga and 
Pilates, elicit / explain that yoga is a set of physical and 
mental exercises intended to give control over the body 
and mind; Pilates is a system of exercises, sometimes 
using special equipment, designed to improve physical 
strength, flexibility, and posture.
You could tell Sts that treadmill is another word for 
running machine.
	 Focus on 2 Keeping fit and get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs.
	 e 8.6  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.6
2 Keeping fit
Equipment
9	 an exercise bike
6	 a running machine
5	 weights
10	 a rowing machine
4	 a cross-trainer
12	 a yoga mat
Exercises
11	 do sit-ups
3	 do press-ups
8	 do stretches
7	 do aerobics
2	 do spinning
1	 do Pilates 
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation. Focus on the items in the list and 
make sure Sts understand all the lexis. Put Sts in pairs and 
give them time to do the task. Point out that some items 
can go in more than one category.
	 Elicit answers.
Possible answers
If you want to lose weight: use an exercise bike / rowing 
machine / cross-trainer, do aerobics, do spinning, etc.
If you want to tone your muscles: do / lift weights, do sit-ups, 
do press-ups, etc.
If you want to do cardio exercises: go on a running machine, 
do aerobics, do spinning, etc.
If you have a bad back: do stretches, do Pilates or yoga
If you want to improve your flexibility: do stretches, do Pilates 
or yoga
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 113@@
113
e 8.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
S = Stephen, J = Joanna
The body polish
J	 So? What did you think?
S	 It was just horrible! Horrible. First, they covered me in fruit puree, 
then they wrapped me in plastic film, then in blankets, and then 
I was left on a water bed. I mean, come on! Fruit’s for eating, not 
for putting on your body. It was hot and sticky, and incredibly 
uncomfortable. And I felt so stupid. I’d never have that again. I 
give it zero out of ten.
J	 Sticky? It was fruit, for goodness’ sake! I thought it was wonderful. 
It smelled amazing, and the head massage was divine. I mean, 
how could anybody not like it? That was one of my favourite spa 
treatments ever. Ten out of ten.
The foot treatment
S	 Wow!
J	 Don’t tell me – you liked it!
S	 It was wonderful!
J	 I must say, your feet look… well, better. Clean, anyway.
S	 Well, I’ve never liked my feet much, to be honest, but now they 
look great. Definitely worth the time and money. Nine out of ten. 
What do you think?
J	 Yes, it was great. A real luxury. And I love the colour they painted 
my nails. I agree – nine out of ten. You see…
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell Sts which 
treatment you would enjoy most and why.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
7	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and the three topics, making 
sure Sts know what they mean.
	 Point out the examples. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
think of other examples for each category.
	 Elicit some more ideas of ways of looking after yourself 
and write them on the board, for example:
KEEPING FIT
•	 GOING TO THE GYM
•	 GOING RUNNING
•	 USE THE STAIRS INSTEAD OF THE LIFT
•	 DOING YOGA OR PILATES
BEING HEALTHY
•	 HAVING A HEALTHY DIET
•	 CUTTING OUT SOME FOOD OR DRINK (E.G. ALCOHOL, SUGAR, ETC.)
•	 HAVING REGULAR MEDICAL CHECK-UPS AT THE DOCTOR’S OR 
DENTIST’S
BOOSTING YOUR BRAINPOWER
•	 DOING BRAIN-TRAINING GAMES (CROSSWORDS, SUDOKU, ETC.)
•	 LEARNING A LANGUAGE
•	 LEARNING A NEW SKILL
	 Tell Sts they should, in pairs, agree on the three most 
important ones.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
c	 e 8.8  Focus on the two remaining treatments 
mentioned in a – the banana, papaya, and strawberry 
body polish and the Elemis foot treatment. Tell Sts they 
are going to listen to four short extracts of things that 
Stephen and Joanna say after these next two treatments.
	 Give Sts time to read the four sentences / phrases and see 
if they can guess what the missing words might be.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each item to give Sts time to 
write. Tell Sts to use the intonation to help them decide if 
the comments are positive or negative.
	 Check answers, eliciting each time if the comment is 
positive or negative. Model and drill pronunciation of any 
words that are tricky for Sts.
1	 sticky, uncomfortable – negative
2	 divine – positive
3	 Definitely worth – positive
4	 luxury – positive
e 8.8
1	
Stephen  It was hot and sticky, and incredibly uncomfortable.
2	
Joanna  And the head massage was divine.
3	
Stephen  Definitely worth the time and money.
4	
Joanna  A real luxury.
d	 e 8.9  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Stephen 
and Joanna discussing first the body polish, and then the 
foot treatment.
	 Play the audio, pausing after Stephen and Joanna have 
discussed the body polish to give Sts time to complete 
the chart.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary. Repeat the process for the foot treatment.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Stephen
Joanna
The body 
polish
Score  
out of 10
0
10
Reasons
It was hot, 
sticky, and 
uncomfortable. 
He felt stupid.
It smelled 
amazing and 
the head 
massage was 
divine.
The foot 
treatment
Score  
out of 10
9
9
Reasons
Now his feet 
look great.
It was a 
luxury. She 
loves the 
colour of her 
nails.
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 114@@
114
b	 Focus on the task and list of ideas. Check that Sts 
understand ban. Get Sts to discuss the question in pairs or 
in small groups.
	 If possible, Sts should then decide which one idea would 
work best.
	 Get feedback from pairs or groups.
	 Now ask Sts if they have any other suggestions to 
encourage healthy eating in schools, and write them on 
the board.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to cover b. Tell them they need 
to think of ideas to encourage healthy eating in schools. Do 
it as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then elicit 
some ideas. Then get Sts to uncover the list in b and see if 
their ideas are included.
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
a campaign is (= a series of planned activities that are 
intended to achieve a particular social, commercial, or 
political aim). Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three and tell them to follow the 
steps given.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to practise presenting their 
campaign. They need to decide who is going to present 
each section.
	 Focus on the Presenting a campaign box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Give Sts time to practise. Monitor and help if necessary.
e	 Focus on the instructions and then get each group to 
present their campaign. Write the name of each group’s 
campaign on the board.
	 When all the groups have finished, get Sts to look at the 
campaign names on the board, and then vote for the 
best one.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to ask questions after each group 
has finished presenting their campaign.
8A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 115@@
	1A	
115
	8B	Sites and sights
1	GRAMMAR  the passive
a	 Books open. Focus on the lesson title, and explain the 
difference between the homonyms site (= a place where a 
building, town, etc. was or is located) and sight (= a thing 
of interest that you can see or visit).
	 Focus on the quiz and go through the questions, making 
sure Sts understand the following words: defeated, battle, 
fleet, attacked, reunified, war, assassinated, evacuated.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and give them time 
to answer the questions.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to either give their team a name or 
simply write all their names on a piece of paper. Then get Sts 
to write their answers on the piece of paper, and when they 
have finished, they should swap with another team.
b	 e 8.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Find out how many points each 
group got.
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  a    5  c    6  b    7  b    8  a
e 8.10
1	 Napoleon was defeated in the battle of Waterloo. Waterloo is in 
Belgium, just south of Brussels.
2	 The American fleet was attacked in Pearl Harbor in nineteen forty-
one.
3	 Berlin, which had been divided by a wall for twenty-eight years, 
was reunified in nineteen eighty-nine.
4	 The Sagrada Família in Barcelona was started in eighteen eighty-
two and is still being built. It is due to be completed in twenty 
twenty-six.
5	 According to legend, the city of Troy fought a famous war against 
Greece. It is thought by many to be in modern Turkey, but has 
never been definitively located.
6	 The city of Chichen Itza was built by the Mayans between seven 
hundred and fifty and nine hundred AD.
7	 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was assassinated while he was being 
driven through Dallas in nineteen sixty-three.
8	 Chernobyl in the Ukraine had to be evacuated in nineteen  
eighty-six after a catastrophic nuclear accident.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write any extra information 
they heard when they were listening to check answers.
c	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to underline the 
passives in the quiz in a, individually or in pairs, and 
decide what form they are.
	 Check answers.
1	 was defeated – past simple passive
2	 was attacked – past simple passive
3	 had been divided – past perfect passive; was reunified – past 
simple passive
4	 was started – past simple passive; is being built – present 
continuous passive
5	 has never been located – present perfect passive
6	 was built – past simple passive
7	 was assassinated – past simple passive; was being driven – 
past continuous passive
8	 had to be evacuated – infinitive with to
 G 	 the passive
 V 	 wars and battles, historic buildings
 P 	 silent consonants
Lesson plan
Historic events and buildings are the main topic of this 
lesson. The lesson begins with a quiz about world history, 
which provides the context for revision and extension of 
the passive. The grammar is then practised orally with a quiz 
written by Sts about the history of their country. Sts then 
read an extract about the Battle of Hastings from the English 
Heritage website. After the reading, Sts talk about their own 
visits to historical sites. Finally, Sts take part in a role-play 
between a local and a tourist visiting the area.
In the second half, the vocabulary focus is on the names of 
some historic British buildings and various parts of these 
buildings, e.g. the crypt, the dome. This is followed by a 
pronunciation focus on silent consonants in these words, e.g. 
aisle. Sts then listen to a guided tour of St Paul’s Cathedral in 
London. After that, Sts practise speaking and writing about 
a famous building, and the lesson ends with a documentary 
about the reconstructed Globe Theatre in London.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  the passive p.167 
Communicative  The History Quiz p.197  
(instructions p.176)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The Globe Theatre
For students
Workbook  8B
Online Practice  8B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the word HISTORY on the board. Elicit what the 
difference is between history and story. 
Then ask what two adjectives you can make from the word 
history (historic and historical).  Elicit / Explain the difference.
•	 Historic is used to describe sth that is so important that it 
is likely to be remembered, e.g. a historic event, a historic 
victory, a historic occasion.
•	 Historical describes something connected with the past or 
with history, e.g. a historical novel, historical research.
Now ask Sts to think of:
•	 a historic event that has happened in their lifetime
•	 a building of historical importance in their town / city.
Elicit Sts’ ideas. Encourage them to explain why the event 
was important and to give a bit of information about the 
building.
Sts might be interested to know that some feminists have 
taken the word history to mean ‘his story’, in order to make 
a point about the lack of focus on the role of women in 
recorded history.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 116@@
116
6	 A fire had destroyed the previous church.
7	 You have to turn off your phone during take-off and 
landing. 
8	 A new visitor centre is going to be opened next year.
9	 The new hospital won’t be finished until July.
10	 Tea is grown in Sri Lanka.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs. Tell them 
that the questions must use a passive form, and that they 
can refer back to the quiz questions in a to help them. 
Remind them also that they must choose questions to 
which they know the answers. You could allow them to 
look up information on their phones if necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the passive form of any verbs Sts 
want to use on the board, e.g. WAS BUILT, WAS DESTROYED, etc.
	 Monitor and help where necessary.
	 When Sts have finished, get each pair to ask the class their 
three questions. Sts should write their answers, and then 
at the end they can see how many they got correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts answer the questions in pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Pin all the questions around the classroom 
and get Sts to walk around in pairs, making a note of their 
answers.
2	READING & VOCABULARY  understanding 
historical events: chronology and geography;  
wars and battles
a	 Focus on the photos and give Sts time to label the five 
items and decide what is happening.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation of the words. 
You could tell Sts that bow is a homograph. Here it is 
pronounced /bəʊ/ (as a noun). Explain / Elicit the second 
meaning: /baʊ/ (as a verb).
1  helmet    2  shield    3  arrow    4  bow    5  archer
	 Finally, elicit what is happening in the photos, but don’t 
tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the task. You could tell Sts 
how to pronounce Hastings /ˈheɪstɪŋz/, and that it’s an 
English town, but don’t tell them where it is as they will be 
completing the map later.
	 Give Sts time to read the information and check their 
answer to a.
	 Check the answer. You could point out that in the first 
photo, there is a crowd of people watching in the 
background, and that of course there wouldn’t be a photo 
of a real battle of this kind.
The photos show the historical re-enactment of a battle.
	 You might want to check that Sts understand the noun 
armour in paragraph 3. Model and drill its pronunciation.
	 Then Sts use information from the website to help them 
label the map. This activity focuses Sts on the important 
places in the story and helps them visualize what 
happened where.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to just underline the passives in the 
questions in the quiz. Then elicit each form as a class.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.147.
Grammar notes
If Sts used English File Intermediate, they will have met 
the different forms and tenses of the passive. Although 
Sts should not have problems forming the basic tenses, 
e.g. past and present, they may still have problems with, 
e.g. leaving out the verb be or not using the participle 
correctly, and future and present perfect forms. Most 
importantly, they may still be using the active instead of 
the passive, e.g. The house is going to paint next week.
It is worth reminding Sts that we often use the passive 
in English (usually without by + person) where other 
languages use an impersonal form, e.g. Olives are grown in 
most regions of Spain. My wallet has been stolen!
Try to discourage Sts from using by (somebody) in every 
passive sentence. Identifying who did the action is often 
unnecessary.
You may also want to point out that we can use 
the indirect object as the new subject in a passive 
sentence, e.g.:
•	 active: Somebody gave me this watch for my birthday.
•	 passive: This watch was given to me for my birthday. or  
I was given this watch for my birthday.
	 Focus on the example sentences for forms of the passive 
and play audio e 8.11 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Active or passive? box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 Many roads were closed to traffic for the carnival last month.
2	 In recent years, many books have been written about the 
American Civil War.
3	 A new shopping centre is being built in the town centre at 
the moment.
4	 I think you should be allowed to take photos in the museum 
if you don’t use flash.
5	 The last battle on British soil was fought at Culloden in 1746.
6	 Washington, DC is visited by nearly 20 million people every 
year.
7	 I love being shown round a city by someone who knows it 
well.
8	 The gallery was closed because a TV series was being filmed 
inside.
9	 I’ve been woken up by the neighbour’s noisy dog three 
times already this week.
 10	 Picasso’s famous painting Guernica can be seen in the Reina 
Sofia museum in Madrid.
b
1	 The palace had to be closed for renovations.
2	 More information can be found on the website.
3	 The famous ‘I have a dream’ speech was given by Martin 
Luther King in 1963.
4	 You must wear a seat belt at all times.
5	 Do you think you’re going to be offered the job?
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 117@@
117
3	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the two questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Local history, A on p.110, B on p.114.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. You could demonstrate 
by writing on the board the name of a famous person 
who has a connection to your town. Then get Sts to ask 
you questions as if they were tourists, e.g. Who’s ______? 
Why is he / she famous? Answer their questions in detail.
	 Get Sts to take turns to role-play the questions and 
answers. Encourage them to ask questions (even if they 
know the answers), and to answer in as much detail as 
possible.
EXTRA IDEA   You could encourage Sts to be a really difficult 
tourist who keeps asking questions.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
4	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
historic buildings; silent consonants
a	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to use the photos to 
help them complete the names of the buildings.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 8.12  Tell Sts that they will listen to the audio twice and 
the first time they just need to check their answers to a.  
You might also want to tell them that they are going to 
hear the name of the building as well as some historical 
facts.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
Buckingham Palace
St Paul’s Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Windsor Castle
The Tower of London
e 8.12
Buckingham Palace was built in the eighteenth century for the Duke 
of Buckingham and became the London home of the British Royal 
Family in eighteen thirty-seven.
St Paul’s Cathedral was rebuilt in the seventeenth century by Sir 
Christopher Wren.
Westminster Abbey was begun in the thirteenth century, during the 
reign of King Henry the Third.
Windsor Castle and the Tower of London were built in the eleventh 
century, during the reign of William the Conqueror.
	 Now focus on the question Which are the two oldest 
buildings? and play the audio again.
	 Check the answer. 
Windsor Castle and the Tower of London are the oldest.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they know any facts about these places, 
e.g. they are all in London, Windsor Castle is where the Queen 
lives, etc. Then ask if any Sts have visited any of these places or 
seen them in films, and if so, what they thought of them.
	 Finally, elicit any more words for types of buildings, e.g. 
mosque, synagogue, etc.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the website the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted verbs.
1  Stamford Bridge    2  Norway    3  Battle    4  Hastings    
5  Bayeux   
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of chronological (= arranged in the 
order in which events happened). Model and drill its 
pronunciation /krɒnəˈlɒdʒɪkl/.
	 Now quickly go through the events, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. abbey, tapestry, etc. Point out 
that the first one (Harold became King of England) has been 
done for them.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the website again and 
number the events in the correct order. 
	 Check answers.
2	 The Norwegians attacked the north of England.
3	 The Normans landed in Sussex.
4	 The Battle of Hastings was fought between the English and 
the Normans.
5	 King Harold was killed.
6	 William became King of England.
7	 Battle Abbey was built.
8	 The Bayeux tapestry was finished.
9	 The town of Battle was named after the battle that took place 
there.
 10	 Battle Abbey was destroyed.
	 You could ask Sts to look again at the photos in a, and, 
using the information in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 
website, to identify which soldiers in the photos are 
English (the soldiers on the left of the first photo, on foot with 
shields and swords), and which are Norman (the soldiers on 
horseback in the first photo, and with bows and arrows in the 
second photo).
d	 Now tell Sts to focus on the highlighted verbs, which are 
all related to wars and battles. Get them to find the one 
irregular verb. Then, for all the verbs, they should decide 
what the infinitive is and work out the meaning from the 
context.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
fought is irregular. The infinitive is fight = to take part in a war or 
battle against an enemy.
defeat = to win against sb in a war, competition, game, etc.
succeed = to achieve sth that you have been trying to do / get
invade = to enter a country, town, etc. using military force in 
order to take control of it
kill = to make sb / sth die
crown = to put a crown on the head of a new king or queen as a 
sign of royal power
retreat = to move away from a place or an enemy because you 
are in danger or because you have been defeated
destroy = to damage sth so badly that it no longer exists, works, etc.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 118@@
118
	 Now play the audio once, pausing after each section for 
Sts to listen and number the places.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  the West Door    2  the Dome    3  the South Transept    
4  the South Quire Aisle    5  the Whispering Gallery    
6  the Crypt
e 8.14
G = guide
G	 Good afternoon, everybody, everyone, and welcome to St Paul’s, 
which, as you probably know, is one of the most famous and most 
historic cathedrals in Britain.
***
1
G	 Just behind you is the Great West Door, you can see the Great 
West Door. The magnificent doors are nine metres tall. And now 
in front of you, you see the Nave, which gives you the most 
wonderful view of the full length of St Paul’s Cathedral.
***
2
G	 We’re now in the centre of the cathedral. Look up above you, and 
you can see inside the wonderful Dome. It’s one of the largest 
domes in the world, and I personally think the most beautiful.
***
3
G	 We are now in the area called the South Transept. Over there, 
you can see the monument to Britain’s great naval hero Horatio 
Nelson, who died at the Battle of Trafalgar in eighteen oh five.
***
4
G	 We’re now in the South Quire Aisle, and we’re just going to stop 
for a moment to look at this marble statue of John Donne.
***
5
G	 Now, are you all feeling energetic? I hope so because we’re going 
to go up these stairs here, to the Whispering Gallery, which goes 
around the inside of the great Dome, and I do need to tell you 
that there are two hundred and fifty-seven steps…
***
6
G	 We’re now going to go back along the Nave, and then down into 
the Crypt to see some of the tombs of famous people who are 
buried in St Paul’s.
c	 e 8.15  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the whole 
tour, starting with the first part. This time, they will hear 
extra information about the history of the West Door and 
the nave. Give Sts time to read the gapped sentences and 
think about whether the missing information is a number, 
a name, etc.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  1066    2  Fire    3  London    4  cathedral    5  Christopher    
6  nine    7  Queen    8  full length
c	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to read 
all the definitions and work out which they can see in the 
photos on pp.82–83.
	 Check answers.
aisle – see where the red carpet is in the photo on p.83
column – see the same photo as above
crypt – see the photo on p.82 under the title Welcome to St Paul's 
Cathedral
dome – see the photo of St Paul’s Cathedral on p.82
gallery – see the first photo on p.83
tomb – see the photo on p.82 under the title Welcome to St Paul's 
Cathedral
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Write the words on 
the board and elicit which consonants to cross out (the 
consonants to cross out are in pink in the answer key 
below). Tell Sts to use the phonetics in c to help them.
	 Model and drill the words.
aisle    castle    column    tomb
e	 e 8.13  Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to listen and 
write the five sentences they hear.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board. 
Ask Sts to identify the silent consonants in each sentence 
(these are in pink in the answer key below).
1	 You mustn’t talk in class when the teacher is speaking.
2	 I got the wrong answer to half the questions.
3	 I doubt if we’ll have time to visit the island.
4	 Listen to the sentence and copy the rhythm.
5	 I’ve wanted to learn a foreign language my whole life.
e 8.13
1	 You mustn’t talk in class when the teacher is speaking.
2	 I got the wrong answer to half the questions.
3	 I doubt if we’ll have time to visit the island.
4	 Listen to the sentence and copy the rhythm.
5	 I’ve wanted to learn a foreign language my whole life.
5	LISTENING  understanding a guided tour – note-
taking
a	 Focus on the instructions and photos. Either read 
the introduction as a class, or give Sts time to do it 
individually.
	 Check the answer to the first question and elicit any other 
information Sts might know about the cathedral.
The wedding of Charles and Diana
b	 e 8.14  Focus on the instructions and tell Sts they are 
going to listen to a tour guide taking people around St 
Paul’s Cathedral and talking about each section. Tell them 
to try and imagine they are on the tour.
	 Focus on the plan of the cathedral and make sure Sts 
are clear what the different sections are. Tell Sts they are 
going to listen to some extracts from the tour first, and try 
to understand which places in the cathedral the guide is 
going to take them to.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 119@@
119
e 8.16
(script in Student’s Book on pp.129–130)
Part 2
G	 Right. Can we just stop here? Could we stop here? We’re now 
in the centre of the cathedral. Look up above you, and you can 
see inside the wonderful Dome. It’s one of the largest domes in 
the world, and I personally think the most beautiful. Now, you 
remember the outside of the Dome, which you saw when you 
arrived. Can anyone tell me what was on top of the Dome?
T	 A cross?
G	 Yeah, that’s right, a cross. In seventeen ten, the year the cathedral 
was finally completed, Christopher Wren was eighty-one years 
old, and he was lifted up in a basket and was able to watch his 
own son place the cross on the top of the Dome. Another thing 
about, fascinating thing about the Dome is that from the top of 
the Dome to the floor, down where you’re standing, is exactly 
three hundred and sixty-five feet, one foot for every day of the 
year.
T	 How much is that in metres?
G	 Approximately one-one-one, a hundred and eleven metres. In 
fact, St Paul’s was the tallest building in London right up until 
the nineteen sixties because until that time, no one was allowed 
to build anything taller near St Paul’s. We’re going to move 
on shortly, but just spend a few minutes now looking at the 
magnificent paintings.
***
G	 We are now in the area called the South Transept. Over there, 
you can see the monument to Britain’s great naval hero Horatio 
Nelson, who died at the Battle of Trafalgar in eighteen oh five. 
T	 C’est lui qui est sur...
G	 Yes, yeah, he’s the one on top of the Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar 
Square.
***
G	 We’re now in the South Quire Aisle, and we’re just going to stop 
for a moment to look at this marble statue of John Donne. Donne 
was a Dean of the Cathedral and one of Britain’s finest poets – 
he died in sixteen thirty-one. But this statue is also important 
because it’s one of the few monuments that survived the Great 
Fire of London. And you can still see the burn marks at the 
bottom of the statue there…
***
G	 Now, are you all feeling energetic? I hope so because we’re going 
to go up these stairs here, to the Whispering Gallery, which goes 
around the inside of the great Dome, and I do need to tell you 
that there are two hundred and fifty-seven steps…
T	 Yo no voy, yo no voy...
G	 ...so if there are any of you who don’t think you can manage it, just 
wait for us here.
***
G	 So, that wasn’t too bad, was it? We’re now in the Whispering 
Gallery. The gallery gets its name because if you whisper – talk very 
quietly – on one side, your voice can be heard very clearly on the 
other side. When there are a lot of tourists, it doesn’t always work, 
but as there aren’t so many of us today, why don’t you try it…?
***
G	 So, did any of you try out the whispering? We’re now going to go 
back along the Nave, and then down into the Crypt to see some 
of the tombs of famous people who are buried in St Paul’s.
***
G	 Right, now the tomb over there is Lord Nelson’s – you remember 
you saw his monument earlier – and then here we have the tomb 
of the Duke of Wellington, who defeated Napoleon at the Battle 
of Waterloo. And finally, this tomb here belongs to the great man 
himself, Sir Christopher Wren, the architect of St Paul’s. It’s just a 
simple stone monument, but can you see the Latin words on it? 
Anyone speak Latin here? No? Well, I’ll translate it for you. It says, 
‘Reader, if you seek his monument, look around you.’ Because of 
course, the whole of St Paul’s is really Wren’s monument.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the two scripts on pp.129–130, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e 8.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
Part 1
G = guide, T = tourist 
G	 Good afternoon, everybody, everyone, and welcome to St Paul’s, 
which, as you probably know, is one of the most famous and 
most historic cathedrals in Britain. The previous church on this 
site burned down in sixteen sixty-six, in the Great Fire of London, 
and the famous architect Sir Christopher Wren was asked to 
design a new cathedral. It took nearly forty years to build and was 
completed in seventeen ten.
	
Just behind you is the Great West Door, you can see the Great 
West Door. The magnificent doors are nine metres tall. 
T	 Ha dicho nueve metros?
G	 They’re normally closed, except when someone very special 
arrives, for example, Her Majesty the Queen.
	
And now in front of you, you see the Nave, which gives you the 
most wonderful view of the full length of St Paul’s Cathedral. 
T	 Wie schoen.
G	 Maybe some of you watched Prince Charles and Princess Diana 
walk down the Nave when they married here in nineteen eighty-
one.
	
OK, now please follow me. We’re going to walk down the Nave, 
and you´ll see the North and South aisle on either side…
d	 e 8.16  Tell Sts they are going to listen to the rest of the 
tour, and this time they are going to take notes about the 
important places on the tour. Focus on the points in the 
list and make sure Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each area (indicated by ***  
in the script) to give Sts time to take notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
The Dome
•  the cross: In 1710, Christopher Wren was lifted up in a basket 
to watch his son place the cross on top of the Dome.
•  the height of the dome: From the top of the Dome to the 
floor is exactly 365 feet, one foot for every day of the year.
•  something that was true until the 1960s: St Paul’s was the 
tallest building in London until the 1960s because until that 
time, nobody was allowed to build anything taller near St 
Paul’s.
The South Transept
•  Horatio Nelson: There’s a monument to Horatio Nelson, who 
died at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805; he’s the one on top of 
Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square.
The South Quire Aisle
•  the statue of John Donne: Donne was a Dean of the 
Cathedral and a famous poet – he died in 1631. The statue is 
one of the few monuments which survived the Great Fire of 
London, and it has burn marks on it.
The Whispering Gallery
•  the number of steps you have to climb: There are 257 steps.
•  the reason the gallery gets its name: If you talk very quietly on 
one side, your voice can be heard very clearly on the other side.
The Crypt
•  the famous people in the tombs: Lord Nelson, the Duke of 
Wellington, Sir Christopher Wren
•  the Latin words on Wren’s tomb: The words on Wren’s tomb 
say, ‘Reader, if you seek his monument, look around you.’ 
Because the whole of St Paul’s is Wren’s monument.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 120@@
120
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their description, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
	 In g, Sts should check their description for mistakes before 
giving it in.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to attach a photo of the building to 
their description.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
7	r  VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Focus on the instructions and the photo. You could ask Sts 
if they have heard of or seen the Globe Theatre.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the two questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Sam Wanamaker was an American actor who loved Shakespeare.
He was shocked to discover that the world-famous Globe 
Theatre had no memorial.
The Globe Theatre
Hello, I’m Charlie. Welcome to Shakespeare’s Globe.
It’s an incredible building. It’s made almost entirely of wood, 
following authentic building practices, and it has a thatched roof. 
Believe it or not, this is the only thatched roof that has been allowed 
in London since the Great Fire of sixteen sixty-six.
In fact, it’s almost exactly the same as the original theatre. The first 
Globe was built by Shakespeare’s playing company – who were called 
the Lord Chamberlain’s Men – in fifteen ninety-nine. It looked just like 
this, but it was about two hundred and thirty metres that way.
The first theatre burned down during a performance of 
Shakespeare’s Henry the Eighth on the twenty-ninth of June, sixteen 
thirteen. The company soon had the theatre rebuilt, but sadly this 
second theatre was destroyed by the British government in the 
sixteen forties because they believed theatre was immoral.
This site was almost completely forgotten about for almost three 
hundred years, until an American called Sam Wanamaker tried to 
find it in the nineteen fifties.
Sam Wanamaker was an actor. He was from the United States, but 
the government banned him from working due to his political 
views. He decided to move to England, the home of his hero, William 
Shakespeare. He started performing in Shakespeare plays all over 
the UK, especially in Stratford-upon-Avon, Shakespeare’s birthplace.
Eventually, Wanamaker followed his hero’s footsteps and came to 
London. He wanted to see the spot where the world-famous Globe 
Theatre had been. He hoped to find a statue or a memorial. He was 
shocked when all he found was a dirty old plaque.
He came up with a plan to rebuild the famous Globe. In nineteen 
seventy, he launched the Shakespeare Globe Trust and put his plan 
into action. But it wasn’t easy. First of all, he tried to find out the size 
of the original theatre. But the owners of the site refused to have an 
archaeological survey carried out.
Then he struggled to buy this riverside site from the local council. All 
this time, everybody was telling him that a true reconstruction of the 
Globe was impossible.
But Wanamaker didn’t give up. He managed to buy the site, and 
with the help of historical advisers and extensive research, he had 
a theatre built that was as close as possible to Shakespeare’s fifteen 
ninety-nine playhouse.
Sadly, Wanamaker died four years before Shakespeare’s Globe 
opened in nineteen ninety-seven. He is remembered as the 
‘visionary who re-created Shakespeare’s Globe’, and the theatre he 
worked so hard to rebuild has been a huge success.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
6	SPEAKING & WRITING  describing a building
a	 Focus on the instructions and the photo, and tell Sts 
that the Guggenheim is a famous museum in Bilbao. Go 
through the questions with the class and remind Sts what 
an anecdote is (= an informal true story that’s interesting 
or amusing).
	 Give Sts time to think about their famous building and 
plan what they are going to say. Get them to make some 
notes, and help them with any new vocabulary they need. 
Remind them that the building can be a modern one (like 
the Guggenheim in the photo).
	 Put Sts in pairs, and monitor and help as Sts describe their 
famous buildings.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts about a building you know well to 
demonstrate the activity.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing a building on p.121.
	 Focus on a and give Sts time to read the description of 
Hagia Sofia and answer the question. Tell Sts not to worry 
about the highlighted relative pronouns.
	 Check answers.
a  A (a minaret)    b  B (a mosaic)
	 Now focus on b. Get Sts to read questions a–e and match 
them to paragraphs 1–5.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  d    2  e    3  b    4  c    5  a
	 Focus on the Defining and non-defining relative 
clauses box in c and go through it with the class.
	 Now give Sts time to tick or cross the highlighted relative 
pronouns in the description. Remind them to correct the 
ones that are wrong.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  f    2  f    3  g where    4  g which    
5  f    6  g which    7  f    8  g which
	 You could do d as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs 
and then check answers.
1 (which) could be left out.
	 Next, focus on e. Tell Sts they are going to write a 
description of a famous building in their town / city for 
a tourism website. Alternatively, they can write about a 
famous building somewhere else in their country.
	 Get Sts to use the questions in b (in the correct order) 
to help them plan their description. Encourage them to 
make brief notes as they answer the questions.
	 Now focus on the instructions in f and go through the 
Useful language: describing a building box with the 
class. Sts write their description of a building, following 
the plan they’ve made. Remind them to use the Useful 
language to help them.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 121@@
121
Today it’s a fantastic place to see Shakespeare’s famous plays. There 
are eight hundred and fifty-seven seats in the stalls, and seven 
hundred people can stand in the pit, an area with no seats which is 
in front of the stage.
Attached to the outdoor theatre is a modern building. The Globe 
Exhibition and Tour is here, housing the largest permanent 
exhibition on Shakespeare in the world. This explores the life of 
Shakespeare and re-creates the London he lived in.
Since twenty fourteen, there has also been an indoor theatre on 
the site, which, like the Globe, looks and feels like a theatre from 
Shakespeare’s time. It was built using plans from the seventeenth 
century. The interior is made of oak wood. Above the stage there is 
a musician’s gallery and a beautifully painted ceiling. There are no 
electric lights on stage – all the lighting is provided by candlelight, 
giving the theatre an authentic Shakespearean atmosphere.
And can you guess what it’s called? It’s the Sam Wanamaker 
playhouse, in honour of the man who made all of this possible.
b	 Tell Sts they are going to watch the documentary again 
and this time they must mark sentences 1–8 T (true) or  
F (false). Remind them to correct the false ones.
	 Give Sts time to read the sentences.
	 Play the video again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, getting Sts to explain why the F answers are false.
1	 T
2	 F (It burned down in 1613.)
3	 F (The second theatre was destroyed by the British 
government.)
4	 T
5	 F (He wanted to rebuild it in London.)
6	 F (Everybody was telling him it was impossible.)
7	 F (He died four years before the Globe opened.)
8	 T
c	 Tell Sts they are going to watch four extracts from the 
documentary and, in pairs, they need to decide what the 
words in bold mean.
	 Play the video, pausing after the first extract.
	 Give Sts time to discuss the bold words, then check the 
answer.
	 Repeat the process for the other three extracts.
1	 a roof covered in dried straw, reeds, etc.
2	 a flat piece of stone, metal, etc., usually with a name and dates 
on, attached to a wall in memory of a person or an event
3	 the place in a theatre just in front of the stage, with no seats
4	 the light that a candle produces
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video  
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
8B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 122@@
	1A	
122
e 8.17
1
I = interviewer, D = Diarmuid
I	 Do you still go to the bank or do you do all your banking online?
D	 I do almost all of my banking online. The only reason I’d go into a 
bank is to ask for advice, so maybe for big things, like a mortgage 
or a loan I would go in to have a face-to-face conversation, but 
other than that, it’s all online.
I	 Have you ever had a problem with online banking?
D	 Yes, I’ve had problems, um, just glitches in the system that mean 
you can’t access it when you need to, um, I’ve never had a huge 
problem though.
2
I = interviewer, V = Victoria
I	 What’s the best live event you’ve been to recently?
V	 Um, I would say the best live event I’ve been to recently is, last 
time I was in LA I went to a Dodgers game. Um, the Dodgers are 
my favourite baseball team and, um, now they’re in the World 
Series, so it was exciting to see them play this year.
I	 Why did you enjoy it so much?
V	 I enjoyed going to the Dodger game so much this year because 
I live in New York now and I don’t get to see them play in person 
that often, and they’re a really good team this year, um, so getting 
to see them play was really exciting.
3
I = interviewer, K = Keith
I	 Do you ever play board games or other kinds of games with 
friends or family?
K	 Yeah, I play, um, board games with my family, with my wife and 
with my children.
I	 What’s your favourite game? Why?
K	 Um, my favourite game. I would choose either Monopoly or 
Cluedo. Um, I play both of them a lot with my children, and with 
my family. I’d probably say Cluedo’s my favourite. My children love 
it and I’ve always loved it since I was a kid as well. It’s a detective 
game where you have to solve a crime and who’s committed it, 
what with and where they did it, and it’s a really good game.
4
I = interviewer, C = Carolina
I	 How often do you go to the hairdresser’s?
C	 Um, once a month, I think.
I	 What do you usually have done?
C	 I get my hair cut. That’s it.
I	 Have you ever had a haircut you really didn’t like?
C	 Many times. Once I remember that it I, it turned out to be super 
short and I was very disappointed. I almost cried.
5
I = interviewer, E = Erin
I	 What's the most interesting historical site you’ve ever visited?
E	 I almost hate to say it because it sounds like a cliché, but the 
Colosseum in Rome. Just the, the architecture and the things 
that people were capable of with their brains before computers 
is just mind-blowing. But also the Museum of Science, the Galileo 
Museum in Florence is also very cool.
I	 Why did you go there?
E	 We went to Rome and the Colosseum specifically because my 
husband wanted to. I wasn’t very interested, but I was really 
surprised at how it, much I enjoyed it. And we went to the Galileo 
Museum because someone else had recommended it and it 
seemed like an interesting thing to do, sort of off the beaten 
tourist path. And it was amazing. I think my brain melted a little 
bit.
I	 Whould you recommend it to other people?
E	 Absolutely. If you do the Colosseum, pay extra for the guided 
tour. You get through the line faster.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
a
1  b    2  a    3  a    4  c    5  a    6  b    7  c    8  b    9  b
b
1  my photo taken    2  my hair cut    3  my flat painted    
4  was built    5  should be paid    6  being told
VOCABULARY
a
1  take    2  gave    3  paid    4  living    5  be    6  back    
7  away    8  after    9  off    10  up
b
1  box office    2  interval    3  plot    4  matinee    5  opponent
c
1  dyed    2  manicure    3  plaits    4  massage    5  stretches    
6  Palace    7  dome    8  crypt    9  tomb    10  defeated
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  crowd /aʊ/    2  whistle /w/    3  yoga /əʊ/    4  cathedral /θ/    
5  tomb /uː/
d
1  performance    2  audience    3  aerobics    4  pedicure    
5  column
CAN YOU understand this text?
b
1  the Pump Room    2  Aquae Sulis    3  the Terrace    
4  the Great Bath    5  July / August    6  Bath Abbey    
7  Bill Bryson    8  the King’s Spring
r  CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    2  b    3  a    4  b    5  c
	7&8	Revise and Check
Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 123@@
	1A	
123
9A
	9A	 Total recall
	 With a show of hands, find out how many Sts ticked each 
sentence.
	 Finally, find out if any Sts didn’t tick any of the sentences. 
Then find out who has the fewest ticks.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or get Sts to discuss it in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could tell the class 
which one causes you the biggest problem and why.
2	READING  understanding a theory
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts exactly 30 seconds 
to look at the credit card number. Make sure they don’t 
write it down. Then tell them to close their books.
	 Now get Sts to write as much of the number as they can 
remember. 
	 When Sts have finished, tell them to compare with a 
partner. Then they should open their books and see how 
much of the number they wrote correctly.
	 Find out if any Sts got all the digits in the correct order.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the objects. Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to write as many of the objects in the photo 
as possible.
c	 Tell Sts to read the extract and check their answers to b. 
Tell them not to worry about the gaps. You might want to 
check Sts know the meaning of shape.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the extract the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted verbs.
a ball    a pencil    a swan    handcuffs    a boat    a seahorse  
an elephant’s trunk    a boomerang    an egg timer    a balloon 
on a string
	 Now tell Sts, in their pairs, to decide if they prefer any 
different objects for numbers 0–9.
	 Elicit some feedback.
!   Tell Sts not to do the task in the last paragraph of the 
extract, as they are going to do it later in f.
d	 Focus on phrases A–D and make sure Sts understand all 
the lexis.
	 Tell Sts to read the extract again and this time to complete 
gaps 1–4 with the phrases.
	 Check answers.
1  C    2  B    3  D    4  A
e	 Focus on the instructions and do this as a whole-class 
activity, or get Sts to do it individually.
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts to find two other words 
in the extract related to the word memorize (memory and 
memorable).
1  remind    2  recall    3  memorize
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
 G   reported speech
 V   word building
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
This lesson is about memory and provides two different 
angles on the topic: strategies to help you to remember, 
and the real-life story of a woman who is not able to forget. 
The lesson begins with Sts doing a survey about how good 
their memory is and then discussing the results. Next, they 
read an extract on how to remember numbers from a book 
called How to Develop a Brilliant Memory Week by Week. The 
grammar section which follows uses two stories on audio 
to revise and extend reported speech (reported statements, 
questions, and imperatives).
In the second half of the lesson, Sts listen to a radio 
programme about a woman who can’t forget anything. 
This leads into a vocabulary and pronunciation focus on 
word building and word stress related to the words in 
the listening. Sts then put this language into practice in a 
speaking activity where they tell stories and anecdotes. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  reported speech p.168 
Communicative  Find the pair p.198 (instructions p.176)
For students
Workbook  9A
Online Practice  9A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts that you are going to read out ten words. They must 
not write them, but must try to remember them.
Dictate the following words, saying each one twice (they are 
all from previous Vocabulary Banks):
toothpaste  butcher’s  zoom  rubbish  thesis  cartoon  
donkey  fork  hammer  fringe
Then put Sts in pairs and tell them to write down as many as 
they can remember.
Check answers and find out which pair has the best memory.
1	SPEAKING
a	 Books open. Focus on the questionnaire and the task. Give 
Sts time to read the sentences and tick the ones that are 
true for them. Highlight that in 4, they can use a different 
social network from Facebook, or use another way of 
remembering, e.g. a calendar.
	 Now focus on the Giving examples box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss with a partner 
which sentences they have ticked, and encourage them 
to give examples.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 124@@
124 9A
e 9.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.130) 
1	 Sarah
My husband, Rick, always forgets where he puts things, and last 
night he came home very late from work and then had to leave very 
early again this morning, at five, while I was still in bed. I heard him 
crashing about downstairs getting ready, and then he shouted up 
the stairs, ‘Sarah, have you seen my car keys?’ So I shouted back, 
‘No’, and I tried to go back to sleep, but then he came running up 
the stairs into the bedroom and said, ‘I can’t find them. I left them 
on the table when I went to bed last night. You’ve moved them.’ 
And I said, ‘I didn’t move them; I was in bed when you came home. 
Have you looked in your coat pocket?’ So he went downstairs again 
and shouted, ‘They’re not there’. So I got up, in a very bad mood, 
and went downstairs, and looked in his coat pocket, and – surprise, 
surprise – there were his car keys. I was really quite angry because by 
now I was completely awake. But at least he apologized.
2	 Kim
It was my mum’s seventieth birthday last week, and I suggested to 
my sister, Caro, that it would be nice to have a birthday lunch for 
her. I said I’d organize it because my sister isn’t very good at that 
kind of thing. She works full time and has a very important job – so 
she says – but anyway, she said, ‘I want to do something to help. I’ll 
bring a birthday cake.’ I said, ‘Fine’, even though I quite wanted to 
make the cake myself. Anyway, on the day, everyone arrived and 
Mum was really surprised and pleased, and we had lunch, and then 
I said to my sister, ‘Where’s the cake?’ She went pale, and said, ‘OMG, 
I completely forgot about it.’ Mum said, ‘Oh, don’t make a fuss, Kim. 
It’s no problem.’ She thought it was very funny, but I was seriously 
annoyed.
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to put the 
initials next to the lines.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to work in pairs and do the activity.
	 Play the first story again for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
Sarah’s story 
R	 ‘Have you seen my car keys?’
R	 ‘I can’t find them.’
R	 ‘You’ve moved them.’
S	 ‘Have you looked in your coat pocket?’
R	 ‘They’re not there.’
	 Now repeat the process for the second story.
Kim’s story
C	 ‘I want to do something to help.’
C	 ‘I’ll bring a birthday cake.’
K	 ‘Where’s the cake?’
C	 ‘I completely forgot about it.’
M	 ‘It’s no problem.’
c	 Focus on the instructions. Look at 1 and tell Sts to also 
look at Sarah’s story in b. Highlight that Have you seen my 
car keys? is direct speech as you are using the exact words 
that someone has said. In c, Sts need to report what the 
person said.
	 Get Sts to complete the gaps and compare with a partner.
	 Check answers.
1  if    2  couldn’t    3  had / ’d    4  asked    5  told    6  said    
7  would / ’d    8  was    9  she    10  was
f	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to memorize 
the 20-digit number in the last paragraph. 
	 Then get them to memorize the credit card number in a 
again, using Dominic O’Brien’s method.
	 Get Sts to write the numbers and then check their own 
answers.
	 Find out if any Sts managed to remember the 20 digits. If 
not, how many did they remember? 
	 Then ask if any Sts remembered more digits in the credit 
card number, and if so, whether they think it is because of 
the Number-Shape System and the Link Method.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
h	 Tell Sts they are now going to use pictures to help them to 
learn some new vocabulary. The words are all ones which 
are going to come up in a story they are going to read 
in 9B.
	 The words are bride, join, thief, sigh (verb), knock (verb), 
warning, upset (adj), and wise (adj). If you think your Sts 
already know any of them, replace them with another 
word from 9B or File 10.
	 Tell the class they are going to draw a picture 
incorporating the new words. Give a large piece of paper 
to each student (or they can use their own paper).
	 Say the first word. You may explain the word by eliciting 
the translation from a student or by translating it yourself, 
but tell Sts not to write it down.
	 Each student then draws an image for the word. The 
image can be a picture of, e.g. a bride, or simply an image 
that they associate with the meaning, or even the sound 
of the word. You might want to do your own drawings on 
the board for the first two to help Sts get the idea.
	 Continue with the other words. Sts must try to incorporate 
each image into their picture.
	 When Sts have drawn their eight images, they should 
compare with a partner, explaining what each image 
represents.
	 Now write the eight words on the board in jumbled order 
and ask Sts to write each word over its image.
	 Finally, clean the board and get Sts to turn over their 
picture and see if they can remember the eight words. 
You may now want to tell them that join, sigh, and knock 
are all regular verbs, and that the plural of thief is thieves.
3	GRAMMAR  reported speech
a	 e 9.1  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of annoyed.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to the first story, and then 
pause the audio and elicit why Sarah was annoyed.
Because Rick, her husband, woke her up very early to help find 
his keys.
	 Now play Kim’s story and elicit why she was annoyed.
Because her sister had promised to bring a cake for their 
mother’s birthday and had then forgotten to do it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 125@@
125
9A
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 She said (that) she couldn’t find her purse.
2	 He said (that) he wasn’t coming to class on Friday.
3	 They said (that) they probably wouldn’t go on holiday that 
summer.
4	 Jane said (that) she had / ’d finished her exams.
5	 They told us (that) the film would be on the next day.
6	 Robert told me (that) he hadn’t been there before.
7	 She said (that) she had to leave at 6.30.
8	 They told me (that) they’d never forgotten their visit.
9	 He said (that) he had / ’d seen a man hiding in the bushes.
10	 She told me (that) she didn’t really want to see me.
b
1	 She asked him how many children he had.
2	 They asked the woman to take a photo of them.
3	 They asked us if / whether we would / ’d be able to come.
4	 He told me to fill in the application form.
5	 He asked her if / whether she had / ’d arrived on time.
6	 She told us to bring plenty of food.
7	 She asked me to help her with the cooking.
8	 He asked them how long they had / ’d been waiting.
9	 He asked her to confirm her date of birth.
10	 They told us not to worry about anything.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and focus on the instructions and 
example.
	 Sts should each write their three questions. They should 
not work together on this. Encourage them to write 
questions to which they don’t know the answers (e.g. not 
What’s your name?).
	 First, Sts A ask Sts B their three questions, but they mustn’t 
write the answers.
	 Then make sure Sts swap roles.
f	 Now focus on the instructions and the example. Get 
Sts to change partners, and tell them to report to their 
new partner the questions they asked their first partner 
and the answers. Although they may need to look at 
the questions in order to transform them into reported 
speech, they should be able to transform the answers in 
their head.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
	 Remind Sts that when they are reporting their questions 
and answers, they may need to change the tense, as well 
as other words. Monitor and help, correcting any mistakes 
in reported speech.
	 Get some feedback. With a show of hands, find out how 
many Sts remembered all three questions and answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity with a 
student in front of the class. First, ask the student a question, 
and then report the question and answer to the class (from 
memory).
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.148.
Grammar notes
In this lesson, the basics of reported speech are revised and 
reported imperatives are introduced. By now, Sts should 
have no problems with reported statements, but will need 
more practice with reported questions, and especially with 
reported imperatives and requests.
Remind Sts that tell is followed by a person or object 
pronoun, but say is not, e.g.  
She told me her name was Anna. NOT She told her name was 
Anna.  
She said she was tired. NOT She said me she was tired.
Remind Sts also of the past simple pronunciation said 
/sed/ and told /təʊld/.
Point out that the past perfect in direct speech does not 
change in reported speech.
Word changes in reported speech
When direct speech is reported at a different time or 
place from when or where it was originally spoken, word 
changes usually happen. However, if the time is very 
recent or the place is the same, these words may not need 
to change, e.g.
‘I’ll meet you this evening.’  
(reported a few minutes later): 
He said he’d meet us this evening.
‘I’ll meet you this evening.’  
(reported a few days later): 
He said he’d meet us that evening.
Reported questions
•	 Rule 1: Remind Sts that the auxiliaries do, does, and did 
are not used in reported questions, e.g. NOT He asked 
how did I feel.
Reported imperatives and requests
Reported imperatives and requests are difficult for many 
Sts because the use of the infinitive does not correspond 
to what they would use in their L1. As a result, they often 
say things like She told us that we didn’t talk instead of She 
told us not to talk. Sts will need a lot of practice before they 
are able to produce this structure correctly.
Requests (but not imperatives), e.g. Can you help me?, 
can be reported in two ways, like an imperative or like a 
question:  
He asked me to help him OR He asked me if I could help him. 
At this level, given that the infinitive is a new structure, we 
recommend just focusing on this way of reporting.
In Intermediate Plus, the structure is only taught with ask 
or tell. Other reporting verbs used with the infinitive, e.g. 
advise, convince, persuade, etc. are introduced in English 
File Upper-intermediate.
	 Focus on Revise the basics, and use the chart to elicit the 
rules for reported statements, e.g. the pronoun and tense 
changes, and remind Sts of the difference between say 
and tell.
	 Now focus on the example sentences for word changes 
in reported speech and play audio e 9.2 for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for reported questions e 9.3 and reported 
imperatives and requests e 9.4.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 126@@
126 9A
c	 Give Sts time to read the questions.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after the answer to each 
question is given to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 24th January 1986 was a Friday. She was working in an ice 
cream shop. She went out that night with friends.
	
29th August 1980 was a Friday. She went to Palm Springs 
with friends.
	
10th January 1981 was a Saturday. It was the third time she 
drove a car.
2	 The traffic in Manhattan and looking out of the window of 
her parent’s apartment. She was 18 months old.
3	 1st July 1974 is the day her family moved to Los Angeles and 
she began to remember everything.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 e 9.6  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the second 
part of the radio programme, in which the presenter talks 
about memory research.
	 Go through questions 1–10, making sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, and point out that the doctor’s name is 
pronounced /məgɒf/. Focus on the Glossary and go 
through it with the class.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and make notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 He asked her questions from a history book.
2	 Elvis Presley and Bing Crosby died.
3	 He checked with her diary and with her mother.
4	 Strong emotional experiences
5	 Things that she finds important
6	 Facts and figures, numbers
7	 Around 60
8	 There’s so much information in her head all the time; it’s 
difficult to forget bad things.
9	 The Woman Who Can’t Forget
10	 Because there might be things in it that he doesn’t want 
to know.
e 9.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
P = presenter, D = Dr McGaugh, J = Jill
Part 2
P	 So what do we know about how Jill’s superior memory works? 
Doctor James McGaugh, who is an expert in memory research, 
met her for the first time in June two thousand. He first tested 
her memory using a big history book. Jill answered the questions 
quickly and confidently.
D	 What happened on the sixteenth of August, nineteen seventy-
seven?
J	 Elvis Presley died in his Graceland bathroom. It was a Tuesday.
D	 When did Bing Crosby die?
J	 Friday, the fourteenth of October, nineteen seventy-seven, on a 
golf course in Spain. I heard it on the radio while my mom was 
driving me to soccer practice.
4	LISTENING  linking dates and events
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think about 
where they were and what they did on the days listed.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to talk about what they 
can remember, giving as much detail as possible.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity by 
choosing one of the days / dates and telling the class where 
you were and what you were doing.
b	 e 9.5  Focus on the task and photos, making sure Sts 
know what extraordinary /ɪkˈstrɔːdnri/ means  
(= unexpected, surprising, or strange). Then go through 
the Glossary with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the three questions. You may want 
to pre-teach the pronunciation of Manhattan, New Jersey, 
and Los Angeles if you think Sts may have problems 
recognizing them when they listen.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Highly Superior Autobiographical Memory
2	 She was 8.
3	 It drives her crazy.
e 9.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
A = announcer, P = presenter, J = Jill 
Part 1
A	 Can you remember exactly what you did on any day ten, twenty, 
or even thirty years ago? Now it’s Mind Matters, and we’re going 
to hear about a woman who can do just that.
P	 Ask Jill Price to remember any day in her life, and she can usually 
come up with an answer. When I met her, she asked for my date of 
birth, which is the twenty-fourth of January, nineteen eighty-six.  
J	 OK, the twenty-fourth of January, nineteen eighty-six was a 
Friday. It was four days before the Challenger explosion. I was 
working in an ice cream shop. I hated my job. That night I went 
out with some friends, Tim and Candace.
P	 Jill could also tell me what she ate and what time she got home 
that evening. I tried another date. What did she do on the twenty-
ninth of August, nineteen eighty?
J	 It was also a Friday. I went to Palm Springs with my friends Nina 
and Michelle and their family.
P	 Then I asked her, ‘When was the third time you drove a car?’ 
J	 That was the tenth of January, nineteen eighty-one. A Saturday.
P	 Jill Price has HSAM, or ‘Highly Superior Autobiographical Memory’, 
which means she can remember exactly what happened on most 
days in her life. She remembers the day of the week for every date 
since nineteen eighty – what she was doing, who she was with, 
where she was. She can recall a memory of twenty years ago as 
easily as a memory of two days ago. 
Jill was born on the thirtieth of December, nineteen sixty-five, in 
New York. Her first memory is when she was eighteen months old 
and she lived with her parents in an apartment in Manhattan. She 
remembers the traffic and staring out of the window down Ninth 
Avenue. When she was five, her family moved to New Jersey, and 
then when she was eight, they moved to a rented house in Los 
Angeles. That was the first of July, nineteen seventy-four – and on 
that day, she says, her ‘brain snapped’, and she began to be able 
to remember everything that happened to her in great detail. Her 
memories come without her trying to recall them. 
J	 People have called it a gift, but for me it’s a nightmare. My entire 
life goes through my head every day – it drives me crazy.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 127@@
127
9A
	 Check answers by underlining the stressed syllables in the 
words on the board (see previous answer key).
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying 
the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
word or group of words for Sts to listen and repeat. Then 
put Sts in pairs to practise saying the words.
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
a collocation is (= a combination of words that happens 
very often, and more frequently than would happen by 
chance).
	 Get Sts to complete the gaps in 1–6.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You may want to explain that emotional 
intelligence = the capacity to be aware of, control, and 
express one’s emotions, and to handle relationships 
empathetically.
1  emotional    2  accurate    3  Personally    4  memorable    
5  important    6  confidently
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then check answers. For 2, Sts might suggest entrance and 
although it is correct, it hasn’t come up in this lesson.
1  atomic    2  entry    3  unlikely    4  security    5  connection    
6  autobiographical    7  easily    8  ability    9  unpleasant
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to work individually or in 
pairs to flick through the material in this lesson and find the 
answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stressed syllable 
in each word. Then check answers.
1  atomic    2  entry    3  unlikely    4  security    5  connection    
6  autobiographical    7  easily    8  ability    9  unpleasant
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and the topics which Sts have to 
talk about, making sure they understand them all.
	 Give Sts time to make some notes or think about what 
they are going to say for the two topics they choose.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by talking about 
one of the topics yourself.
b	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Focus on the 
example and tell them to discuss their topics in their 
groups.
	 Monitor and help.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
EXTRA IDEA   Elicit / Write on the board a few different ways 
of starting an anecdote, e.g. 
THIS HAPPENED TO ME WHEN… 
I’LL NEVER FORGET THE TIME WHEN… 
WHEN I WAS AT SCHOOL, …
c	 Get individual Sts to tell the rest of the class about a story 
or anecdote they’ve just heard from a classmate. Remind 
Sts to speak from memory and not to use notes.
	 If there isn’t enough time for everyone to speak, you could 
form new groups or put Sts in new pairs where they can 
exchange stories.
P	 It’s often difficult for scientists to confirm whether 
autobiographical memories are accurate, but Doctor McGaugh 
was able to check with Jill’s detailed diary. He also checked Jill’s 
memories with her mother.
	
Doctor McGaugh’s research was focused on showing that strong 
emotional experiences are the most memorable ones, and Jill had 
the most vivid memories that McGaugh had ever encountered. 
However, her memory only stores the things that she finds 
important. When it comes to remembering things that don’t 
relate to her personally or to her interests, Jill is no better than the 
average person. 
J	 At school, I couldn’t remember facts and figures, and I can’t 
memorize a sequence of random numbers.
P	 McGaugh and other experts have now discovered around 
sixty people with HSAM. These people often say that there 
was a specific point in their lives that triggered their ability to 
remember in such detail. For Jill, it was her family’s stressful move 
to Los Angeles. Most people would think that having HSAM is an 
advantage, but Jill says there are two big problems.
J	 The first is that there’s so much information running through my 
head all the time, and the second is that I find it difficult to forget 
unpleasant things. For example, I can remember bad moments 
from my childhood as if they’d just happened, and they make me 
feel unhappy all over again. 
P	 No one else in Jill’s family has a memory like hers. She’s published 
an autobiography, The Woman Who Can’t Forget, but her brother 
hasn’t read it. He says that there might be things in it that he 
doesn’t want to know.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
5	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
word building; word stress
a	 Focus on the task and the chart, and point out the 
examples in the chart.
	 Give Sts time to complete the chart, individually or in 
pairs.
b	 e 9.7  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the words onto the board.
Noun
Adjective
Adverb
1	 memory
memorable
memorably
2	 confidence
confident
confidently
3	 emotion
emotional
emotionally
4	 importance
important
importantly
5	 accuracy
accurate
accurately
6	 person
personal
personally
e 9.7
1	 memory, memorable, memorably
2	 confidence, confident, confidently
3	 emotion, emotional, emotionally
4	 importance, important, importantly
5	 accuracy, accurate, accurately
6	 person, personal, personally
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stressed 
syllables before they listen again. Then play the audio for 
them to listen and check.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word to give 
Sts time to underline the stressed syllable.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 128@@
	1A	
128 9B
	9B	 Here comes the bride
EXTRA IDEA   You might want to tell Sts a bit more about 
Maugham’s life. Maugham was orphaned at the age of 
ten; he was brought up by an aunt and uncle. He qualified 
as a doctor in 1897. As well as stories, he wrote plays – in 
1908, four of his plays were showing in London at the same 
time, which made him financially secure. During World 
War I, he volunteered as an ambulance driver and then 
worked as a secret agent. After the war, he resumed his 
interrupted travels and, in 1928, bought a villa in the south 
of France, which became his permanent home. Among his 
most famous novels are Of Human Bondage, The Moon and 
Sixpence, and The Razor’s Edge.
b	 e 9.8  Tell Sts they are going to read and listen to 
Mabel, a short story written by Maugham and originally 
published in 1930, many years after the events in the 
story had taken place. Point out that most of the places 
mentioned in the story were British colonies at that time, 
ruled by British colonial governments.
	 Focus on Part 1 and the Glossary and go through it with 
the class. You might want to tell Sts that the country now 
called Myanmar was called Burma until 1989. At the same 
time, Rangoon became Yangon.
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–5. Elicit / Explain 
the meaning of dilemma (= a situation which causes 
problems, often one in which you have to make a 
very difficult choice). Model and drill its pronunciation 
/dɪˈlemə/.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and read at the 
same time.
	 In pairs, Sts answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read Part 1 of the short story, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 George worked for the British colonial government in Burma, 
and Mabel was engaged to him (his fiancée).
2	 Because there were difficulties: Mabel’s father died, the 
war came, and then George was sent to an area which was 
unsuitable for a white woman.
3	 He suddenly became afraid (of marrying Mabel) because he 
hadn’t seen her for seven years and couldn’t remember what 
she was like.
4	 He didn’t want to marry Mabel, but didn’t want to tell her, 
either.
5	 He decided to run away, and he got a boat to Singapore.
e 9.8
See text in Student’s Book on p.90
	 Now focus on the last two questions in pink and ask them 
to the class. You could also get Sts to discuss them in pairs, 
and then get feedback.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
 G   third conditional and other uses of the past perfect
 V   weddings
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is weddings. The lesson begins with 
Mabel, a short story by the famous British writer, William 
Somerset Maugham, about a wedding that was postponed 
for years and nearly didn’t take place. The story is presented 
in four parts, two of which are for reading and listening, and 
two of which are for listening only. This is followed by the 
grammar focus, which looks at third conditional sentences 
and other uses of the past perfect. These structures are 
further practised in a pronunciation focus on sentence stress.
The second half of the lesson begins with a listening 
activity with two stories about failed proposals. The theme 
continues in a vocabulary focus on lexis related to weddings, 
including a text about the real cost of a wedding. This leads 
into a speaking activity where Sts read some controversial 
statements about weddings, decide whether or not they 
agree with them, and then discuss each one in small groups. 
Finally, Sts write a story describing a significant event.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  third conditionals and other uses of the past 
perfect p.169 
Communicative  What had happened? p.199 
(instructions p.177)
For students
Workbook  9B
Online Practice  9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the words WEDDING DISASTERS on the board. 
Then put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to 
brainstorm three ideas why a wedding might be a disaster. 
Elicit ideas.
Now tell Sts they are going to read a short story about a 
wedding that almost didn’t happen.
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding a 
short story
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions. You might want 
to tell Sts how to pronounce the author’s name, William 
Somerset Maugham /mɔːm/.
	 Give Sts time to read the information. Make sure they 
understand the meaning of colonies (= countries or 
areas that are governed by people from another, more 
powerful, country).
	 Do the question as a whole-class activity. Encourage Sts to 
give reasons to justify their opinions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 129@@
129
9B
e	 Focus on the instructions and Mabel’s four telegrams.
	 Now play the audio for Part 2 again, pausing as necessary 
to give Sts time to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again, pausing if necessary, for them to check.
	 Check answers.
1	 understand, Don’t worry
2	 Love Mabel
3	 sorry, missed, Manila
4	 Arriving soon
	 Now focus on the two questions in pink and get the class 
to speculate on what George will do next. You could put 
Sts in pairs, and then elicit ideas.
f	 Focus on the instructions. Get Sts to read Part 3 and 
continue marking George’s journey on the map. Elicit / 
Explain that a consul /ˈkɒnsl/ is a government official who 
is the representative of his or her country in a foreign city.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, eliciting the names of the places on his route.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read Part 3 of the short story, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
(Shanghai along the Yangtze River ➝) Chungking ➝ Cheng-tu
	 Next, get Sts to complete the gaps with adverbs and 
adverbial phrases from the list, and then compare with a 
partner.
g	 e 9.11  Play the audio for Sts to listen to Part 3 and check 
their answer to f, pausing as necessary.
	 Check answers.
2  After that    3  only    4  at last    5  never    6  One morning
e 9.11
Part 3
R	 No, no, she wasn’t going to catch him so easily. He had already 
made his plans. He could catch the last ship along the Yangtze river 
to Chungking. After that, no one could get there until the following 
spring. He arrived at Chungking, but he was desperate now. He was 
not going to take any risks. There was a place called Cheng-tu, the 
capital of Szechuan, and it was four hundred miles away. It could 
only be reached by road, and the area was full of thieves. A man 
would be safe there. 
George set out. He sighed with relief when he saw the walls of the 
lonely Chinese city. He could rest at last. Mabel would never find him 
there. The British consul was a friend of his and he stayed with him in 
his luxurious house.  
The weeks passed lazily one after the other. One morning George and 
the consul were in the courtyard when there was a loud knock at the 
door.
	 Now ask Sts what they think He sighed with relief means. 
You could demonstrate what a sigh /saɪ/ sounds like 
and point out that people make this sound for different 
reasons.
sigh = take and then let out a deep breath; relief = happiness 
that nothing unpleasant is happening
In this context, it means ‘he felt very happy to be there, where 
Mabel couldn’t follow’.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 e 9.9  Tell Sts they are going to follow George’s route on 
the map, so they should familiarize themselves with some 
of the place names. Give Sts time to find each place in the 
list on the map. They should also try to work out how they 
think the names are pronounced in English.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Remind 
Sts that some of the cities and countries now have 
different names (e.g. Saigon / Ho Chi Minh City, Burma / 
Myanmar, etc.).
e 9.9
See place names in Student’s Book on p.90
EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts look at the map, get them to look 
at the place names in the list and see if they know in which 
country any of the places are.
d	 e 9.10  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 2 of 
the story.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and mark George’s route on the map.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, eliciting the names of the places on his route.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
(Singapore ➝) Bangkok ➝ Saigon ➝ Hong Kong ➝ Manila ➝ 
Shanghai ➝ Yokohama ➝ Shanghai
e 9.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
R = reader, G = George, M = Mabel 
Part 2
R	 When George arrived at Singapore he found a telegram waiting for 
him.
M	 Quite understand. Don’t worry. Love Mabel.
G	 My God, I believe she’s following me...
R	 he said. He checked the passenger list of the next ship on its way 
to Singapore, and sure enough her name was on it. There was not 
a moment to lose. He jumped on the first train to Bangkok. But he 
was uneasy; she would have no difficulty in finding out that he had 
gone to Bangkok. Fortunately, there was a French boat sailing the 
next day for Saigon. He took it. At Saigon he would be safe. It would 
never occur to her that he had gone there. It was five days’ journey 
from Bangkok to Saigon and the boat was dirty, crowded, and 
uncomfortable. He was glad to arrive and went straight to the hotel. 
A telegram was immediately handed to him. It contained only two 
words:
M	 Love Mabel.
R	 He started to tremble.
G	 When is the next boat for Hong Kong?
R	 he asked. He sailed to Hong Kong, but was afraid to stay there. 
Then he went to Manila, and from there he went on to Shanghai. 
Shanghai made him feel nervous; every time he went out of the hotel 
he expected to run straight into Mabel’s arms. No, Shanghai would 
never do. The only thing was to go to Yokohama. At the Grand Hotel 
in Yokohama a telegram awaited him.
M	 So sorry I missed you at Manila. Love Mabel.
R	 Where was she now? He went back to Shanghai. This time he went 
straight to the club and asked if he had received any telegrams. One 
was handed to him.
M	 Arriving soon. Love Mabel.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 130@@
130 9B
1  c    2  b    3  a
	 You may want to point out that a is a third conditional.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.149.
Grammar notes
The third conditional and other uses of the past perfect 
are brought together here. The most difficult structure for 
most Sts will be the third conditional, which is why one 
whole practice exercise is devoted to it.
Third conditional
This was introduced towards the end of English File 
Intermediate, but it is a difficult structure in terms of form 
for Sts to produce correctly and needs a lot of practice.
Typical mistakes include using would have instead of the 
past perfect in the if-clause of the third conditional, e.g. 
If I would have known the band had cancelled, I wouldn’t 
have gone to the concert.
Or using the past perfect instead of would have in the 
main clause of the third conditional, e.g. If I had seen your 
text message, I had answered it immediately.
Other uses of the past perfect
You may want to tell Sts that in reported speech, when 
the tense in the direct speech is the past simple, people 
sometimes use the past simple again rather than the past 
perfect in reported speech, especially if the reporting 
takes place shortly after the event.
‘I got up very early’ > She said she (had) got up very early.
	 Focus on the example sentences for third conditional 
and play audio e 9.13 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the ’d box and go through it with the class.
	 Repeat for other uses of the past perfect e 9.14.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 She wouldn’t have fallen in love with him if he hadn’t made 
her laugh so much.
2	 If they’d / had been invited to the wedding, they’d / would 
have gone.
3	 I’d / would have forgotten our anniversary if you hadn’t 
reminded me.
4	 If we’d / had left earlier, we wouldn’t have missed our train.
5	 If you hadn’t paid in advance, you wouldn’t have lost your 
money.
6	 If they’d / had had enough money, they’d / would have 
bought a flat instead of renting one.
7	 I would have slept better if I hadn’t drunk a coffee after 
dinner.
8	 Jane and I wouldn't have lost touch if she hadn’t moved 
abroad.
9	 If I’d / had known you had a problem, I’d / would have 
offered to help.
10	 If he hadn’t shouted at the policeman, he wouldn’t have 
been arrested.
b
1	 I enjoyed that play very much, even though I’d / had seen 
it three times before.
2	 He said he’d / had worked for the company for six months. 
h	 e 9.12  Ask Sts to guess how the story will end. Elicit 
some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen to Part 4, which is the 
end of the story. Play the audio once all the way through 
for Sts to listen.
	 Play it again if necessary.
	 Now ask Sts to explain, in their own words, what 
happened in the end (Mabel found George and they got 
married). With a show of hands, find out how many Sts 
were surprised. Ask individuals why or why not.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 9.12
R = reader, G = George, M = Mabel, C= consul
Part 4
R	 One morning George and the consul were in the courtyard when 
there was a loud knock at the door. The doorman opened it. Mabel 
walked in. She was neat and cool and fresh. There was nothing in her 
appearance to suggest that she had just come in after two weeks on 
the road. George was terrified. He was as pale as death. She went up 
to him.
M	 Hello, George, I was so afraid that I’d missed you again.
G	 Hello, Mabel.
R	 he said. 
He did not know what to say. He looked this way and that: she stood 
between him and the doorway. She looked at him with a smile in her 
blue eyes.
M	 You haven’t changed at all.
R	 she said. 
M	 I was afraid you’d got fat and bald. I’ve been so nervous. It would 
have been terrible if I hadn’t been able to marry you after all.
R	 She turned to George’s host.
M	 Are you the consul?
R	 she asked.
C	 I am.
M	 Good. I’m ready to marry him as soon as I’ve had a bath.
R	 And she did.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you photocopy script 9.12 from here, Sts 
could read and listen to the whole story. Translate / Explain 
any new words or phrases.
i	 Focus on the two questions, making sure Sts understand 
sympathy (= the feeling of being sorry for sb). Model and 
drill its pronunciation /ˈsɪmpəθi/.
	 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback.
	 You might want to tell Sts that George and Mabel were 
real people. The writer met George in Burma and a friend 
of George’s told Maugham about George and Mabel’s 
‘romance’. The story does have a happy ending. When 
Maugham met George, he and Mabel had been happily 
married for eight years – in fact, George was totally 
dependent on Mabel and was very unhappy that she had 
had to go back to England for a visit.
2	GRAMMAR  third conditional and other uses of 
the past perfect
a	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts, in pairs, to 
match the uses of the past perfect in the story to the 
descriptions.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 131@@
131
9B
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the three sentences with a verb phrase in the past perfect.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences to 
each other with the correct stress pattern.
	 Get some Sts to read out their sentences, and find out if 
any Sts wrote the same endings.
4	LISTENING  understanding anecdotes
a	 Focus on the first part of the instructions and get Sts to 
read the introduction to the article and decide what two 
words complete the title.
	 Check the answer.
marry me
	 Now put Sts in pairs, and focus on the second part of 
the instructions, making sure Sts know the meaning of 
propose /prəˈpəʊz/ (= to ask sb to marry you). Tell Sts to 
look at the photos and decide who proposed, and how, 
for each one. 
	 Use the photo to elicit / teach the word beads.
b	 e 9.16  Tell Sts they are going to listen to Alex (from 
couple 1) and Emma (from couple 2), and they must 
check their answers to a and say which couple is still 
together.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Chloe proposed to Alex. She made a necklace with letters saying 
Will you marry me?
Tom proposed to Emma. He got down on one knee.
No, only Alex and Chloe are still together.
e 9.16
(script in Student’s Book on pp.130–131)
Alex
My girlfriend Chloe and I had been together for just over a year. 
Soon after we met, I’d told her that I didn’t want to get married or 
have children, and she seemed fine with that. But then, Chloe began 
to talk about moving in together. I tried not to discuss it, and we 
went on like that for a couple of months. Then one afternoon – it was 
the twenty-ninth of February – Chloe invited me to her house. When 
I arrived, she was making a bracelet. I sat down and she passed 
me a box which contained some small beads with letters on them. 
When I looked into the box, I realized that the letters spelled Will you 
marry me? I was horrified. I didn’t want to embarrass her, so I started 
putting the letters on the bracelet thread in the wrong order – 
I made words like ‘owl’ and ‘yellow’, but then she started crying. So 
we went out for a walk and she explained that the twenty-ninth of 
February only happens once every four years, and it’s the day when, 
traditionally, women can propose to men. I didn’t say anything and 
went home. I felt awful. It’s probably the worst thing that’s ever 
happened to me, and I didn’t see her for three days afterwards. But 
we got over it, and we’re still together. We’re not married, but who 
knows? Maybe in a few years’ time, I’ll propose, and Chloe will say no.
Emma
When I first started going out with Tom, I was completely in love. He 
was ten years older than me, very good-looking, and he had been 
an Olympic athlete. He was also a really lovely guy. In theory, he was 
my perfect man, but after two years, our relationship became very 
difficult, so I decided to end it. Not long afterwards, Tom phoned me 
to say that he wanted to meet at the cathedral. I thought, ‘OK, fine’. 
3	 She still hadn’t got up at 10.00, so I left the house without 
her. 
4	 We spent an hour looking for Carol, but she had 
disappeared. 
5	 He ran across the road, but the taxi had already been taken 
by someone else.
6	 I couldn’t get on the flight because they had overbooked it.
7	 I’d / had only been in Sydney for a week when I first met 
Sally.
8	 She asked me if I’d / had visited China before.
9	 They told me they’d / had just got engaged.
10	 The shop hadn’t opened yet, but there were already a lot of 
people waiting outside.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
a	 e 9.15  Remind Sts that in English sentences only some 
words are stressed. Elicit the type of words which are 
usually stressed (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs).
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear five sentences and they 
must listen for the stressed words and write them in the 
pink rectangles in the sentences. Point out that the first 
one has been done for them.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 known, weather, bad, wouldn’t, come
3	 soon, got, airport, remembered, hadn’t, locked, windows
4	 said, hadn’t, seen, ages
5	 bought, dress, hadn’t, expensive
e 9.15
1	 When I read your email, I understood why you’d left.
2	 If I’d known the weather was going to be so bad, I wouldn’t  
have come.
3	 As soon as we got to the airport, we remembered that we hadn’t 
locked the windows.
4	 He said that he hadn’t seen her for ages.
5	 I would have bought the dress if it hadn’t been so expensive.
b	 Now tell Sts to look at the words they have written and try 
to remember what the complete sentence is.
c	 Tell Sts to listen to the audio again and complete any 
gaps they have. Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See script 9.15
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm. Encourage them 
to pronounce the stressed words (in the pink rectangles) 
more strongly and not to stress the other words.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying the sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 132@@
132 9B
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you have heard of 
any proposals that went wrong, you could tell the class 
about them.
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts if they have the same 
tradition in their country regarding 29th February when 
women can propose to men. If not, do they think it is a good 
tradition?
5	VOCABULARY  weddings
Vocabulary notes
Wedding traditions vary the world over. In the UK, the 
best man is usually a close friend or family member of the 
bridegroom, and it is his responsibility to be in charge of 
the rings and hand them to the groom at the appropriate 
moment. He also usually gives a speech at the wedding 
reception.
Very young bridesmaids are also sometimes called 
flower girls.
 a	Focus on the wedding photo and the list of words and 
phrases. Give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to match 
the people in the photo to the words.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know what each word 
means. Model and drill pronunciation.
A  the bride    B  a pageboy    C  the (bride)groom    
D  a bridesmaid    E  the best man
EXTRA SUPPORT   Let Sts use their dictionaries to help them 
with this activity.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know the meaning 
of all the words in the list, especially reception here (= a 
formal social occasion to welcome sb or celebrate sth).
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  engaged    2  reception    3  guests    4  married    
5  invitations    6  bridesmaids    7  best man    8  couples
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know the meaning 
of expenses /ɪkˈspensɪz/ (= money spent in doing a 
particular job, or for a particular purpose). Now go 
through the list, making sure all the lexis is clear, e g. 
venue, veil, honeymoon, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to try to match the prices in 
the list to the cost of each item in the list. Point out that 
these prices are in pounds. You could tell Sts the exchange 
rate if you think it will help them.
d	 e 9.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
The venue for the ceremony and the reception cost £5,500.
The five bridesmaids’ dresses cost £350.
The food cost £8,500.
The flowers cost £1,300.
The rings cost £640.
The groom’s suit cost £1,160.
The wedding dress, veil, and shoes cost £2,500.
The honeymoon cost £4,500.
When I got there, Tom was waiting for me outside. He was holding a 
bottle of champagne and a bunch of flowers. And then before I had 
a chance to say anything, he got down on one knee and proposed. 
He gave me a necklace – not a ring, a necklace. Then a crowd of 
Japanese tourists rushed towards us and began taking photos – Tom 
was down on one knee and I was looking white and shocked. It was 
awful. I asked him to get up, and explained to him, in front of all the 
tourists, that we were not together any more, and we were definitely 
not going to get married. We left the cathedral, and as I was walking 
with him to the station, Tom said he had hoped that if he proposed 
to me, it would solve all our problems. But it was never going to 
work. We’re not together now.
c	 e 9.17  Tell Sts they are now going to hear Alex’s story 
again and they need to complete sentences 1–8.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to go through 1–8 and see if 
they can remember what Alex said.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and complete the 
sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Alex didn’t want to get married or have children.
2	 Chloe began to talk about moving in together.
3	 On 29th February, Chloe invited Alex to her house.
4	 Chloe gave Alex a box with some small beads with letters 
on them.
5	 The letters spelled Will you marry me?
6	 Alex started putting the letters on the bracelet in the wrong 
order.
7	 Chloe got upset and explained that on 29th February, women 
can propose to men.
8	 Alex didn’t see her for three days afterwards.
e 9.17
See Alex’s story in script 9.16
d	 e 9.18  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Emma’s 
story again and this time they must work out why Emma 
mentions items 1–8.
	 Now repeat the same process with Emma’s story.
1	 Tom was ten years older than Emma.
2	 After two years their relationship became difficult and she 
decided to end it.
3	 Tom wanted them to meet at the cathedral.
4	 When she got there, he was holding a bottle of champagne 
and a bunch of flowers.
5	 He proposed and gave her a necklace.
6	 A crowd of (Japanese) tourists rushed over and started 
taking photos.
7	 Emma was looking white and shocked when the tourists 
took their photos (because she didn’t want to marry him).
8	 She was walking with him to the station when he explained 
why he had proposed – he thought it would solve their 
problems.
e 9.18
See Emma’s story in script 9.16
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.130–131, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 133@@
133
9B
9B
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  unfortunately    2  Fortunately / Luckily    3  Luckily / 
Fortunately    4  in the end    5  In fact
c	 Tell Sts to correct the ten mistakes underlined in Matt’s 
story.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
wasnt – wasn’t (punctuation)
we only have – we only had (grammar)
gests – guests (spelling)
were hired – had hired (grammar)
lost – got lost (vocabulary)
stressed – stressful (vocabulary)
good – well (grammar)
proffessional – professional (spelling)
corse – course (spelling)
here – hear (spelling)
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to cover Matt’s story and retell it in their 
own words.
d	 Focus on the titles in the exam question. Give Sts time to 
choose a title and to write down some ideas about the 
topic.
	 Sts who have chosen the same title can compare their 
ideas in pairs.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs on each of the 
three topics.
e	 Now go through the plan with the class. Encourage Sts to 
make brief notes on what they will write about, using 1–4 
to help them plan their story.
f	 Focus on the Useful language: telling a story with 
sentence adverbs box. Go through it with the class.
	 Get Sts to write their story, following the plan and notes 
they made in d and e. Remind them to use the Useful 
language to help them.
	 If you do the writing in class, set a time limit for Sts to 
write their story, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
g	 Sts should check their story for mistakes before giving it in.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Fast finishers or Sts who want additional 
writing practice can choose a second title to write about.
e 9.19
The venue for the ceremony and the reception cost five thousand 
five hundred pounds.
The five bridesmaids’ dresses cost three hundred and fifty pounds.
The food cost eight thousand five hundred pounds.
The flowers cost one thousand three hundred pounds.
The rings cost six hundred and forty pounds.
The groom’s suit cost one thousand one hundred and sixty pounds.
The wedding dress, veil, and shoes cost two thousand five hundred 
pounds.
The honeymoon cost four thousand five hundred pounds.
	 Now do the question as a whole-class activity.
e	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
controversial /kɒntrəˈvɜːʃl/ (= causing a lot of angry 
public discussion and disagreement). Now go through 
statements 1–6 to make sure Sts understand them.
	 Give Sts time to think whether they agree or disagree with 
each one, and to think of reasons and examples.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Now focus on the Agreeing and Disagreeing box and go 
through it with the class. Highlight that No way! is quite 
informal.
	 Put Sts in small groups of four and tell them to discuss 
each statement.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 When Sts have finished, you could ask if any groups 
disagreed strongly about any of the statements.
EXTRA IDEA   Other possible controversial statements to 
discuss if they are appropriate in your teaching context, 
could be: 
‘You shouldn’t get married in a religious building unless 
you practise the religion.’ 
‘Living together is just as valid as getting married.’
7	WRITING  a story
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A story on p.122.
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read Matt’s 
story about his wedding. Tell them not to worry about the 
gaps or mistakes in the story. Elicit / Explain that a score (in 
this context) means a written piece of music.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
The woman who was supposed to play the violin at the 
wedding ceremony never arrived.
b	 Now focus on the Adverbs box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Tell Sts to read the story again and complete the gaps 
with the adverbs and adverbial phrases from the list. Point 
out that some words can go in more than one place.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 134@@
134 PE5
Old man refers to Proteus, a Greek god who is called ‘the old man 
of the sea’.
They think Henry is being held at a biochemical company called 
Proteus in Oxford.
e 9.20
N = narrator, J = Jenny, L = Luke, R = Rob, La = Laing, T = Tom
N	 Day four. Four a.m. Jenny and Luke have gone back to Henry’s house 
and are in his study. They are looking for a clue about an ‘old man’…
but time is running out.
J	 Keats, The Iliad, poems by Byron, The Complete Works of 
Shakespeare…nothing about an old man!
L	 Not even a picture on the front cover.
J	 What about those paintings? Anything there?
L	 I’ve already checked them. Nothing. Should we look through 
each book?
J	 That could take forever and we don’t have time. This is hopeless. 
It’s OK, it’s Rob. Rob.
R	 Jenny. Any luck?
J	 No. We’ve been here for hours and we’ve looked everywhere. We 
haven’t found a single thing about an old man. Look, Rob, maybe 
the old man thing wasn’t a secret message at all.
R	 But it sounded so odd. And why would he mention his study?
J	 Well, he’s under a lot of pressure. He probably just…
R	 Wait!
J	 What?
R	 Is there anything on top of the bookcase?
L	 Just a load of old books. We’ve already been through them.
R	 Isn’t there anything else?
L	 Wait a second. Yeah, there are two small paperweights.
R	 Do they have anything written on them?
L	 This one says Apollo, god of music and poetry.
R	 What about the other one?
L	 It says Proteus…the old man of the sea!
R	 That must be what Dad meant!
J	 What does it mean? Who’s Proteus?
L	 You know, that name sounds familiar.
R	 I think he’s a Greek god. Dad’s got loads of stuff like that.
L	 No, no, not that. I’m sure I’ve seen it somewhere. I’ll google it.
J	 Does it mean anything to you, Rob?
R	 No. I can’t remember hearing it before. Maybe it’s someone’s 
name, or…
L	 Got it! Proteus is a biochemical company. It’s based in Oxford 
and…oh, I don’t believe it!
J	 What is it, Luke?
L	 It’s right by St Bartholomew’s Church. You know, the one with the 
famous bells!
J	 That must be where Henry is! Rob, we’ve got to go call the police.
N	 Day four. Four fifteen a.m. Inspector Laing is on night duty at 
the police station. She’s making a cup of tea when she receives a 
phone call.
La	 Laing speaking…Yes?…Oh, Jenny Zielinski…OK, slow down…
Where? Proteus?…Yes, I know it…No, Jenny, you can’t go down 
there…It’s too dangerous…and it’s illegal…I know, but…OK, OK, 
but not on your own…We’ll meet you there in ten minutes.
N	 Day four. Five a.m. Jenny and Luke meet Inspector Laing outside the 
Proteus building. They are in her car, and she’s in contact with two 
policemen by radio. They are going to the Proteus building. Luke 
is looking at the plans of the building on his laptop. Jenny tells her 
about Henry’s message.
J	 It was night-time and we could hear a generator in the 
background.
La	 Right, so we’re looking for a room with a generator. How are you 
doing, Luke?
L	 I’m just downloading the plans for the Proteus building now. 
That’s it. Done. OK, there’s only one room with a generator. It’s in 
the basement.
La	 Excellent.
Function    asking for and giving directions in a building; 
checking understanding
Language  Go through the door and turn right; Which way 
now?; Go down the stairs, etc.
Lesson plan
In this final Practical English episode, the functional focus 
is on asking for and giving directions inside a building. 
This revises and extends Sts’ previous knowledge of 
understanding directions, and here the focus is more on 
giving rather than asking for them.
In the first scene, Jenny and Luke return to Henry’s house 
during the night and search his study for clues about ‘the 
old man’. They find a paperweight that has ‘Proteus – the 
old man of the sea’ written on it and realize that this must 
be the key to the mystery. Luke does an internet search 
and discovers a biochemical company called Proteus in 
Oxford, right by St Bartholomew’s Church, which is famous 
for its bells (another clue). They immediately contact the 
police and Luke directs the police in a search of the Proteus 
building. In the final scene, Henry is reunited with his family, 
and they all celebrate his return.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 5 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 5 
Can you remember? 1–9
Online Practice  Practical English 5 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 5, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 4. Ask What two clues have Jenny and Luke 
got about Henry’s kidnapping? Did they go back to the police? 
What’s their plan of action?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 4.
1	r  WHAT THE CLUE MEANS
a	 e 9.20  Books open. Focus on the photos and ask Where 
are Jenny and Luke? What are they doing?
	 Point out the object in the smaller photo and elicit / teach 
paperweight.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the questions. Play 
the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch or listen and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video / audio, go 
through the listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-
teach / check any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
EPISODE
	 5	
Practical English  Finding Henry
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 135@@
135
PE5
T	 Should we go back up the ramp?
L	 No. Go straight to the end of the corridor and turn left.
T	 We’re here. There are two doors. Which one should we take?
L	 Try the one on your left.
T	 It’s open!
L	 What can you see?
T	 There are three big safes and cages full of documents. Are you 
sure this is the right way?
L	 Yes, you’re in the store room. Can you hear a generator?
T	 Yes! It’s coming from the end of the corridor.
L	 Head towards it. But watch out for guards!
T	 There’s a door here and a narrow corridor to the right. What 
should we do?
L	 I don’t know!
T	 Wait. I can hear voices. There are people in there.
La	 That must be the room.
T	 OK. We’re going in.
b	 Give Sts time to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Then play 
the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen and 
complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  through    2  right    3  straight    4  past    5  Carry    6  left    
7  down    8  way    9  Turn    10  along    11  another    12  round   
13  back    14  one    15  Try    16  right    17  towards
	 Deal with any new vocabulary in the conversation.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 9.22  Tell Sts to focus on the highlighted phrases in 
the conversation and to listen and repeat the phrases, 
copying the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat.
e 9.22
See highlighted phrases in Student’s Book on p.95
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Focus on the instructions. Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and 
tell them to practise giving directions in a building. Sts A 
choose a place on the plan and mark it with a cross. They 
then give directions to Sts B to get there. Sts B mark the 
route on the plan, checking that they understand the 
directions given by Sts A. Make sure they both start where 
the arrow is, and suggest that they choose a room in the 
basement, which means the first part of the directions will 
be as in the conversation. Finally, Sts A should check that 
Sts B have reached the correct place.
	 Monitor and help Sts to give directions.
	 Now Sts swap roles.
	 When they have finished, get feedback. How many were 
able to find the way?
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to give each other directions from the 
classroom to a destination somewhere in the building you 
are currently in (if appropriate). In pairs, A writes a place, e.g. 
the coffee machines or the student lounge, but doesn’t show it 
to B right away. Then A gives directions and B tries to work 
out the destination. When B guesses the place, A shows B 
the paper. Then they swap roles.
N	 The inspector radioes the two police officers who are just outside the 
Proteus building.
La	 Tom, where are you?
T	 We’re approaching the side entrance. There’s nobody around.
La	 OK, Tom. I’m going to hand you over to Luke. He’s going to guide 
you to a room in the basement. That’s where we think Henry’s 
being held.
T	 Got it.
La	 Be careful.
T	 Don’t worry. Come on.
b	 Now focus on 1–8 and give Sts time to read them.
	 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen and 
complete the sentences with Jenny, Luke, or Rob.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Luke    2  Jenny    3  Rob    4  Luke    5  Luke    6  Jenny    
7  Luke    8  Luke
	 Now focus on the last question and get Sts to speculate 
what (or who) they will find in the building.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r  GIVING DIRECTIONS IN A BUILDING
a	 e 9.21  Focus on the photos and ask Sts what they think 
is happening, and who the people are (the two men in the 
second photo are policemen).
	 Now tell Sts to focus on the plan of the building. Elicit / 
Explain the meaning of basement (= the level below the 
ground floor of a building). Make sure Sts can see where 
the police are (Start), and where they have to continue the 
route from. Check that Sts understand corridor, ramp, and 
double doors.
	 Play the video / audio once, pausing after each set of 
directions for Sts to mark the route. Tell Sts to mark the 
police officers’ route as they follow the directions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Play the video / audio again to check the answer.
They end up in C
e 9.21
N = narrator, L = Luke, T = Tom, La = Laing
N	 Day four. Five ten a m. The policemen go into the Proteus building. 
Luke directs them from a police car outside. He’s looking at the plans 
of the building on his screen.
L	 OK, go to the end of the corridor, go through the door, and turn 
right.
T	 We’re in a large, open area.
L	 That’s right. Now, go straight ahead. You should see some stairs 
on your right. Go past the stairs and a coffee bar. Turn right. Carry 
on and you should see a set of double doors.
T	 Should we go through?
L	 Yes. Now, you should see some stairs on your left.
T	 Yeah, I see them.
L	 Right. Go down the stairs, continue straight on, and walk down 
the ramp.
T	 We’re at the end of the ramp. Which way now?
L	 Turn right and carry on straight along the corridor. Go past a 
maintenance room and two fuse boxes, and try the next door on 
your right.
T	 The door’s locked. Is there another way?
L	 Hold on. OK. Turn round and go back down the corridor.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 136@@
136 PE5
1	 T
2	 F (They have been arrested.)
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (They celebrate with champagne at Henry’s house, and Rob, 
who is still in Alaska, joins them via Skype.)
6	 T
7	 F (She can’t wait to get back to New York.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 9.24  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  admit    2  knows    3  fetch    4  great    5  wish    6  wait
e 9.24
1	 I must admit I was beginning to lose hope.
2	 Goodness knows what would have happened if you hadn’t found 
me in time.
3	 Could you fetch the glasses, Luke?
4	 It’s great to have you back, Dad.
5	 I just wish you were here, Rob.
6	 I can’t wait to get back to the peace and quiet of New York!
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  2    C  1    D  4    E  6    F  5
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
3	r  A HAPPY ENDING?
a	 e 9.23  Focus on the photos and the instructions. Elicit 
ideas on what the police found. Then elicit who each 
character is (Jenny, Luke, Henry, Rob, Grant, Selina, Andrew) 
and ask Sts what they think happened to them.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. Note 
that the video shows the arrest of Selina Lavelle – this 
scene is not included in the audio.
	 Find out how many Sts guessed correctly.
e 9.23
N = narrator, Ne = newsreader, J = Jenny, H = Henry, R = Rob, L = Luke
N	 Day four. Five p.m. Henry is finally back at home with Jenny and 
Luke. They’re talking to a relieved Rob on Skype and listening to a 
radio news report about the kidnapping.
Ne	Police have arrested a man and a woman following a raid on 
the Proteus building in Oxford early this morning. They have 
been named locally as Selina Lavelle and Grant McFadden. Mr 
McFadden has been charged with assault following the brutal 
attack on research scientist Andrew Page, who is still recovering 
in hospital. Ms Lavelle has been charged with false imprisonment, 
extortion, blackmail, and industrial espionage. Police believe she 
organized the kidnapping of university lecturer Henry Walker. 
Mr Walker, who was rescued in the raid, told reporters he’d been 
through a terrible ordeal, but hadn’t been badly hurt. He wished 
Andrew Page a speedy recovery and said he would visit him in 
hospital. Mr Walker thanked the police for their hard work. He said 
that he was too tired to talk to reporters in detail and was just 
looking forward to returning home.
J	 Well, Henry, you’re kind of a star.
H	 I never expected to become a celebrity – not at my age.
R	 Well, next time you’re kidnapped, Dad, try to set us an easier clue.
H	 I must admit I was beginning to lose hope. It took you a long time 
to work it out.
R	 You can’t blame us! Proteus – the ‘old man’ of the sea? How were 
we supposed to know that?
H	 You need to brush up on your classics.
L	 Oh, come on, Henry, I think we did really well!
H	 I’m joking, I’m joking. You were great. And I really have to thank 
you. Goodness knows what would have happened if you hadn’t 
found me in time.
J	 We’re just glad we did.
N	 Henry puts a bottle of champagne on the table.
H	 Now, I had been saving this for a special occasion, and I think this 
is it. Could you fetch the glasses, Luke?
L	 No worries. 
R	 It’s great to have you back, Dad.
J	 It sure is.
H	 I just wish you were here, Rob.
R	 Well, it’s just stopped snowing. I could get a flight now, and 
maybe we could stay there for longer. What do you think, Jenny?
J	 Oh, I don’t know. The English countryside is a little too wild for 
me. I can’t wait to get back to the peace and quiet of New York!
b	 Focus on sentences 1–7. Go through them with Sts, 
making sure they understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio again the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Remind them to correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
	 Point out that Jenny is being ironic when she says the 
peace and quiet of New York, a place that’s often associated 
with excitement and plenty of noise.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 137@@
	1A	
137
	10A	 The land of the free?
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write any extra facts that 
they hear.
1	 T
2	 F (Colour is spelled without a u and centre is spelled -ter.)
3	 F (According to a recent survey, the figure is about 40%.)
4	 F (According to a recent survey, 77% of American men do no 
housework on any given day.)
5	 F (The world’s first skyscraper was in Chicago.)
6	 T
7	 F (There has never been an official language of the United 
States.)
8	 T
9	 F (The USA has always had the world's biggest economy.)
10	 T
e 10.1
1	 True. The USA has around six hundred billionaires. China has 
the second highest number, and Germany is third.
2	 False. Colour is spelled without a u and centre is spelled -ter. 
About two hundred common words are spelled differently in 
British and American English.
3	 False. According to a recent survey, the figure is about forty 
per cent.
4	 False. According to a recent survey, seventy-seven per cent of 
American men do no housework on any given day.
5	 False. The world’s first skyscraper was in Chicago. It was finished 
in eighteen eighty-five, had ten floors, and was forty-two metres 
high.
6	 True. Despite the rise of online dating, about fifty per cent of 
adult Americans are now single.
7	 False. There has never been an official language of the United 
States. However, the most commonly spoken language is 
American English. Spanish is the second most common language 
in the USA.
8	 True. Texas joined the USA in eighteen forty-five, but left again in 
eighteen sixty-one, during the American Civil War. It re-joined the 
USA when the war had ended, in eighteen sixty-five.
9	 False. The USA has been the world’s biggest economy since 
records began.
 10	 True. The name soccer was first used in the nineteenth century 
in British public schools, but when the sport started to be played 
by everyone, the name football took over. American football is a 
completely different sport.
c	 Focus on the instructions. Elicit that be, do, and have are 
sometimes main verbs and sometimes auxiliary verbs. 
Remind Sts that an auxiliary is a verb used to form a tense 
or questions and negatives. Unlike main verbs, auxiliaries 
don’t have a separate meaning.
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to look at all the bold verbs in 1–10 in a 
and circle the ones that are auxiliaries.
	 Check answers.
2  are    3  don’t    7  has    8  didn’t    9  was    10  is, had, been
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do the first two sentences with 
the class to make sure Sts are clear about the difference 
between a main verb and an auxiliary verb.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.150.
 G   be, do, and have: auxiliary and main verbs
 V   British and American English
 P   stress on be, do, and have
Lesson plan
Aspects of the USA and its relationship to other countries 
provide the context for Sts to revise be, do, and have as 
auxiliaries and main verbs. The lesson begins with a quiz on 
facts about the USA, which leads into the grammar focus. 
Next, a pronunciation activity focuses on when be, do, and 
have are stressed in a sentence, and this is practised with 
more quiz questions. Sts then listen to six people talking 
about life in New York. The first half ends with Sts looking 
at the term ‘Americanization’ and discussing their views on 
American culture, whether any aspects of their culture have 
been influenced by the USA, and whether any aspects of 
their own culture have had an influence in the world.
The second half of the lesson begins with a vocabulary focus 
on British and American English words and phrases. This is 
followed by a humorous blog where a British woman writes 
about things the Americans do that irritate the British, and 
an American woman writes about things the British do that 
annoy Americans.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  be, do, and have: auxiliary and main verbs p.170 
Communicative  What’s the question? p.200 
(instructions p.177)
For students
Workbook  10A
Online Practice  10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write THE USA on the board and ask Sts to write on a piece 
of paper the first three things that come to mind when they 
hear the phrase, e.g. Hollywood, skyscrapers, the name of the 
current president, etc.
Write their ideas on the board.
1	GRAMMAR  be, do, and have: auxiliary and 
main verbs
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the quiz, and 
give Sts time to read statements 1–10.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to mark each 
statement T (true) or F (false).
	 Get some feedback, eliciting reasons from Sts, but don’t 
tell them if they are correct.
b	 e 10.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check, and tell 
them to correct the false statements.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
10A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 138@@
138
2	PRONUNCIATION  stress on be, do, and have
Pronunciation notes
This focus looks at the way the verbs be, do, and have 
are stressed or unstressed in sentences depending on 
whether they are main verbs or auxiliary verbs, and 
positive or negative. After Sts have listened to and 
practised the examples, they then work out the rules. 
One of the effects of the stress is that the vowel sound 
changes. Sts also practise saying these verbs with the /ə/ 
sound when they are unstressed.
a	 e 10.5  Focus on the sentences and play the audio, 
pausing after each one for Sts to listen and repeat, 
copying the rhythm. Tell them to underline the 
highlighted word if it is stressed.
	 Check answers. You could get Sts to listen again and 
repeat.
1	 The capital of the USA is Washington, DC.
2	 When are your friends arriving?
3	 The world’s tallest skyscraper isn’t in New York.
4	 Anne does Pilates twice a week.
5	 Where does your sister live?
6	 My brother doesn’t like dogs.
7	 I have a house in New Jersey.
8	 How long have you known your best friend?
9	 We haven’t seen our cousins for ages.
e 10.5
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.96
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio for Sts just to listen and read. 
Then play it again and get Sts to underline the highlighted 
words if they are stressed. Check answers. Finally, play the 
audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 Play the audio again, this time getting Sts to focus on 
the vowel sounds in the highlighted words that are 
unstressed (i.e. in sentences 2, 5, and 8). Or you could read 
sentences 2, 5, and 8 to the class.
	 Check the answer.
When are, does, and have are unstressed, the vowel sound is /ə/: 
are = /ə/    does = /dəz/    have = /əv/
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may also want to elicit what the 
vowel sound is when these verbs are stressed: are = /ɑː/, 
do = /duː/, does = /dʌz/, and have = /hæv/.
c	 Give Sts time to read the rules and complete them, 
checking each time with 1–9 in a.
	 Check answers.
1  unstressed    2  stressed    3  stressed    4  unstressed    
5  stressed
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication More facts about the USA?, 
A on p.110, B on p.114.
	 Go through the instructions, making sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. You could demonstrate the activity 
by doing statement 1 for Sts A and statement 6 for Sts B 
with the whole class.
Grammar notes
Many Sts have problems first of all in using the correct 
auxiliary verb, and secondly in distinguishing between 
when be, do, and have are main verbs. This difference 
is important, as it can affect both the form (e.g. haven’t 
and hadn’t are the negatives of have as an auxiliary verb; 
don’t have and didn’t have are the negatives of have as a 
main verb), and the pronunciation (main verbs are usually 
stressed, auxiliaries usually unstressed). Identifying and 
using the correct auxiliary is also vital as auxiliaries are 
used in so many structures, e.g. short answers, So do I, 
question tags, etc. Have and be as main verbs are also 
often confused by Sts who express certain concepts in 
their L1 with have where English uses be, e.g. age, feelings 
like hunger, cold, etc.
	 Focus on the example sentences for be – main verb and 
auxiliary and play audio e 10.2 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for do – main verb and auxiliary e 10.3 and 
have – main verb and auxiliary e 10.4.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs. Encourage them to use contracted 
forms rather than full forms.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 A	 Have you ever been to the USA?
	
B	 No, my husband doesn’t like flying.
2	 A	 Did you miss the beginning of the film?
	
B	 No, luckily it hadn’t started yet.
3	 Does he know we’re coming, or do we need to give him 
a ring?
4	 I’m sorry I didn’t answer the phone when you called, but I 
was having a meeting.
5	 We don’t often travel outside Europe, but we’ve been to 
Chile twice.
6	 He’d been working since 7.00 this morning, but now he’s 
gone home.
7	 A	 Where’s Melanie going on holiday this year?
	
B	 Rome, I think. She’s never been there before.
8	 They’re in New York, but they don’t have much time for 
sightseeing – they’re only staying for two days.
b
1	 I would have finished the exercise if I’d had more time.
2	 She hasn’t been to Africa before, so she’s really looking 
forward to our trip to Namibia.
3	 I had steak for lunch and it was delicious.
4	 Nothing is being done at the moment to solve the problem.
5	 Where were you at 10 o’clock this morning?
6	 I was having a shower when the hot water stopped working!
7	 I would have been really annoyed if you’d repeated what I 
told you.
8	 The reception was a great success, and a good time was had 
by all.
9	 I’ll do the washing-up as soon as I finish my homework.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
10A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 139@@
139
So it’s pretty easy to, you know, change your phone company, and 
it’s easy to renew your driver’s licence. 
4	 Laura
Um, something that I like about America is that I find people are very 
keen to help, even without being asked. ’cause I lived in Germany 
for four years and I remember every time I flew there, at the airport, I 
would always really struggle to get my bag off the luggage carousel 
and no one would ever help me. And every time I flew back home 
to the US, immediately someone would come over and offer to help. 
And I’ve noticed the same thing with opening doors, with helping 
people carry things up the stairs in the subway.
5	 Peter
Something I really like about America is the sense of opportunity 
here. Um, I feel like, as a new immigrant, I’ve been able to come into 
the country and get jobs that I couldn’t get back home in the UK 
because I don’t think I would have had the same opportunities there. 
I think that you can move here and make something of yourself 
very quickly, and I really like the sort of entrepreneurial spirit there 
is here – um, the feeling that if you have a good idea and you work 
hard, you can be successful. I think it really is the land of opportunity, 
and I really like that.
6	 Sarah
I’ve lived in the US for three years, and something that I really 
dislike about American culture has to be the fascination with guns. 
Er, growing up in the UK – growing up in Europe – I’ve never seen 
people really want to own guns themselves. For me, it’s up to the 
police to take care of people and to make sure everyone’s safe. I 
can’t understand why a civilian would want to own their own gun 
and keep it in their house. For me, that means that the country is 
less safe, not more safe, so that’s something I don’t think I’ll ever be 
able to understand.
b	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and this time they 
must complete the notes for each speaker. Give Sts time 
to read the notes.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each speaker to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 faces, accents, strange surname
2	 complicated, rules, aggressive
3	 phone company, driver’s licence
4	 bag, luggage carousel, open doors, subway
5	 get jobs, spirit
6	 own guns, take care, safe
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the book cover and either read it as a class, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis, or give Sts time to 
read it individually.
	 Now focus on the questions and check the answer to the 
first question. Then elicit opinions to the second.
Americanization is the process of making something American 
in character.
b	 Focus on the photos, question, and topics. Point out the 
example.
	 Sts take it in turns to read their statements to their partner. 
Remind them to give their partner the explanation of why 
a sentence is false.
	 Monitor and make sure they are using the correct rhythm 
and sentence stress.
	 Get feedback to find out who got the most correct 
answers in each pair.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look carefully at the sentences 
they are going to read and underline the stressed words to 
help them get the correct rhythm.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
3	LISTENING  understanding examples – note-
taking
a	 e 10.6  Tell Sts they are going to listen to six people – 
four foreigners and two Americans – who live in New 
York, talking about life there. They must match each 
speaker to a topic in the list and decide which speakers 
are negative. First, focus on the words in the list and 
make sure Sts understand them all. Model and drill 
pronunciation, especially bureaucracy /bjʊəˈrɒkrəsi/, 
gun culture /ˈgʌn kʌltʃə/, and multiculturalism 
/mʌltiˈkʌltʃərəlɪzəm/.
	 Tell Sts that the speakers all have different accents.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1  multiculturalism    Speaker 2  sport    
Speaker 3  bureaucracy    Speaker 4  helpfulness    
Speaker 5  opportunity    Speaker 6  gun culture
Speakers 2 (Cristina) and 6 (Sarah) are negative.
e 10.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
1	 Yannis
Um, so I’ve lived in New York for, uh, twelve years now, and one thing 
that I think I will always appreciate is the diversity of the place and 
the people. And every time I go away, it’s so nice to come back here 
and…and be on the subway and see all the different faces and hear 
different accents. Erm, and, you know, my English is pretty good, but 
I have never felt judged here, you know, for having a foreign accent, 
and nobody is surprised, you know, if you have a strange surname, 
um, or if you sound different. I have never felt that. And I could say 
that sometimes in Europe, I did, so… This is one thing that I will 
always appreciate about living here.
2	 Cristina
Um, one thing that, um, I don’t particularly like here is the culture 
around American football. And maybe this has something to do with 
me being European and liking, uh, European football – or soccer – 
um, more than American football. And I did try, um, but I think, uh, 
the game is way too complicated – though I tried to understand 
the rules. And I find the atmosphere around American football, 
I…I just…I find it a bit too aggressive? For example, recently the 
Philadelphia Eagles won the Super Bowl and, um, the celebrations, 
so to speak, if we can call them celebrations, were more like riots.
3	 Louisa
I know from having travelled a lot and having lived overseas, having 
an Italian husband, it’s very complicated to get sort of bureaucratic 
tasks done in places like Italy. So I think the one thing that I like most 
about living in the United States is that things are pretty easy to do, 
and even living in a big city, it’s, um, it’s easy to get things done.  
10A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 140@@
140
d	 e 10.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 10.8
1	 e	
car park	
parking lot
2	 h	
mean	
stingy
3	 d	
autumn	
fall
4	 f	
petrol	
gas
5	 b	
queue	
stand in line
6	 j	
garden	
yard
7	 a	
wardrobe	
closet
8	 i	
pavement	
sidewalk
9	 g	
lorry	
truck
10	 c	
tap	
faucet
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
phrase for Sts to listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Give Sts time to write Am or Br next to each picture or 
definition. They could work individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
1  a  Am  b  Br   
2  a  Br  b  Am   
3  a  Am  b  Br   
4  a  Am  b  Br    
5  a  Br  b  Am
f	 e 10.9  Focus on the task and tell Sts they are going to 
hear five speakers saying one sentence or question. They 
must decide which nationality the speaker is and then 
‘translate’ it into the other language.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 The speaker is American.
	
Excuse me, can you tell me the way to the underground?
2	 The speaker is American.
	
I’m so excited – we’re going to Paris in the autumn.
3	 The speaker is British.
	
There were so many people in town today. I had to stand in 
line for ages at the post office.
4	 The speaker is British.
	
I only live on the second floor, but I always take the elevator.
5	 The speaker is American.
	
That brown shirt doesn’t go with those blue trousers.
e 10.9
1	 Excuse me, can you tell me the way to the subway?
2	 I’m so excited – we’re going to Paris in the fall.
3	 There were so many people in town today. I had to queue for 
ages at the post office.
4	 I only live on the first floor, but I always take the lift.
5	 That brown shirt doesn’t go with those blue pants.
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts if they know any other words 
that are American English. If Sts can’t think of any words 
or phrases, you could give them some ideas, e.g. What’s 
‘vacation’ in British English? (holiday).
Elicit some answers and write them on the board. Try to 
get at least four or five.
	 Now put Sts in pairs to discuss the question.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If all your Sts are from the same country, 
you could do this as a whole-class activity.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think. You 
could demonstrate the activity by choosing one of the 
topics yourself and telling the class of examples in your 
country, and whether you prefer the American version 
or the one from your country. Then say whether your 
preference is also that of the people from your country.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss the topics.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
5	VOCABULARY  British and American English
Vocabulary notes
All the American words in a have come up previously in 
English File, so Sts should recognize them.
In c you may want to point out that stingy is also used 
in British English with the same meaning; however, 
Americans would never use mean as the opposite of 
generous. In US English, mean = likely to become angry or 
violent. They also sometimes use cheap as an alternative 
to stingy.
You may also want to point out that yard also exists in 
British English, but means an area outside a building with 
a hard surface (not grass), e.g. a prison yard.
a	 Focus on the instructions. Put Sts in pairs or small groups 
and tell them to see how many British English words they 
know with the same meanings.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do one or two words with 
the class.
b	 e 10.7  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Point 
out that one speaker is American, the other British.
	 Check answers.
1  mobile phone    2  toilet    3  cinema    4  secondary school    
5  rubbish    6  trainers    7  lift    8  flat    9  postcode    10  bill
e 10.7
1	 cell phone    mobile phone
2	 restroom    toilet
3	 movie theater    cinema
4	 high school    secondary school
5	 garbage    rubbish
6	 sneakers    trainers
7	 elevator    lift
8	 apartment    flat
9	 zip code    postcode
10	 check    bill
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word or phrase 
for Sts to listen and repeat. They will probably enjoy 
copying the two different accents.
c	 Now get Sts to match some more British English words to 
the American English equivalents.
10A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 141@@
141
e 10.10
1	 awesome
2	 creepy
3	 reserved
4	 weird
5	 turkey
6	 compliment
7	 get
8	 nod
	 Model and drill pronunciation where necessary. You could 
use the audio to do this.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 You could do this in pairs, small groups, or as a whole-
class activity.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   You could also ask Sts if there are any other 
things that annoy them about Americans or the British.
Possible answers
American	
British
drugstore / pharmacy	
chemist’s
store	
shop
candy	
sweets
cookie	
biscuit
fries	
chips
	 Finally, you could ask Sts whether they think people 
from their country would be more likely to recognize the 
American or the British word, and why.
6	READING  working out vocabulary from context
a	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to read the title and 
introduction of each blog. Elicit / Explain that Brits is an 
informal way of referring to British people.
	 Check answers. Ask Sts why they answered as they did.
Ruth Margolis (writer of the first blog) is British because she’s 
talking about what annoys her about Americans. 
Maria Roth (writer of the second blog) is American as she is 
talking about what annoys her about the Brits.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read the introduction to Six things 
Americans do that drive Brits crazy as a class and check that 
Sts understand eccentric /ɪkˈsentrɪk/ (= considered by other 
people to be strange or unusual).  
Now read the introduction to Six things Brits do that drive 
Americans crazy as a class and check that Sts understand 
charming (= very pleasant or attractive) and smart here  
(= intelligent).
b	 Focus on the task and headings A–I, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis.
	 Give Sts time to read the blogs and complete the gaps 
with the headings. Remind them that there is one extra 
heading.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the blogs the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words.
Six things Americans do that drive Brits crazy
2  G    3  I    5  F    6  C
Six things Brits do that drive Americans crazy
1  A    3  H    4  D    6  B
c	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to read the two 
blogs again. Each time they come across a highlighted 
word, they should decide if it is an adjective, noun,  
or verb. Then they should look at definitions 1–8 and 
match the highlighted word to the correct definition. 
Highlight that in point 5 of the second blog, share means 
‘communicate / share emotions, thoughts, and feelings’. 
This is a common use of share in American English.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
d	 e 10.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
10A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 142@@
	1A	
142
	10B	 Please turn over your papers
1	VOCABULARY  exams
Vocabulary notes
You may want to point out in b that we can also say to sit 
an exam as an alternative to do / take.
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the photo. 
You could do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You may want to teach 
Sts that a person who supervises an exam is called an 
invigilator.
Possible answers
The people in the photo are students. They look like older 
secondary or university students, so they are probably in their 
late teens or early twenties.
They are in a hall probably in a school or university building. 
They are taking an exam.
They are possibly nervous or they might be feeling confident if 
they know how to answer the questions.
There are probably some teachers in the room to check that 
nobody is cheating.
b	 Focus on the mind map and tell Sts to complete it with 
the words and phrases in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 10.11  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand all the words.
e 10.11
Verbs
1	 cheat
2	 do
3	 fail
4	 pass
5	 retake
6	 revise
7	 take
Types of exams
8	 oral or speaking
9	 practical
10	 written
Types of questions
11	 essay
12	 multiple-choice
13	 true or false
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again to drill the 
pronunciation of the words, or model and drill them 
yourself. Give further practice of any words your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to go to 
Communication Describing a photo, A on p.109 and  
B on p.111.
	 Focus on the instructions. Sts A should start by describing 
their photo. Then they swap roles.
	 In their pairs, Sts then decide what the photos have in 
common (They both show students cheating in an exam).
	 Finally, in their pairs, Sts discuss the four questions in c.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
 G   revision of verb forms
 V   exams
 P   revision of sounds
Lesson plan
The topic of this final lesson is exams, and one of its aims is 
to help prepare Sts for their end-of-course English exam.  
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on words 
and phrases connected with exams. This is followed by 
Pronunciation, where Sts revise several of the sounds 
that they have practised previously. Sts then read a short 
paragraph about exams in England before listening to four 
people talking about exams and tests, and getting further 
practice of multiple-choice questions. This leads into Sts 
talking about their own experience of exams. Finally, Sts do a 
writing exam task.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read about and discuss 
the gaokao, an extremely demanding university entrance 
exam in China. This is followed by a grammar focus in which 
Sts revise all the verb forms they have learned up until now. 
This grammar focus only has practice exercises, not rules, as 
the rules have already been covered. The lesson ends with a 
video giving advice about taking oral exams, and Sts then do 
an authentic oral exam task in pairs.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  revision of verb forms p.171 
Communicative  Speaking exam p.201 (instructions p.178)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Speaking exams – top tips for success
For students
Workbook  10B
Online Practice  10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
EXAM
Ask Sts how they feel when they see this word. Do they 
know what it’s short for? (examination) How is an exam 
different from a test? What kind of exams do people take in 
their country? What are the most important ones? What is 
the most important exam they’ve had to do in their life?
Now also write on the board: 
DON’T CRAM FOR AN EXAM.
Elicit the meaning of cram (= to learn a lot of things in a 
short time, in preparation for an exam). Then ask Have you 
ever done this? Ask if they think it’s good advice.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 143@@
143
b	 Ask the class what they know about exams that Sts take at 
school in England.
	 Now tell Sts to read the text about exams in England. 
Deal with any new vocabulary and ask a few questions to 
check comprehension, e.g. What exam do some students 
take when they’re eleven years old? At what age do students 
normally take GCSEs? What were O levels? Which exams are 
important for admission to university?
	 You may want to point out that A levels = Advanced levels, 
O levels = Ordinary levels, and GCSE = General Certificate 
of Secondary Education. Also point out that the system is 
different in Scotland, where they do exams called Highers 
instead of A levels.
	 Then find out what exams Sts do at school in their own 
country. If your Sts come from different countries, give 
them time to think, and then put them in pairs or small 
groups to tell each other about the exam system in their 
country. Then get feedback from various pairs or groups.
c	 e 10.13  Tell Sts they are going to listen to four people 
talking about exams or tests they have taken. Focus on 
the two questions.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speakers 1 (Mark), 2 (Sophie), and 4 (Paul) failed an exam or test.
Speaker 2 (Sophie) used to find exams stressful.
e 10.13
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
I = interviewer, M = Mark, S = Sophie, D = Diane, P = Paul
1	 Mark
I	 What’s the hardest exam or test you’ve ever taken?
M	 My A level physics exam – I didn’t understand at least half the 
questions.
I	 Have you ever done an exam where everything went wrong?
M	 I’m afraid so. For a history O level, there were five questions – all 
short essays. I’d prepared five questions from previous exam 
papers, but nothing else. So I was gambling that at least three of 
the questions would come up. But none of them did, so obviously 
I failed it.
I	 How did you usually prepare for a big exam?
M	 I remember it generally involved a lot of coffee and late nights!
I	 Did you find exams stressful?
M	 No, I never got that stressed about exams, but that may have had 
a negative effect on the results, come to think of it. I was never 
the world’s best at exams. I usually passed, but the results were 
never brilliant.
2	 Sophie
I	 What’s the hardest exam or test you’ve ever taken?
S	 I think the hardest was probably my driving test – the practical 
part. I got so nervous each time I just couldn’t drive. In fact, I failed 
three times before I finally passed.
I	 Have you ever done an exam where everything went wrong?
S	 Yes, in the beginning of my first driving test, I refused to stop 
where the examiner asked me to stop. I just didn’t think it looked 
safe and I thought it was a trick – I mean, I thought that he was 
asking me to do something dangerous, to test me. Anyway, it 
wasn’t a trick and he wasn’t happy at all.
I	 How did you usually prepare for a big exam?
S	 I used to spend a lot of time writing notes; I probably spent more 
time making them look nice, using different coloured pens and 
so on, than I did actually learning the information. But I found it 
really helpful to stick the notes up on posters all over the house 
so that I could see them every day.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before they start, get Sts to revise language 
for describing a photo in Vocabulary Bank Photography 
on p.155.
2	PRONUNCIATION  revision of sounds
Pronunciation notes
This final exercise brings together some of the common 
consonant and vowel sounds that have come up at this 
level and that frequently cause difficulties for learners 
from many different L1 backgrounds.
a	 Focus Sts’ attention on the groups of words. Check that 
they understand all of the words, then tell them to focus 
on the sound picture and the pink letters in the words. 
Explain that in each group of three words, the pink letters 
in one word are pronounced differently.
	 Give Sts time to find the odd one out, encouraging them 
to say the words aloud. They could work individually and 
check with a partner, or work in pairs.
b	 e 10.12  Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check.
	 Play it again, pausing after each group of words to check 
the answers.
1	 revises (-es = /ɪz/, the other two are /z/)
2	 cheated (-ed = /ɪd/, the other two are /d/)
3	 exam (a = /æ/, the other two are /ɑː/)
4	 work (or = /ɜː/, the other two are /ɔː/)
5	 professor (o = /ə/, the other two are /ɒ/)
6	 essay (e = /e/, the other two are /iː/)
7	 school (oo = /uː/, the other two are /ʊ/)
8	 idea (i = /aɪ/, the other two are /ɪ/)
9	 result (e = /ɪ/, the other two are /e/)
e 10.12
See words in Student’s Book on p.100
c	 Focus attention on sentences 1–7 and the pink letters. 
Put Sts in pairs and tell them to decide what sound the 
pink letters have. Remind them that this kind of activity is 
easier if they say the words aloud.
	 Check answers.
1	 good (oo = /ʊ/), school (oo = /uː/)
2	 answered (a = /ɑː/), exam (a = /æ/)
3	 report (or = /ɔː/), worked (or = /ɜː/)
4	 practise (i = /ɪ/), written (i = /ɪ/)
5	 cheated (-ed = /ɪd/), failed (-ed = /d/)
6	 professor (o = /ə/), college (o = /ɒ/)
7	 test (e = /e/), result (e = /ɪ/)
	 Now get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Model and drill each sentence before 
putting Sts in pairs to practise saying them.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  exam skill –  
multiple-choice listening
a	 Focus on the instructions and the photo, and ask Sts how 
they think the girl is feeling and why. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to take it in turns to talk 
about the last time they took an exam or test.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could tell the 
class about the last exam or test you took.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 144@@
144
	 Get some feedback from various pairs and elicit opinions 
on the last question. You could also have a class vote 
regarding whether exams are a good way of testing. You 
might want to introduce the term continuous assessment 
(= a system of giving a student a final mark / grade based 
on work done during a course of study rather than on 
one exam).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write on the board some of the expressions 
for agreeing and disagreeing in 9B.
4	WRITING  an exam task
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An exam task on p.123.
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to read the 
essay topic and the student essay. If you didn’t do it in the 
previous activity, elicit / explain that continuous assessment 
is a system of giving a student a final grade based on the 
work the student has done during the course, rather than 
testing what they know in one exam. Tell Sts not to worry 
about the gaps.
	 Check the answer.
The writer disagrees with the statement.
b	 Tell Sts to read the essay again and write each paragraph 
number next to the correct description.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
In paragraph 1 the writer gives an introduction to the topic.
In paragraph 2 the writer gives his / her opinion and three 
reasons for it.
In paragraph 3 the writer gives a contrasting opinion.
In paragraph 4 the writer gives a summary of his / her opinion.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the connecting words or 
phrases in the list.
	 Give Sts time to read the essay again and complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  because    2  when    3  so    4  instead of    5  but    
6  although
d	 Focus on the Useful language: essays box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to write an essay for an exam 
using the topic It is not a good idea to cram the evening 
before an exam. If you didn't do the Optional lead-in, 
elicit / explain the meaning of cram (= to learn a lot of 
things in a short time, in preparation for an exam).
	 Tell Sts first to decide whether they agree or disagree with 
the statement and then plan their essay. They should write 
four paragraphs as in the model.
e	 It would be a good idea to get Sts to do the writing in 
class as practice for writing an essay in exam conditions, 
but if time is short, set it as homework. If you do it in class, 
set a time limit for Sts to write their essay which reflects 
the time they would have in their exam.
f	 Remind Sts to check their essay for mistakes before 
giving it in.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
I	 Did exams use to stress you out?
S	 Yes. I hated exams and used to get very nervous and stressed 
beforehand. But once the exam had started, I usually relaxed.
3	 Diane
I	 What’s the hardest exam or test you’ve ever taken?
D	 I think it has to be the eleven plus because that was the first time I 
had ever felt any pressure to succeed.
I	 How did you do?
D	 I passed it.
I	 Have you ever done an exam where everything went wrong?
D	 Yes, my A level French oral exam went horribly wrong. Some 
friends had said, ‘Whatever you do, don’t say that you’ve been to 
France, otherwise they’ll expect your French to be quite good’. 
And so what happened was I got in there and the examiner said, 
‘Have you ever been to France?’ in French, and I said ‘Non’, and 
then I started talking about driving to Gibraltar with my parents. 
And then the examiner said, ‘Well, how did you manage to drive 
from the UK to Gibraltar without driving through France?’, at 
which point I just completely froze and couldn’t say anything else 
at all! But I guess I’d spoken enough previously, so I passed.
I	 How did you usually prepare for a big exam?
D	 Well, for literature exams, I used to memorize loads and loads of 
famous passages from the books we were studying, so I could put 
them in my answers, and that seemed to work because I passed.
I	 How did you usually feel about doing exams?
D	 Not great, but I was usually reasonably confident, I’d say.
4	 Paul
I	 What’s the hardest exam or test you’ve ever taken?
P	 Probably the exam at the end of the first year of my geography 
course at university. Not because the questions were very 
difficult, but because I’d done so little work for it.
I	 Have you ever done an exam where everything went wrong?
P	 Oh yes. I thought I’d done quite well in my GCSE chemistry exam, 
but I failed it. So something must have gone very wrong.
I	 How did you usually prepare for a big exam?
P	 I used to read notes over and over again, right up till the last 
possible minute. Yeah, I relied heavily on short-term memory, I 
think.
I	 Did exams use to stress you out?
P	 Not really, though they probably would now. When I was at 
school and university, it was just part of life – so not particularly 
stressful.
d	 Elicit from Sts what they think the best technique is for 
multiple-choice listening activities. Then focus on the 
TIP: Multiple-choice listening box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the four multiple-choice questions.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and choose the 
correct answers. You could pause it after each speaker to 
give Sts time to complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  b    2  a    3  b    4  c
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Focus on the task and point out the two categories and 
the last question, which is for both options.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions from the relevant section, giving as much 
information as possible. 
	 When Sts have finished interviewing each other, they 
should discuss the final question. Remind them to use 
some of the expressions for agreeing and disagreeing 
which they saw in Lesson 9B.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 145@@
145
	 This Grammar Bank does not include a new presentation 
or an audio. Instead, Sts practise all the verb forms from 
this level of English File as revision.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs. Encourage them to use contracted forms rather 
than full forms.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 I’ve been working really hard all week.
2	 Is that why you didn’t come out with us last night?
3	 Yes, I couldn’t come because…
4	 I was studying.
5	 My last exam starts at 9.00 tomorrow morning.
6	 Really? I’ve finished all my exams!
7	 Lucky you! What are you planning to do now they’re over?
8	 I’m flying to Australia in three days.
9	 I’ve always wanted to go there…
10	 …ever since my aunt and uncle moved there five years 
ago…
11	 …, but I haven’t had time until now.
12	 Fantastic – I’m sure you’ll love it.
13	 I saw Mary yesterday…
14	 …and she said…
15	 …you’d invited her to go to France.
16	 Yes, but unfortunately she’d already made / ’s already made 
other plans.
17	 Are you celebrating / going to celebrate?
18	 Yes, I’m thinking of going to that new pizzeria with some 
friends.
19	 Do you want to come along?
20	 I’ll see you tomorrow.
b
1	 She’s known him for 20 years.
2	 You don’t need to bring any money.
3	 If I had some glue, I could repair the chair.
4	 I’ve been able to swim since I was five.
5	 What are you going to do after you graduate?
6	 He suggests including a covering letter.
7	 The concert hall was opened by the President in 2019.
8	 I used to have much longer hair when I was younger.
9	 You don’t have to pay me back until tomorrow.
10	 She’s been learning Russian for two months.
11	 He phoned the police because his car had been stolen.
12	 My boss let me leave work early.
13	 She said she could come to the wedding.
14	 The photo would have been in focus if I hadn’t moved the 
camera.
15	 They ought to be more careful.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
7	r  VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary that gives 
tips on how to prepare for taking speaking exams. 
	 Focus on the questions and give Sts time to think what 
the answers might be.
	 Now play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
5	READING  exam skill – T / F reading
a	 Ask the questions to the whole class and elicit some 
opinions. If any Sts have taken university entrance exams, 
ask them to describe what they were like.
b	 Focus on the instructions, title of the article, and photo 
and ask Sts to say what they think is happening.
	 Now tell Sts to read the article.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Elicit how best to deal with True / False questions on 
reading texts. Then focus on the TIP: True / False reading 
box and go through it with the class. Highlight that using 
this advice will be helpful for Sts when they take exams.
	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and mark sentences 
1–10 T (true) or F (false).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    2  T    3  T    4  F    5  T    6  F    7  F    8  T    9  T    10  F
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to say why the F sentences are false.
1	 F (Driving is only prohibited on roads near schools where 
students are taking the gaokao.)
4	 F (Students preparing for the exam have no time for a 
social life.)
6	 F (Some candidates who cheat use high-tech devices which 
are similar to those used in James Bond films.)
7	 F (Tutors get no time off. It’s the students who have one day 
a month when they don’t have to work. Teachers spend that 
day marking practice exams.)
10	 F (The number of candidates taking the gaokao has fallen 
dramatically in recent years.)
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Encourage Sts to give 
reasons to justify their opinions.
6	GRAMMAR  revision of verb forms
a	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs. Tell them to 
look at the highlighted verbs in the article in 5 and match 
them to the verb forms in the list.
	 Check answers.
3	 present simple (I make…)
13	 present continuous (I’m making…)
6	 present simple passive (It is made…)
7	 past simple (I made…)
5	 past continuous (I was making…)
11	 past simple passive (It was made…)
4	 past perfect simple (I had made…)
1	 future simple (I will make…)
2	 future with be going to (I’m going to make…)
8	 will passive (It will be made…)
9	 present perfect simple (I’ve made…)
12	 present perfect continuous (I’ve been making…)
10	 present perfect passive (It’s been made…)
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.151.
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 146@@
146
only impress the examiner, it will also make it feel much more like 
a natural conversation, which can help you to relax. 
E 1	Marcus, where are you from?
M	 Rio.
E 1	And Valentina, where are you from?
V	 I live in Brazil as well, but I live in a really small town. It’s called 
Santo Gusto, and I live there with my whole family. It’s, um, it has 
only thirteen thousand…
E 1	Inhabitants.
V	 Inhabitants, yeah. 
W	 Tip five: Don’t be afraid to say that you don’t understand.
N	 It’s perfectly normal to not understand a person that you’re 
meeting for the first time. When the examiner asks you a 
question, don’t panic if you don’t understand. Just ask the 
examiner to repeat it.
E 2	What sort of accommodation would you most like to live in?
S	 Could you repeat that, please?
E 2	What sort of accommodation would you most like to live in?
S	 In apartments, of course. I don’t really like living in houses. 
W	 Tip six: Don’t memorize answers.
N	 Whatever you do, don’t give answers you’ve learned word-for-
word. It’s fine to memorize words and phrases that you might 
need, but not whole sentences or paragraphs. These are easy 
to spot and give a bad impression. Remember it’s a test of your 
English, not your memory.
E 2	Tell me about the kind of accommodation that you live in.
S	 I live in an apartment. I’ve lived there for five years. And I really 
love being there because it’s really big and it’s close to my school. 
Next year I will move. I don’t really want to, but I have to.
W	 Tip seven: Don’t freeze if you can’t find the word you need.
N	 When it’s your turn to speak, if you can’t think of the word you 
need, don’t panic and say nothing. Just try to explain it in a 
different way. This is also quite normal – it happens to people all 
the time, even in their own language.
E 2	…and here’s your topic. I’d like you to describe an event that you 
attended recently. Can you start speaking now, please?
S	 Yes. A couple of weeks ago, I went to my cousin’s wedding. And 
we had a really… A couple of weeks ago, I went to my cousin’s 
wedding, and we were really glad that he invited us. And we had 
to go to another country. Um, I was really glad that , that he got 
married…how can I say…it was…it was a really nice wedding, 
he’s from another country, so I went to Paraguay. We went there 
and it was so nice and beautiful. In other words, so it was so 
emotional and touching, but my favourite part was when his 
mother, my, my aunt, she sang a love song to the newlyweds, 
and…how can I explain,…? Everyone in there cried. 
N	 There’s no doubt that speaking exams are challenging, but 
these tips will help you to feel more confident and speak more 
naturally. But of course, the best preparation is practice. And the 
best way to practise?  
Get talking!  Goodbye…and good luck!
b	 Tell Sts they are going to watch the documentary again 
and this time they have to complete the gaps in 1–7 with 
one to three words.
	 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–7 and think what the 
missing words might be. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to do this in pairs. 
	 Play the video again for Sts to watch and complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  half an hour, relaxed    2  eye, sit up straight    3  interested, 
opinion    4  full, detail    5  panic, repeat    6  sentences, 
paragraphs    7  nothing, different
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video  
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
EXTRA CHALLENGE  Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
brainstorm different ways to prepare for a speaking exam. 
Elicit ideas. Then play the video for Sts to answer the 
questions and see if their ideas are mentioned.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
The speaking exam is the most stressful because students are 
face-to-face with the examiner.
The best way to prepare is to practise talking.
Speaking exams – top tips for success
N = narrator, W = woman, E = examiner, M = Marcus, V = Valentina,  
S = student
N	 Welcome to Regent Oxford, one of the oldest English language 
schools in the UK. For many years, Regent has helped people 
to improve their English, and a big part of this is preparing for 
English exams.  
Most of the students here are hoping to get a qualification in 
English. There are several different tests and certificates for them 
to work towards, but almost every exam tests reading, writing, 
listening and, of course, speaking. 
For a lot of students, the speaking exam is often the most 
stressful. Unlike any other exam, students are face-to-face with 
their examiner, so it can feel like there’s less thinking time and 
more pressure. But don’t worry, here are some tips that can help. 
W	 Tip one: Give yourself plenty of time.
N	 The first tip may seem obvious, but it’s important – get to your 
speaking exam in plenty of time. You should arrive at least half an 
hour beforehand if you can. You need to feel relaxed, and if you’re 
late, you’ll be stressed, which will make the exam much more 
difficult.
W	 Tip two: Engage with the examiner.
N	 When you first go into the exam room, greet the examiner and try 
to smile, even if you feel nervous. Remember, examiners want you 
to do well, so just be polite and friendly. Body language is really 
important too, so make eye contact, smile and sit up straight 
throughout the exam.
E 1	And Marcus, what do you enjoy doing at weekends?
M	 I enjoy going to the beach and hanging out with friends, to 
maybe the shopping mall or some parties.
E 1	Valentina, where do you meet your friends?
V	 Mostly at school, but we like hanging out at other times as well.
E 1	OK. And Marcus, what did you do yesterday?
M	 Yesterday, I did a tour at Oxford city and I really enjoyed know, 
knowing new places, yeah and knowing new people.
E 1	OK, good. Excellent.
W	 Tip three: Involve your partner.
N	 Always look interested in what your partner is saying, respond to 
their suggestions and make sure you give them the opportunity 
to speak. Ask for their opinion and try to involve them in the 
conversation as much as possible. 
E 1	Here is a picture with some ideas to help you.
N	 Hopefully, they will do the same for you.
M	 Would you like to start?
V	 Oh, yeah. What do you think about the vending machine? 
M	 Oh, it will be a nice thing, but it’s better to invest in something 
related to education. Don’t you think?
V	 Oh, yeah, I agree.
M	 And what about the tablets?
V	 Oh, I think they wouldn’t be really helpful because we would 
access another side perhaps and we wouldn’t focus on the 
lessons.
M	 Mmm, I see your point, but maybe we can put rules in the use of 
it, and just put things related to the lessons and about subjects 
that we’re going to work with them.
V	 Oh, yeah.
W	 Tip four: Avoid one word answers.
N	 Another useful tip is not to just say one word when you’re 
answering the examiner or your partner. Always answer in full 
sentences and add more detail wherever you can. This will not 
10B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 147@@
147
10B
c	 This speaking activity is useful for Sts taking the 
Cambridge PET exam, as well as general practice of the 
principles mentioned in the documentary (involving your 
partner, turn taking, expressing your opinion) that are 
helpful in all speaking exams.
	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
the task. You might want to tell the class that this activity 
is based on a real oral test. 
	 Play the video for Sts to watch the examiner giving them 
the task they need to complete.
I’m going to describe a situation to you.
A British couple with two children aged twelve and fourteen are 
going to visit your country next month. You have been asked to 
show them some places in your town. The parents are especially 
interested in history, and the children in sport and nature. 
Talk to a partner about the different places they could visit, and say 
which they would enjoy most and why.
Here is a picture with some ideas to help you.
!   If you aren’t using the video in class, read the script above 
to Sts. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the situation for 
two or three minutes, using tips from the documentary 
and ideas from the picture. Make sure they stay within the 
time limit.
	 You could give some feedback on any tips from the 
documentary that Sts ignored and also tell them if they 
have done well.  
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 148@@
148
	9&10	Revise and Check
r  CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    2  b    3  b    4  b    5  b
e 10.14
1
I = interviewer, V = Victoria
I	 Do you have a good memory?
V	 Um, I have a good memory for, for things that I can picture, like 
details in my head. So when I meet someone, I’m really good at 
remembering their name because I, I just kind of plant it in my 
head. Um, but I’m not as good at remembering, like if you ask me 
what I had for dinner three days ago, I wouldn’t remember that.
2
I = interviewer, J = Jan
I	 When was the last time you went to a wedding?
J	 It was approximately two and a half weeks ago. And it was my 
wedding.
I	 Did you have a lovely time?
J	 I did. I had a lovely wedding. And the wedding was a second time 
around for me. I was a widow for eight years, and I met my new 
husband online, which is quite avant-garde for someone my age.
3
I = interviewer, K = Keith
I	 What’s the best influence that the USA has had on the world?
K	 Um, I think the best influence that the US has had on the world is 
in TV and movies. I think a lot of countries, or most countries, um, 
that watch a lot of US TV, US drama, US movies. I watch a lot. I’ve 
been watching Breaking Bad and Ozark recently, which are two of 
my favourite shows, and I just think the, the influence that they’ve 
had on TV and drama is, is a really big influence.
I	 And the worst influence?
K	 The worst influence, I’d probably say, is the amount of 
commercialism. I think, you know, the American dream was 
always, you know, about making money, um, and being 
successful, and I think that’s had quite a negative impact on 
the world, that, um, so much now is driven by the need to be, 
er, er, making profits and I think all in all society’s, er, not really 
benefitted from that.
4
I = interviewer, R = Royce
I	 Are there any American fast-food places near where you live?
R	 Er, yeah, there are several fast-food places near where I live.
I	 Do you ever go to any of them?
R	 Um, I don’t, I try not to. I don’t particularly like it very much and 
it's quite bad for you.
5
I = interviewer, D = Diana
I	 How do you feel about taking exams?
D	 Um, I feel all right, I like studying, so I am kind of all right at 
handling that situation. It’s always a little bit nervous, but it’s all 
right.
I	 Have you ever had an exam disaster?
D	 Um, well I remember in um, in an oral exam I went, er, blank for, 
like, twenty very long seconds, but then I was all right. I was just 
like, blank for a while.
I	 Did you pass the exam?
D	 Yes, I did.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.39.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test 
Progress Test Files 6–10 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice   Check your progress
GRAMMAR
a
1  b    2  a    3  a    4  a    5  c
b
1  hadn’t studied    2  ’d / would have spent    3  ’d / would have 
been able to    4  didn’t do    5  Have…visited    6  Had…been    
7  ’s been working    8  had finished    9  will be completed    
10  had…closed    11  have sold    12  are…eating    13  was 
showing    14  ’s…been    15  was made
VOCABULARY
a
1  memorable    2  confidently    3  emotional    4  accuracy    
5  personal
b
1  bride    2  honeymoon    3  best man    4  reception    5  guests
c
1  Am – cinema    2  Br – faucet    3  Am – trainers    
4  Br – elevator    5  Am – rubbish    6  Br – restroom    
7  Am – queue    8  Am – flat    9  Br – sidewalk    10  Br – gas
d
1  failed    2  multiple    3  essay    4  took    5  cheated
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  autobiography /f/    2  luxurious /ʊə/    3  toilet /ɔɪ/    
4  rather /ɑ:/    5  weird /ɪə/
d
1  security    2  important    3  propose    4  bridesmaid    
5  practical
CAN YOU understand this text?
b
1  E    2  D    3  F    4  B    5  G    6  A    7  C
Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 149@@
149
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
•	 When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
•	 If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
•	 These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
•	 You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
•	 All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
•	 Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
•	 change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
•	 change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
•	 change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
•	 reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
•	 There is a Grammar activity for each main (A and B) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Communicative activity for each main (A and 
B) lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
The photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC) and the Classroom 
Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display the 
worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. This 
will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the activities, 
and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
•	 The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
•	 All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
153
  
Write the comparative and superlative forms of the adjectives.
 a
  
Complete each sentence with one word. Write your answers in the column on the right.
 b
1B GRAMMAR adjectives
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right in b and look at the sentences. Read the sentences 
aloud with the correct word.
comparative
superlative
1 
addictive
more addictive
the most addictive
2 
bad
3 
clever
4 
expensive
5 
far
6 
light
7 
lucky
8 
narrow
9 
tidy
 
10 
tired
1 Let’s walk a 
 further – we have time and it’s a lovely day. 
bit
2 The tunnel was 
 narrower than I thought and I accidentally damaged my car. 
3 I really like this bike, but unfortunately, it’s the 
 expensive and I can’t afford it. 
4 My brother is definitely the lucky 
 in our family. He’s won the lottery twice. 
5 Kim is 
 cleverest student in our school. 
6 I felt exhausted yesterday, but luckily, I’m 
 tired today. 
7 My suitcases are the two light blue 
 over there. 
8 My colleague’s desk is tidier 
 mine. I have papers everywhere! 
9 Coffee is 
 addictive than some people realize. 
 
10 The exam wasn’t as bad 
 I thought it would be. 
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4B COMMUNICATIVE What if…?
If I had a 
problem with 
someone at 
work, I…
More people 
would work 
part-time if…
If my boss 
asks me to do 
a webinar, I…
If I received 
an interesting 
job offer, I…
I’d get stressed 
at a job 
interview if…
If I did a  
PhD, I…
If you want 
a better job, 
you…
You should 
get an English 
qualification 
if…
More people 
would go to 
university if…
Unless  
they offer  
me more 
money, I…
I’ll update my 
CV if…
I wouldn’t sign 
a contract if…
If I had more 
qualifications, I…
I might leave 
my job if…
If I went on 
a training 
course, I…
I’ll work 
overtime if…
If a  
colleague 
asks for my 
help, I…
I wouldn’t  
do an internship 
unless…
START
FINISH
If I went  
to university 
(again), I…
1
2
19
3
18
4
17
7
14
8
13
9
12
10
11
5
16
6
15
If I had 
more work 
experience, 
I…
20
If I went to university again, 
I would study history.
What if…?
207
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2A VOCABULARY Packing
a driving licence
flip-flops
a first-aid kit
a hairdryer
(to) pack
a phone charger
headphones
a towel
a guidebook
insect repellent
slippers
swimming trunks
(to) wrap
a washbag
a comb
an adaptor
a bathrobe
a razor
(to) fold
nail scissors
make-up
a rain jacket
a passport
a toothbrush
Photocopiable activities
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 150@@
150
Grammar activity answers
4A  future forms: will / shall and be going to
	
2  Shall I turn on    3  It’ll probably rain.    4  ✓    5  I’ll text    
	
6  I’ll change    7  it’s coming    8  shall we go    9  I’m going to be   
 10  ✓    11  I won’t be    12  I was going to go
4B  first and second conditionals
	
3  won’t pass, attends    
	
4  had, wouldn’t need    
	
5  ’d enjoy, weren’t    
	
6  won’t be able to pay / can’t pay, don’t get    
	
7  were, ’d try    
	
8  won’t get, have    
	
9  wouldn’t be, didn’t have    
 10  had, ’d help
5A  present perfect simple
	
1  Well, I haven’t seen the director yet!
	
2  Have you had breakfast?, What time did you get up?
	
3  How long have you known Alex?, Where did you meet?
	
4  I’ve already had three cups this morning., Have you ever 
thought about cutting down?
	
5  When did you start learning the piano?, Have you ever played 
in public?, No, I’ve never played for anyone except my teacher.
	
6  Have you ever been to the United States?, We’ve just come 
back from Florida.
	
7  Have you ever lived abroad?, Yes, I taught in Italy for a few 
years., How long have you been a teacher?
	
8  Have you tidied your room yet?, I’ve been out all afternoon., 
When did you get home?
5B  present perfect continuous
	
2  ’m trying    3  ’ve been doing    
	
4  Is, teaching, ’s been working    5  ’s starting    
	
6  Has, done, ’s been playing    
	
7  Have, been waiting, ’ve been standing    
	
8  ’s having    9  haven’t been watching    
 10  have, been living, ’ve been thinking    
 11  haven’t been feeling    10  ’ve been studying, ’m watching
6A  obligation, necessity, prohibition, advice
	
2  have / need    3  mustn’t    4  shouldn’t    5  have / need    
	
6  should    7  oughtn’t    8  mustn’t    9  have    10  needn’t    
 11  shouldn’t    12  must
6B  can, could, and be able to
	
 2  be able to    3  couldn’t / wasn’t able to    4  can’t    
	
5  couldn’t / weren’t able to    6   Can / Could    7  be able to    
	
8  being able to    9  can’t    10  be able to    
 11  ’d be able to / could    12  be able to    13  couldn’t    
 14  has been able to    15  can’t    16  Can / Could    
 17  were able to    18  couldn’t / wasn’t able to
1A  pronouns
a	 1  ours    2  her, She    3  their, his    4  your, mine    5  her, his    
6  your, my    7  their, him    8  yours, mine
b	 2  it to me    3  them for me    4  it to me    5  it to me / us    
6  it for me    7  them for him    8  it for me
1B  adjectives
a	 2  worse, the worst    
	
3  cleverer, the cleverest    
	
4  more expensive, the most expensive    
	
5  further, the furthest    
	
6  lighter, the lightest    
	
7  luckier, the luckiest    
	
8  narrower, the narrowest    
	
9  tidier, the tidiest    
 10  more tired, the most tired
b	 2  much    3  most    4  one    5  the    6  less    7  ones    8  than    
9  more    10  as
2A  present tenses
	
3  ✓    4  ✗ I really want    5  ✓    6  ✗ does the guidebook say    
	
7  ✗ it depends on    8  ✗ we’re waiting    9  ✓    10  ✗ I’m going    
 11  ✗ Are you coming    12  ✗ I don’t see    13  ✓    14  ✓    15  ✓    
 16  ✗ We’re going    17  ✗ They prefer    18  ✗ we need    
 19  ✗ She’s having    20  ✓    21  ✓    22  ✗ they’re cleaning    
 23  ✗ I don’t believe    24  ✓    25  ✗ My neighbour is looking after
2B  possessives
a	 2  the children’s    
	
3  ✓    
	
4  the centre of Glasgow    
	
5  my brother’s    
	
6  florist’s    
	
7  my grandparents’    
	
8  the name of the village    
	
9  the butcher’s    
 10  the men’s    
 11  the corner of the street    
 12  Sarah and Tony’s    
 13  grandfather’s    
 14  the back of the book    
 15  people’s names    
 16  the south of France
b	 2  hers    3  our    4  theirs    5  his    6  yours    7  its    8  her    
	
9  their    10  mine    11  his    12  your    13  ours / mine    
 14  yours    15  her    16  his
3A  past simple, past continuous, or used to?
	
2  used to have    3  didn’t use to wear    4  saw    5  was working   
	
6  did she teach / did she use to teach    7  did you think    
	
8  was / used to be    9  found    10  didn’t have    
 11  was still writing    12  said    13  broke    14  did it happen    
 15  wasn’t skiing    16  fell    17  were walking
3B  prepositions
a	 2  through, past    3  out of, towards    4  over, round    
5  on, under    6  on, at
b	 2  in, at    3  about, for    4  with, about    5  with, for    6  to, on    
7  of, for    8  to, about    9  about, –    10  –, in
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 151@@
151
10A  be, do, and have: auxiliary and main verbs
	
2  have    3  haven’t    4  had    5  do    6  ’s    7  Are    8  don’t    
	
9  are    10  Does    11  having    12  hasn’t    13  Have    14  don’t    
 15  be    16  are    17  ’re    18  has    19  did    20  was    21  do    
 22  doesn’t    23  having    24  be
10B  revision of verb forms
	
2  Do, forget    3  goes    4  ’s having    5  Were, driving    
	
6  didn’t watch    7  didn’t use to like    8  loved / used to love    
	
9  ’ll stop    10  ’m leaving / going to leave    11  are, going to do    
 12  Shall, help    13  ’ll be    14  didn’t spend    15  wouldn’t go    
 16  wins    17  Have, ever tried    18  went    19  Did, come    
 20  ’ve been    21  ’ve been waiting    22  have, been doing    
 23  ’m reading    24  ’re trying    25  ’s based    26  is being decorated  
 27  will be nominated    28  Has, been fixed    29  ’d told    
 30  had, shut    31  didn’t eat    32  Had,  started
7A  phrasal verbs
a	 2  try on these trousers / try these trousers on    
	
3  look after the children
	
4  look round the museum    
	
5  take away my old cooker / take my old cooker away    
	
6  took her best friend out  / took out her best friend    
	
7  put up the new curtains / put the new curtains up    
	
8  looking forward to his holiday    
	
9  lives off our parents    
 10  turn off your phone / turn your phone off
b	 2  try them on    3  look after them    4  look round it    
5  take it away    6  took her out    7  put them up    
8  looking forward to it    9  lives off them    10  turn it off
7B  verb patterns
a	 2  to have    3  to see    4  believe    5  to let    6  wait    
	
7  going out    8  watching    9  playing    10  be    11  to get    
 12  not winning
a	 2  seeing    3  go    4  to rain / raining    5  getting    6  to do    
7  getting    8  to take    9  to watch    10  not to be    11  losing
8A  have something done
	
3  ’re having their photograph taken
	
4  ’s drying his hair
	
5  ’s painting the front door
	
6  ’s putting up some shelves
	
7  ’s having his glasses repaired
	
8  ’re having the windows replaced
	
9  ’re washing their clothes
 10  ’s having her fringe cut
8B  the passive
	
2  took    3  opened    4  was called    5  was renamed    
	
6  was, being built    7  gave    8  is, known    9  was designed    
 10  has been awarded    11  are allowed    12  are held    
 13  is considered    14  became    15  holds    
 16  was commissioned    17  was used    18  hasn’t owned    
 19  had    20  be visited    21  are rented    22  be missed
9A  reported speech
a	 2  was a beautiful morning   
	
3  me to wake up and come outside
	
4  (that) I couldn’t just lie there on my chair all day
	
5  (that) I should be catching birds
	
6  how I could be so lazy
	
7  were supposed to be fun
	
8  if / whether he could have a dog
b	 2  (that) he’d have to take it for walks   
	
3  (him) where it was going to sleep
	
4  (that) they’d have to take it on holiday with them the  
following month
	
5  not to forget about the cat
	
6  to let them think about it
9B  third conditional and other uses of the  
past perfect
a	 2  would have been    4  hadn’t turned    5  ✓    6  ✓    
7  would Sally have done    8  ✓
b	 2  hadn’t left    3  had gone    4  dropped    5  told    
	
6  ’d already had    7  lived    8  had, known    9  hadn’t eaten    
 10  had stolen
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 152@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
152
 	
Complete the conversations with the correct subject pronoun, object pronoun, possessive adjective, 
or possessive pronoun, e.g. I / me / my / mine. Write your answers in the column on the right.
 a
1	 A	 Hey! Those are 
 coffees!	
our
	
B	 I’m sorry, we thought they were 
 .	
2	 A	 Sara got a new phone for 
 birthday.	
	
B	 Wow! 
 always gets fantastic presents.	
3	 A	 I’ve met those people before, but I can’t remember 
 names.	
	
B	 His name is Ryan and I think 
 wife’s name is Jessica.	
4	 A	 Tom! Are these 
 keys?	
	
B	 No, I’ve got 
 here.	
5	 A	 Where’s Sylvia? I think these are 
 glasses.	
	
B	 No, they’re not Sylvia’s. Ask Ben, they might be 
 .	
6	 A	 Is this 
 car, sir?	
	
B	 No, it isn’t. That’s 
 car over there.	
7	 A	 Have Ruth and Oliver chosen a name for 
 baby yet?	
	
B	 Yes, he’s called Patrick. They named 
 after his grandfather.	
8	 A	 I’ve left my book at home. Can I share 
 ?	
	
B	 Sorry! I forgot to bring 
 , too!	
1A  GRAMMAR  pronouns
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the columns on the right. Practise the conversations in a and b with a partner.
 	
Complete the conversations with object pronouns and for or to. Write your answers in the column 
on the right.
1	 A	 What beautiful flowers!
	
B	 Yes, my boyfriend sent 
 
 
 .	
them  to  me
2	 A	 Is that Sean’s old bike?
	
B	 Yes, he sold 
 
 
 for £50.	
  
  
3	 A	 Where did you get those headphones?
	
B	 My friend got 
 
 
 in New York.	
  
  
4	 A	 Is that your tennis racquet?
	
B	 No, it’s my brother’s. He lent 
 
 
 .	
  
  
5	 A	 Have you seen our new logo?
	
B	 Yes, the Marketing Director showed 
 
 
 yesterday.	
  
  
6	 A	 Where did you buy that hat?
	
B	 My wife found 
 
 
 online.	
  
  
7	 A	 I didn’t think George could afford designer sunglasses.
	
B	 He can’t. His parents bought 
 
 
 .	
  
  
8	 A	 I love your sweater.
	
B	 Thanks. My grandmother made 
 
 
 .	
  
  
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 153@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
153
 	
Write the comparative and superlative forms of the adjectives.
 a
 	
Complete each sentence with one word. Write your answers in the column on the right.
 b
1B  GRAMMAR  adjectives
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right in b and look at the sentences. Read the sentences 
aloud with the correct word.
comparative
superlative
1	
addictive
more addictive
the most addictive
2	
bad
3	
clever
4	
expensive
5	
far
6	
light
7	
lucky
8	
narrow
9	
tidy
 
10	
tired
1	 Let’s walk a 
 further – we have time and it’s a lovely day.	
bit
2	 The tunnel was 
 narrower than I thought and I accidentally damaged my car.	
3	 I really like this bike, but unfortunately, it’s the 
 expensive and I can’t afford it.	
4	 My brother is definitely the lucky 
 in our family. He’s won the lottery twice.	
5	 Kim is 
 cleverest student in our school.	
6	 I felt exhausted yesterday, but luckily, I’m 
 tired today.	
7	 My suitcases are the two light blue 
 over there.	
8	 My colleague’s desk is tidier 
 mine. I have papers everywhere!	
9	 Coffee is 
 addictive than some people realize.	
 
10	 The exam wasn’t as bad 
 I thought it would be.	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 154@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
154
1	 They usually go hiking in Scotland  
in the summer.	
✓
2	 I’m not knowing where to go on holiday.	
✗ I don’t know
3	 Their flight arrives at Terminal 4 at 16.45. 	
4	 I’m really wanting to try waterskiing.	
5	 Hurry up! We only have half an hour to get to the airport!	
6	 What is the guidebook saying about this museum?	
7	 We’d love to go surfing, but it’s depending on the weather.	
8	 Our flight’s delayed, so we wait in the departure lounge at the moment.	
9	 Do you think we should get a taxi or a bus to the hotel?	
 
10	 I go to the cinema with some friends this evening.	
 
11	 Do you come for a swim or not?	
 
12	 I’m sorry, I’m not seeing what you mean.	
 
13	 You’re very quiet – what are you thinking about?	
 
14	 £500 seems very expensive for a flight to Madrid.	
 
15	 What time does your train leave tomorrow?	
 
16	 We go camping in the Pyrenees next summer.	
 
17	 They’re preferring sunbathing to climbing mountains.	
 
18	 I don’t think we’re needing to take a hairdryer.	
 
19	 She has a shower at the moment – can you call back later?	
 
20	 Do you remember the name of the hotel?	
 
21	 It isn’t raining any more. Shall we go to the beach?	
 
22	 We can’t go in the pool now because they clean it.	
 
23	 I’m not believing it! I’ve won a holiday to Hawaii!	
 
24	 Why are you packing so much? It’s only a weekend trip!	
 
25	 My neighbour looks after my cat 
	
when I’m away next month.	
	
2A  GRAMMAR  present tenses
 	
Tick (✓) the sentences where the bold phrases are right and correct the wrong ones.  
Write your answers in the column on the right.
 
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the correct present tense.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 155@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
155
2B  GRAMMAR  possessives
 	
Circle the correct form. In which sentence are both forms possible?
1	 She’s at the front of the queue / the queue’s front.
2	 What are the childrens’ / the children’s names?
3	 I needed James’s / James’ help.
4	 I live in the centre of Glasgow / Glasgow’s centre.
5	 I don’t get on with my brother’s / my brothers’ wife.
6	 What time does the florists / florist’s open?
7	 I drove to my grandparent’s / my grandparents’ house. They live just outside Southampton.
8	 What’s the name of the village / the village’s name where you were born?
9	 I never buy meat at the butcher’s / the butchers’. I get it at the supermarket.
 
10	 Excuse me. Where’s the men’s / the mens’ changing room?
 
11	 I’ll wait on the street’s corner / the corner of the street.
 
12	 We’re going to Sarah’s and Tony’s / Sarah and Tony’s wedding next weekend.
 
13	 I went to my grandfather’s / grandfathers’ yesterday. It was his 90th birthday. 
 
14	 The answers are at the book’s back / the back of the book.
 
15	 I’m not very good at remembering people’s names / peoples’ names.
 
16	 They go to France’s south / the south of France every year.
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct possessive adjective or pronoun.  
Write your answers in the column on the right.
1	 I hate living with my parents. I’d love to have a house of 
 own.	
my
2	 Jane’s keeping very quiet about this new boyfriend of 
 !	
3	 My brother and I had 
 own bedrooms when we were children.	
4	 Both my sons smoke. It’s a bad habit of 
 .	
5	 My nephew never goes to the hairdresser’s. He cuts 
 own hair.	
6	 Is that woman a friend of 
 ? She’s smiling at you.	
7	 The supermarket has 
 own bakery, so we can buy some bread there.	
8	 My grandmother loves gardening. She grows all 
 own vegetables.	
9	 My cousins are thinking of opening 
 own restaurant.	
 
10	 A colleague of 
 has just told me she’s leaving.	
 
11	 Tom must earn a lot of money. Have you seen that new car of 
 ?	
 
12	 I’m going out this evening, so you’ll have to make 
 own dinner.	
 
13	 A friend of 
 is going away, so we’re looking after his dog.	
 
14	 Are you still having problems with those noisy neighbours of 
 ?	
 
15	 My daughter loves singing and has started writing 
 own songs.	
 
16	 He’s an amazing artist. I have a painting of 
 in the living room.	
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right in b and look at the sentences. Read the sentences 
aloud with the correct possessive adjectives and pronouns.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 156@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
156
3A  GRAMMAR  past simple, past continuous, or used to?
 	
Complete the conversations with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: past simple, past 
continuous, or used to.
 
1
2
3
Ben	
Helen, do you recognize that woman over there?  
I think we 1 used to go (go) to school with her.
Helen	
Oh, yes. That’s Clare Brown! She looks so different. 
She 2
 (have) much longer hair.
Ben	
Yes, and she 3
 (not wear) glasses.
Helen	
I wonder what she’s doing these days.  
The last time I 4
 (see) her, she  
5
 (work) as a teacher.
Ben	
What subject 6
 (she / teach)?
Helen	
I’m not sure. Shall we go and say hello?
Evie	
What 7
 (you / think) of the exam, 
Oliver?
Oliver	
Well, I 8
 (be) good at maths 
when I was at primary school, but I  
9
 (find) the exam today really 
difficult. How about you?
Evie	
Me too. And I 10
 (not have) 
enough time to answer all the questions.
Oliver	
Yeah, I 11
 (still / write) when the 
teacher 12
 (say) ‘Stop’.
Evie	
Oh, well. Let’s just hope we both pass.
Tom	
Welcome back, Justin. How was the skiing trip?
Justin	
Not so great. Unfortunately, my wife  
13
 (break) her leg on the first day.
Tom	
Oh, that’s terrible. How 14
  
(it / happen)?
Justin	
Well, the funny thing is, she 15
  
(not ski) at the time! She 16
 (fall) 
over in the hotel when we 17
 
(walk) down the stairs to go to breakfast.
Tom	
Oh no! What a shame!
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the conversations and look at the pictures. In pairs, say what you can 
remember about the people in the pictures.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 157@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
157
3B  GRAMMAR  prepositions
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the pictures and try to remember the sentences.
 	
Choose the correct preposition. Write your answers in the column on the right.
 a
1	 The man ran 
 the road and 
 the park.	
across	
into 
(through / across, in / into)
2	 The train went 
 the tunnel and 
 the stadium.	
	
 
(under / through, past / along)
3	 The woman came 
 the bank and walked 
 	
	
 
the supermarket. (out / out of, along / towards)
4	 The cycle path goes 
 the river and 
 the car park.	
	
 
(over / off, round / between)
5	 They sat 
 a bench 
 a tree.	
	
 
(in / on, under / down)
6	 I’m still 
 the bus, but we’re nearly 
 the bus stop.	
	
 
(on / into, in / at)
 	
Complete the sentences with prepositions from the list, or write – if no preposition is needed.
about (x4)  at  for (x4)  in (x2)  of  on  to (x2)  with (x2)
 b
1	 The receptionist asked  –  me 
if I was waiting for a taxi.
6	 My sister is married 
 a Frenchman 
and they’re both very keen 
 cooking.
3	 Don’t worry 
 the bill – 
I’ll pay 
 everything.
8	 The boss was very rude 
 
me – I don’t know what he was 
so angry 
.
5	 Why are you still angry 
 Callum? 
He apologized 
 his mistake.
2	 I’m very interested 
 science, 
but I’m not very good 
 it.
7	 I’m tired 
 applying 
 
jobs – I never get an interview.
9	 The professor talked 
 his 
research and then we discussed 
 the new project.
4	 My sons never agree 
 each 
other. They argue 
 everything.
10	 Peter told 
 me that he’d arrived 
 London on Tuesday morning.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 158@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
158
4A  GRAMMAR  future forms: will / shall and be going to
 	
Circle the correct form. Tick (✓) if both are possible.
1	 A	 Dad! I’ve dropped my ice cream!
	
B	 It’s OK, don’t worry – I’ll get / I’m getting you a new one!
2	 A	 I’m freezing!
	
B	 Shall I turn on / Will I turn on the heating?
3	 A	 We’re going for a walk in the country tomorrow.
	
B	 It’ll probably rain. / It’s probably raining.
4	 A	 Do you and David have any plans for tomorrow evening?
	
B	 Yes, we’re meeting / we’re going to meet some friends  
for dinner.
5	 A	 Don’t forget to send me a message when you get there.
	
B	 Don’t worry, Mum. I’m texting / I’ll text you as soon  
as I arrive.
6	 A	 Excuse me. I ordered still water and this is sparkling.
	
B	 I’m sorry, sir. I’ll change / I’m going to change it for you.
7	 A	 Have you phoned for a taxi?
	
B	 Yes, it comes / it’s coming in five minutes.
8	 A	 How about going abroad for our holiday this year?
	
B	 That sounds good! Where shall we go / do we go?
9	 A	 You don’t look very well. Are you OK?
	
B	 No. I think I’m going to be / I’m being sick.
 
10	 A	 Who do you think will win / is going to win the  
World Cup?
	
B	 Italy, of course!
 
11	 A	 The play starts at 7.30, so we need to be at the  
theatre by 7.15.
	
B	 OK, I won’t be / I’m not being late this time!
 
12	 A	 Did you buy the pizza for tonight?
	
B	 Oh sorry! I was going to go / I’m going to go to  
the shop earlier, but my boss called and then I forgot.
ACTIVATION
Write three short conversations, one with will, one with shall, and one with be going to.
I’m here
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 159@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
159
4B  GRAMMAR  first and second conditionals
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences so that they are true for you. Compare with a partner.
If the weather’s bad this weekend,…	
If I had more time,…
If I get better at English,…	
If I lost my phone,…
I’ll be really happy if…	
I’d enjoy my job (or course) more if…
1	 You have to dress smartly to make a good 
impression at the interview.
2	 She can’t work in France because she doesn’t 
speak French.
3	 She needs to attend all the lectures to pass 
the course.
4	 I need to get a part-time job because I don’t 
have any money.
5	 He doesn’t enjoy teaching very much because 
the pupils are so badly behaved.
6	 I need to get a grant so I can pay the 
course fees.
7	 I think you should try to get a new job. 
8	 You’ll need to have a good CV to get  
an interview.
9	 You have good references, so it should be 
easy to get a job.
 
10	 I can’t help you – I don’t have time.
	
You won’t make a good impression at the interview 
if you don’t dress smartly.
	
If she spoke French, she would be able to work /  
could work in France.
	
She 
 the course unless she 
 all the lectures.
	
If I 
 more money, I 
 to get a part-time job.
	
He 
 teaching more if the 
pupils 
 so badly behaved.
	
I 
 the course fees if I 
 a grant.
	
If I 
 you, I 
 
to get a new job.
	
You 
 an interview unless you 
 a good CV.
	
It 
 easy to get a job if you 
 good references.
	
If I 
 time, I 
 
you.
 	
Complete the second sentence so that it means the same as the first. Use contractions  
where possible.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 160@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
160
5A  GRAMMAR  present perfect simple
 	
Complete the conversations with the present perfect simple or past simple.
ACTIVATION
With a partner, write two short conversations using the present perfect simple and the past simple.
1	 A	 When / you / start working here?
	
	
When did you start working here?
	
B	 Only a few weeks ago.
	
A	 you / meet everyone in the office?
	
	
Have you met everyone in the office?
	
B	 Well, I / not see the director yet!
	
	
2	 A	 you / have breakfast?
	
	
	
B	 Not yet.
	
A	 What time / you / get up?
	
	
	
B	 Only ten minutes ago.
3	 A	 How long / you / know Alex?
	
	
	
B	 For about ten years.
	
A	 Where / you / meet?
	
	
	
B	 At university.
4	 A	 Do you want a coffee?
	
B	 No, thanks. I / already / have three cups 
this morning.
	
	
	
A	 you / ever / think about cutting down?
	
	
	
B	 I’m trying!
5	 A	 When / you / start learning the piano?
	
	
	
B	 About three years ago.
	
A	 you / ever / play in public?
	
	
	
B	 No, I / never / play for anyone except my 
teacher.
	
	
6	 A	 you / ever / be to the United States?
	
	
	
B	 Yes, three times. What about you?
	
A	 We / just / come back from Florida.
	
	
7	 A	 you / ever / live abroad?
	
	
	
B	 Yes, I / teach in Italy for a few years. Now I 
teach in London.
	
	
	
A	 How long / be a teacher?
	
	
	
B	 Since 2016.
8	 A	 you / tidy your room yet?
	
	
	
B	 Not yet. I / be out all afternoon.
	
	
	
A	 When / you / get home?
	
	
	
B	 Only about half an hour ago.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 161@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
161
5B  GRAMMAR  present perfect continuous
 	
Complete the conversations with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: present continuous  
or present perfect continuous. Use contractions where possible.
 
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
1	 A	 Look, Mum. It ’s snowing! (snow)
	
B	 I know. It ’s been snowing since five o’clock this morning. (snow)
2	 A	 Ssh! I 
 to read. (try)
	
B	 Sorry, Dad.
3	 A	 Hi, Lisa. You look great!
	
B	 Thanks! I 
 a lot of exercise recently. (do)
4	 A	
 your daughter still 
 at the college, Cathy? (teach)
	
B	 Yes, she 
 there for over three years now. (work)
5	 A	 Oh no! It 
 to rain. (start)
	
B	 I’ll go and bring in the washing.
6	 A	
 Mark 
 his homework yet? (do)
	
B	 Of course not. He 
 games on his phone all evening. (play)
7	 A	 Sorry I’m late! 
 you 
 long? (wait)
	
B	 Yes, I 
 here for nearly 20 minutes! (stand)
8	 A	 Can I speak to Mrs Johnson, please?
	
B	 She 
 lunch at the moment. Can she call you back in half an hour? (have)
9	 A	 Did you see that programme about sharks last night?
	
B	 No, I 
 much TV lately. (not watch)
 
10	 A	 How long 
 you 
 in Manchester? (live)
	
B	 About two years, but recently we 
 about moving to the country. (think)
 
11	 A	 You don’t look very well, Pete. Are you OK?
	
B	 Not really, I 
 well all week. (not feel)
 
12	 A	 Is that the TV I can hear?
	
B	 Yes, Dad. I 
 for my exams since lunchtime, and now I 
 the news. (study, watch)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 162@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
162
 	
Complete the second sentence with one word so that it means the same as the first. Contractions 
(e.g. can’t) count as one word.
1	 She should buy a new house. She needs something bigger.
	
She ought to buy a new house. She needs something bigger.
2	 Is it necessary to use that teapot? Can’t you just put a teabag in a mug?
	
Do you 
 to use that teapot? Can’t you just put a teabag in a mug?
3	 It’s really dangerous to drive when you’re taking these tablets.
	
You 
 drive when you’re taking these tablets. It’s really dangerous.
4	 You ought to be more careful. You’ve made ten spelling mistakes.
	
You 
 be so careless. You’ve made ten spelling mistakes.
5	 You can borrow the car whenever you want. You needn’t ask for permission.
	
You can borrow the car whenever you want. You don’t 
 to ask for permission.
6	 It would be a good idea to book a table for Saturday night. 
	
You 
 book a table for Saturday night.
7	 You should eat less fast food. It’s not good for you.
	
You 
 to eat so much fast food. It’s not good for you.
8	 I must remember to buy more paper napkins. We don’t have any left. 
	
I 
 forget to buy some more paper napkins. We don’t have any left.
9	 We got a takeaway last night so we didn’t need to cook.
	
We got a takeaway last night so we didn’t 
 to cook.
 
10	 It’s not necessary to send us your CV. Just fill in the form online.
	
You 
 send us your CV. Just fill in the form online.
 
11	 It’s not a good idea to take a photo here without a flash.
	
You 
 use flash to take a photo here.
 
12	 You need a visa to visit India. You’ll have to apply for one.
	
You 
 have a visa to visit India.  
You’ll have to apply for one.
6A  GRAMMAR  obligation, necessity, prohibition, advice
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences so that they are true for you. Compare with a partner.
I have to…
I mustn’t…
I ought to…
I needn’t…
I don’t have to…
I shouldn’t…
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 163@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
163
6B  GRAMMAR  can, could, and be able to
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of can, could, or be able to.
1	 My cousin can never find clothes that she likes.
2	 Will I 
 change these 
batteries if they’re the wrong type?
3	 I 
 do my homework last 
night. It was too difficult.
4	 Daniel 
 speak French very 
well – nobody understands a word he says!
5	 They 
 come to the 
conference because there weren’t any flights.
6	
 you tell me where the 
nearest supermarket is, please?
7	 Simon used to 
 play tennis quite well, but he’s hopeless now.
8	 I love 
 buy everything I need in the local shops.
9	 You 
 be tired – it’s only 9.00!
 
10	 I might 
 leave work early on Friday.
 
11	 If I got a pay rise, I 
 afford a new laptop.
 
12	 You need to 
 swim well if you want to go surfing.
 
13	 I spent hours looking for my wallet, but I 
 find it.
 
14	 Laura 
 ride a horse since 
she was six years old.
 
15	 The curtains 
 be too small!  
I measured the windows myself.
 
16	
 I go to Joe’s party on 
Saturday, please?
 
17	 It was hard work, but we 
 
assemble the furniture in the end.
 
18	 Dad 
 fix the washing 
machine, so my parents bought a new one.
 
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences so that they are true for you. Compare with a partner.
I can…really well.
When I was a child, I could…
The last time I went clothes shopping, I couldn’t…
I’d really like to be able to…
In the next five years, I might be able to…
I hope I’ll be able to…next year.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 164@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
164
7A  GRAMMAR  phrasal verbs
 	
Replace the nouns in a with pronouns. Change the word order if necessary.
1	 get  on  with  him
2	
  
  
3	
  
  
4	
  
  
5	
  
  
6	
  
  
7	
  
  
8	
  
  
  
9	
  
  
 
10	
  
  
 b
ACTIVATION
Use the phrasal verbs below to write sentences that are true for you. Compare with a partner.
get on with (somebody)
grow up
look after (somebody / something)
look forward to
throw (something) away
 	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with the correct form of a phrasal verb from box A 
and a noun phrase from box B.
get on with  live off  look after  
look forward to  look round  put up  
take away  take out  try on  turn off
 a
	
A
	
B
her best friend  her brother  his holiday  my old cooker  
our parents  the children  the museum  
the new curtains  these trousers  your phone
1	 She doesn’t get on with her brother very well.
2	 Can I 
 , please?
3	 Her parents 
 every Saturday.
4	 The schoolchildren had an hour to 
 
 .
5	 The refuse collectors didn’t 
 
 .
6	 She 
 for dinner last night 
to celebrate her promotion.
7	 We 
 last weekend.
8	 He’s really 
 .
9	 My sister still 
 , 
even though she’s nearly 40.
 
10	 I’m not starting the class until you 
 
 !
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 165@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
165
7B  GRAMMAR  verb patterns
 	
Complete the texts with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
 a
ACTIVATION
Write a paragraph about a memorable night out (or in) with friends.
My wife and I both love 1 going (go) to the theatre. Last month, for our 
anniversary, our son booked tickets for us to see the musical Wicked. 
It was a matinee, so we decided 2 
 (have) lunch in a 
restaurant before the show. When we arrived at the theatre after lunch, 
we were surprised 3 
 (see) how quiet it was, so we checked 
our tickets and suddenly realized why. The start time was 2.00 p.m. 
and it was already 2.15 p.m. We were sure it started at 2.30 p.m. We 
couldn’t 4 
 (believe) we’d been so stupid! The attendant 
refused 5 
 (let) us in, so we had to 6 
 (wait) until 
the interval and missed the whole of the first half.
My boyfriend Sam and I usually look forward to 7 
 (go out) 
with friends on Saturday evenings. Last Saturday, however, we were 
both really tired, so we stayed in. We didn’t feel like 8 
 
(watch) TV, so Sam suggested a game of Scrabble. Generally, I’m not 
very keen on 9 
 (play) board games, but I enjoy Scrabble. 
That might 10 
 (be) because I usually win. With this game, 
however, Sam managed 11 
 (get) high scores for most of 
his words, while my scores were really low. In the end, I lost the game 
by over 100 points! I really hate 12 
 (not win), so I spent 
the rest of the evening in a bad mood!
get  go  miss  rain  see
I’m a huge fan of Adele, so when she came to Auckland a 
few years ago, I really didn’t want to 1 miss 2 
 her 
perform. I was still at school at the time and it finished quite 
late, but luckily my dad let me 3 
 with a friend. The 
concert was at Mount Smart Stadium, which is open-air, and on 
the night of the performance, the weather was awful. It started 
4 
 really heavily, but I didn’t mind 5 
 wet 
as it was just such an amazing experience.
do  get  lose  not be  take  watch
I’ll always remember the 2018 Football World Cup. People didn’t 
expect England 6 
 very well, but the team amazed 
everyone by 7 
 through to the semi-final. The match was 
against Croatia and kick-off was at 7.00 p.m. My friends persuaded 
me 8 
 the evening off work and we went to the local pub 
together 9 
 the game. We told ourselves 10 
 
too disappointed if England didn’t win, but when they ended up  
11 
 2–1, we were still absolutely heartbroken.
 	
Complete the texts with the correct form of the verbs in the lists.
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 166@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
166
8A  GRAMMAR  have something done
 	
Look at the pictures. Are the people doing something or having something done? Write sentences.
1	 	
clean / the windows	
She’s cleaning the windows .
2	 	
service / his car	
He’s having his car serviced .
3	 	
take / their photograph	
They 
 .
4	 	
dry / his hair	
He 
 .
5	 	
paint / the front door	
He 
 .
6	 	
put up / some shelves	
She 
 .
7	 	
repair / his glasses	
He 
 .
8	 	
replace / the windows	
They 
 .
9	 	
wash / their clothes	
They 
 .
 
10	 	
cut / her fringe	
She 
 .
 
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences. Look at the pictures and try to remember the sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 167@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
167
8B  GRAMMAR  the passive
 	
Complete the texts with the correct form of the verb in brackets, active or passive.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the texts. In pairs, say what you can remember about each building.
The Gherkin 1 is situated (situate) in the City of 
London’s financial district. It 2 
 (take) 
two years to construct and first 3 
 
(open) its doors in April 2004. Originally, it  
4 
 (call) the Swiss Re Building, but 
it 5 
 (rename) later to its street 
address – 30 St Mary Axe. While it 6 
 
still 
 (build), however, Londoners 
7 
 (give) the tower the nickname 
‘The Gherkin’, because of its distinctive cucumber-
like shape. It 8 
 still commonly 
 (know) by that name today. The 
building 9 
 (design) by the famous 
British architect Sir Norman Foster and since its 
completion, it 10 
 (award) a number 
of prizes for architecture. The Gherkin contains private 
offices and a few restaurants and cafés, which are the 
only areas that members of the public  
11 
 (allow) to visit. However, each 
year, several special events 12 
 
(hold), giving more lucky visitors the chance to step 
inside this iconic landmark.
The Chrysler Building 13 
 (consider) 
by many contemporary architects to be one of New 
York City’s finest structures. When it first opened in 
1930, it 14 
 (become) the world’s 
tallest building. Today, it still 15 
 
(hold) the title of the tallest brick building in the world. 
The skyscraper 16 
 (commission) by 
Walter Chrysler, founder of the Chrysler Corporation, 
and 17 
 (use) as the car company’s 
headquarters until the 1950s. Although the building  
still has the Chrysler name, the family in fact  
18 
 (not own) it since 1953. 
Originally, the tower 19 
 (have) a 
public observation deck on the 71st floor. Nowadays, 
however, only the lobby can 20 
 
(visit), as the other floors 21 
 (rent) 
to private businesses. For visitors to New York, the 
Chrysler Building is one attraction that really shouldn’t  
22 
 (miss).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 168@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
168
9A  GRAMMAR  reported speech
 	
Read the cartoon. Complete the paragraph below.
 a
 	
Write the things Tim’s parents said in reported speech.
1	 ‘Do you really want a dog?’	
They asked him if he really wanted a dog.
2	 ‘You’ll have to take it for walks.’	
They said 
 .
3	 ‘Where’s it going to sleep?’	
They asked 
 .
4	 ‘We’ll have to take it on holiday  
with us next month.’	
They said 
 .
5	 ‘Don’t forget about the cat!’	
They told him 
 .
6	 ‘Let us think about it.’	
They told him 
 .
 b
Tim asked me 1 what I was doing .
He said it 2 
 ,
and told 3 
 .
He said 4 
 .
He told me 5 
 ,
and asked 6 
 .
Then he said that pets 7 
 ,
and asked his parents 8 
 !
ACTIVATION
Think of a short conversation you’ve had with a friend or a member of your family. Write it in reported 
speech. Compare with a partner.
Mum! Dad! Can 
I have a dog?
You should be 
catching birds.
What are you doing?
It’s a beautiful 
morning.
Pets are supposed 
to be fun.
Wake up and 
come outside!
You can’t just lie here 
on your chair all day.
How can you 
be so lazy?
1
5
2
6
3
7
4
8
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 169@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
169
9B  GRAMMAR  third conditional and other uses of the past perfect
Third conditional
 	
Tick (✓) the sentences which are right and correct the wrong ones. Write your answers in the 
column on the right.
1	 We would have been late for the wedding if we didn’t take a taxi.	
✗ hadn’t taken
2	 Would you have taken me on holiday if you’d won the competition?	
✓
3	 If we’d bought our tickets online, they would be cheaper.	
4	 I would have gone home if you didn’t turn up.	
5	 If John had met his wife earlier, they would have had more children.	
6	 If you’d asked me, I would have helped you.	
7	 What did Sally do if Rob had taken the job in Dubai?	
8	 If I hadn’t studied languages, I wouldn’t have moved to Italy.	
Other uses of the past perfect
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: past simple or past perfect. 
Write your answers in the column on the right.
1	 Marianne told me her parents 
 married for forty years. (be)	
had been
2	 I thought we were going to miss the train, but luckily it 
 yet. (not leave)	
3	 Nobody answered the phone because everyone in the office 
 home. (go)	
4	 I 
 my phone yesterday, but I think it’s OK. (drop)	
5	 Where’s Matt? He 
 me he’d be here at 9.00. (tell)	
6	 Fabio said he wasn’t hungry because he 
 lunch. (already have)	
7	 We saw our friends every weekend when we 
 in Bristol. (live)	
8	 How long 
 you 
 Tom when he proposed to you? (know)	
9	 Lucy said she 
 meat since she was ten years old. (not eat)	
 
10	 When I came out of the café, I realized that someone 
 my bike. (steal)	
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the columns on the right and look at the sentences. Read the sentences aloud 
with the correct verb forms.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 170@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
170
10A  GRAMMAR  be, do, and have: auxiliary and main verbs
 	
Complete the conversation with the correct form of be, do, or have. Use contractions where possible.
 
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversation with a partner.
Mum	
Kate, darling! It 1 ’s great to hear from you. How 2 
 you been?
Kate	
Good, thanks Mum. Sorry I 3 
 phoned for ages. I’ve 4 
 to 5 
 a 
lot of work on my dissertation this term. 
Mum	
Sounds like hard work. How 6 
 the course going? 7 
 you still enjoying it?
Kate	
Yes, mostly. I 8 
 like going to some of the lectures, but the seminars and tutorials  
9 
 really interesting.
Mum	
That’s good, then. And what about that flatmate of yours? 10 
 she still leave her dirty 
dishes all over the place? 
Kate	
No, I told her I hated 11 
 to live in an untidy flat, so she 12 
 been as messy 
recently.
Mum	
Great. And what about romance, darling? 13 
 you met anyone special?
Kate	
Not yet, Mum. But 14 
 worry, you’ll 15 
 the first to know when I do.  
Anyway, how 16 
 you and Dad?
Mum	
Oh, we 17 
 OK, thanks, although your father 18 
 hurt his back again. 
Kate	
Not again! How 19 
 it happen this time?
Mum	
He 20 
 on the treadmill at the gym and he fell off. 
Kate	
Oh, poor Dad!
Mum	
Well, I keep telling him not to 21 
 too much at the gym, but of course he 22 
 
listen to me! Anyway, Kate, I’m 23 
 my hair cut at half past three, so I’d better go.
Kate	
OK, Mum. I’ll 24 
 in touch again soon. Bye!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 171@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
171
10B  GRAMMAR  revision of verb forms
	25–32	 Excellent. You can use different verb forms very well.
	16–24	 Quite good, but check the Grammar Banks for any forms that you got wrong.
	 0–15	 This is still a bit difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Banks again.  
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verb in brackets.
present simple / present continuous (2A)
1	
We’re thinking about buying a new car. 
(think)
2	
 you often 
 
your keys? (forget)
3	
Sarah 
 for a run every 
evening. (go)
4	
He can’t come to the phone – he 
 a shower. (have)
present perfect simple / past simple (5A)
 
17	
 you 
 
windsurfing? (ever try)
 
18	
She 
 to Turkey three times 
last year. (go)
 
19	
 you 
 to 
work by bike yesterday? (come)
 
20	
I 
 here all day and I want to 
go home. (be)
past simple / past continuous / used to (3A)
5	
 you 
 when I 
called you? (drive)
6	
We 
 any TV last night. (not 
watch)
7	
Hannah 
 swimming but now 
she goes every day. (not like)
8	
I 
 watching baseball when I 
lived in New York. (love)
present perfect continuous / present 
continuous (5B)
 
21	
We 
 for you since 7.00! (wait)
 
22	
Hi John! What 
 you 
 lately? (do)
 
23	
I 
 a really good book at the 
moment. (read)
 
24	
Ssh! We 
 to listen to the 
news. (try)
will / shall / be going to / present 
continuous (4A)
9	
Look, we’re nearly out of petrol. I 
 at the next petrol station. 
(stop)
 
10	
I 
 at 7.30 tomorrow 
morning. (leave)
 
11	
What 
 you 
 
when you finish university? (do)
 
12	
 I 
 you take 
the rubbish out? (help)
the passive (8B)
 
25	
It’s a very interesting film – it 
 
on a true story. (base)
 
26	
Our house 
 at the moment. 
(decorate)
 
27	
Do you think the film 
 for an 
Oscar? (nominate)
 
28	
 the air conditioning 
 yet? (fix)
first and second conditionals (4B)
 
13	
I 
 late for work if I don’t 
leave now. (be)
 
14	
If you 
 so much on clothes, 
you wouldn’t have to borrow from your 
parents. (not spend)
 
15	
Young people 
 abroad if 
there were enough jobs at home. (not go)
 
16	
If she 
 the next game, she’ll 
be Wimbledon champion. (win)
third conditional / past perfect / past 
simple (9B)
 
29	
If he 
 me the truth, I’d have 
forgiven him. (tell)
 
30	
I didn’t hear you because I 
 
already 
 the door (shut).
 
31	
We were in a hurry, so we 
 
breakfast. (not eat)
 
32	
 the meeting already 
 when you got there? (start)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 172@@
172
•	 Check answers by eliciting only the comparative or 
superlative, not the whole question.
A	 2  the most delicious    3  busier    4  the oldest    
5  more creative    6  the best    7  the laziest    8  calmer    
9  the furthest    10  fitter than
B	 2  better    3  cheaper than    4  the closest    5  the latest    
6  more active    7  the greatest    8  the most useful    
9  the safest    10  healthier than
•	 Now focus on b. Put Sts face to face if possible to ask 
and answer their questions. They can either ask alternate 
questions, or Sts A can interview Sts B and they then swap 
roles. Encourage Sts to ask for more information. If there’s 
time, they could also return the questions, asking What 
about you?
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2A	Ask me a question
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts revise the present simple and present continuous. Copy 
one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Present simple for habits / states / timetables
Present continuous for present / future
What does your best friend look like?
Why exactly are you learning English?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a. Tell Sts they have ten minutes to complete the 
questions individually, using either the present simple or 
the present continuous form of the verbs in brackets.
•	 Check answers.
2  do, think    3  are, learning    4  Does, speak    5  Are, going    
6  Is, looking    7  Are, thinking    8  Do, prefer    9  does, look   
 10  are, reading    11  are, doing    12  do, belong   
 13  do, start    14  do, use    15  Do, know, is getting
•	 Focus on b. Tell Sts to choose eight questions each from 
the worksheet to ask their partner.
•	 Put Sts face to face if possible and tell them to take 
turns to ask each other their questions. If they don’t 
understand a question, they should ask their partner to 
repeat it slowly. Encourage Sts to give and ask for as much 
information as possible. The student who answers should 
try and reply with What about you? Monitor and help 
where necessary.
 EXTRA IDEA   Fast finishers could ask more questions from  
the sheet.
•	 Get feedback from various pairs.
1A	Talk for a minute
A group board game
Sts move around the board and revise pronouns. Copy one 
worksheet per group of three or four Sts. You also need one 
dice per group and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
Pronouns and possessive adjectives (I / my / mine,  
he / his / him, etc.)
My favourite TV series is ‘The Walking Dead’. I usually watch 
it with my sister.
One of my best friends is Linda. I met her at school.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters.
 !   If you don’t have a dice, give each group a coin. Sts toss 
the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Each player puts a counter on START.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to throw the 
dice and move their counter. When they land on a circle, 
they must talk for one minute about the topic. They must 
try and use correct pronouns wherever possible. Focus 
on the example on the worksheet (The best cook I know 
is my mum…) to show how Sts should use the correct 
pronouns as they speak. If the other Sts hear the speaker 
use a pronoun incorrectly, they should try to correct it. Be 
the final judge in case of dispute. 
•	 If a pronoun is wrong, Sts move back a circle. If it is correct, 
they stay on the circle.
•	 Sts play the game in their groups. Monitor and correct any 
mistakes. The first student to reach FINISH wins.
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
1B	Good, better, the best
A pairwork questionnaire
Sts revise comparative and superlative adjectives by 
completing a questionnaire and then asking and answering 
the questions. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
Comparative and superlative adjectives
When you feel stressed, what do you do to feel calmer?
The most delicious meal I’ve had recently was beef with 
vegetables in the new Chinese restaurant in the town 
centre.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a. Tell Sts to complete each question with the 
comparative or superlative form of the adjective / adverb 
in brackets. Tell them that they may also need to add than 
or the if necessary.
Communicative activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 173@@
173
3B	What’s the preposition?
A pairwork activity
Sts revise prepositions by asking and answering questions. 
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Dependent prepositions (afraid of, rely on, etc.),
prepositions of place (in, on, etc.)
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Focus on a. Sts look at the boxes and the questions. Tell 
them that the preposition is missing from each question. 
The missing preposition is the same for all the questions in 
that box. In their pairs, Sts write the missing preposition in 
the space provided at the top of each box. Tell Sts not to 
complete each individual question with the preposition.
•	 Check answers.
2  on    3  at    4  to    5  in    6  about    7  with    8  for
•	 Now focus on b. Tell Sts to take turns to choose a box 
and ask their partner all the questions in it. Remind them 
to ask for more information. The student answering the 
questions could ask What about you? Then they swap 
roles, and the other student chooses a different box and 
repeats the process. Alternatively, this part of the activity 
could be done in small groups, allowing Sts to ask more 
follow-up questions.
•	 Monitor and correct any mistakes with prepositions. 
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
4A	The Green Quiz
A pairwork quiz
Sts read some questions related to green issues and choose 
an answer. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
Environmental issues, rubbish and recycling, future forms
Which of these things can’t be recycled?
How long will it take most plastics to decompose?
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to answer some questions 
about the environment.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. Give Sts time to read the questions. 
Before Sts start, check whether you need to pre-teach 
any vocabulary, e.g. decompose, fuel, etc. Tell Sts that the 
correct answers are in bold.
•	 Sts A read their questions to Sts B with the three options. 
Sts B choose an option and Sts A circle their answer. Then 
Sts swap roles. 
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to add up their partner’s 
score. Each correct answer is worth one point. 
•	 Sts swap worksheets so that they can see their score and 
what questions they got wrong. The student with more 
points wins.
•	 Get some quick feedback from pairs to find out which 
facts were surprising / new to them. Find out if any Sts got 
all the answers correct.
2B	Describe and draw
A pairwork describing activity
Sts describe their pictures to each other and draw them.
Copy one pair of worksheets (A and B) per pair.
LANGUAGE
Possessives / present continuous revision
The man is holding an umbrella in his left hand.
His dog is next to him. The dog’s ears are big and long.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. Make sure Sts can’t see each other’s 
worksheet. Get Sts to fold their worksheet along the 
fold line.
•	 Explain that they both have different pictures, and that 
one of them will describe their picture and the other must 
draw it in the empty space under Draw. Describe some 
Sts in the class as an example, emphasizing the use of the 
present continuous and possessives, e.g. ‘Steve is sitting 
on a chair. His hair is short and black and his T-shirt is blue. 
Steve’s pen is in his left hand.’ 
•	 Focus on a. Give Sts a minute to look at their pictures.
•	 Sts A begin by describing their picture, and Sts B 
listen and draw. B should ask their partner questions if 
necessary. B then compares their drawing to A’s picture. 
Ask them to find any differences. Then Sts swap roles. 
Monitor and help where necessary.
3A	When you were younger
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts choose some topics and then talk about their past using 
the past simple / continuous / used to. Copy one worksheet 
per student.
LANGUAGE
Past simple, past continuous, used to
The first trip I went on without my family was a school trip 
to Wales.
One day, my friend and I were cheating in a maths exam 
and the teacher saw us.
I used to love eating crisps.
•	 Give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a. Go through the phrases in the circles 
and make sure Sts understand what they have to do. 
Demonstrate by choosing a couple of circles and write 
your notes on the board, e.g. a kind of food you used to 
love eating – crisps, and a group or singer you used to like 
but don’t any more – Coldplay.
•	 Give Sts time to work individually and think of something 
for at least three circles in each group. Monitor and help.
•	 Now focus on b and the example. Put Sts in pairs. Tell 
them to use their notes in the circles and take turns to 
tell their partner about their past. Again, demonstrate the 
activity and give more information.
•	 Remind Sts to use used to to express habits, and the past 
simple / continuous to talk about events.
•	 Give Sts time to talk about their past. Remind them to 
always ask for more information.
•	 When Sts have finished, get some feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 174@@
174
•	 Focus on a and the characters. Give Sts a few minutes to 
look at the photos and read the information. Put Sts in 
each group in two pairs and tell them that they are going 
to check they understand the relationships between the 
characters by drawing a family tree. Point out that Simon 
isn’t related to anyone, so he isn’t on the family tree.
•	 When Sts have finished, they can compare their tree with 
the other pair in their group. Check answers by eliciting 
the family tree onto the board to ensure that Sts have the 
correct model.
•	 Focus on b. Make sure Sts understand that they have to 
develop a plot outline for a one-hour pilot episode. Their 
ideas should be general – they don’t have to write any 
dialogue or give too much detailed information. Tell Sts 
to use the present simple to describe the plot. Give some 
examples, e.g. ‘Lizzie is very happy about the party, but 
everyone else is angry about it. Five minutes after the party 
starts, the doorbell rings and…’
•	 Sts work in their groups and discuss their ideas. Get each 
group to appoint a secretary to make notes of the plot 
outline. Monitor and help.
•	 Now focus on c. Sts plan their presentation and make 
notes on what each student is going to say.
•	 Finally, focus on d. Each group presents their proposed 
pilot episode to the class. 
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting plots and 
decide as a class which is the best plot.
 EXTRA IDEA   If you see that your Sts are enjoying the task, 
you could let them continue developing more plots for some 
more episodes.
5B	Why did you write…?
A pairwork activity
Sts write information about themselves. They then swap with 
a partner and try to guess what their partner’s information 
is about. Copy and cut up one pair of worksheets (A and B) 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect continuous
A  I think you wrote ‘tired’ because it’s how you’ve been 
feeling today.
B  Almost! It’s because it’s how I’ve been feeling this week.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give each student their 
instructions and a ‘shapes’ chart.
Elvis 
Lizzie and 
Charlie’s 
10-year-old 
son
Lizzie Blake
Charlie Blake 
Lizzie’s husband
Alexis 
Charlie’s 
21-year-old 
daughter
Talia 
Alexis’s 
2-year-old 
daughter
Gloria-Mae 
Lizzie and 
Charlie’s 
18-year-old 
daughter
Jackson 
Gloria-Mae’s 
boyfriend
4B	What if…?
A group board game
Sts move around the board and complete sentences about 
study and work. Copy one worksheet per group of three or 
four Sts. You also need one dice per group and one counter 
per student.
LANGUAGE
Study and work, first and second conditionals
I wouldn’t do an internship unless I wanted to change careers.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters.
 !   If you don’t have a dice, give each group a coin. Sts toss 
the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Each player puts a counter on START.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to throw 
the dice and move their counter. When they land on 
a circle, they must complete the sentence using the 
first or second conditional. Focus on the example on 
the worksheet (If I went to university again, I would study 
history.) to show how Sts should use the conditionals 
correctly. Tell Sts not to worry about making the 
sentences true for themselves – they simply have to make 
grammatically correct sentences.
•	 The rest of the group has to decide if the sentence is 
correct and makes sense. Be the final judge in case of 
dispute. If the sentence is wrong, Sts move back a circle.  
If it is correct, they stay on the circle. 
•	 If a student lands on a circle that another player is on, they 
must make a different sentence.
•	 Sts play the game in their groups. Monitor and correct any 
mistakes. The first student to reach FINISH wins. 
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
5A	Soap opera
A group activity
Sts work in groups to plan the plot for a pilot episode of a 
soap opera. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Television, dramatic present for describing a plot, 
suggesting, agreeing and disagreeing, expressing 
enthusiasm
Why don’t we…?
I agree / don’t agree.
That’s a good idea!
•	 Put Sts in small groups of four and give out one worksheet 
to each student.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to plan the plot for a pilot episode 
of a soap opera. Make sure Sts know what a pilot is here (= 
a single TV programme made to find out if people will like 
it and want to watch further episodes).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 175@@
175
6B	What can I do?
A group speaking activity
Sts ask questions and answer using can, could, and be able to. 
Copy and cut up one worksheet per group of three to five Sts.
LANGUAGE
can, could, and be able to, DIY and repairs
You could ask a friend to help you with the instructions to 
put the furniture together.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three to five and give each group  
a set of cards face down. Demonstrate the activity by 
getting a student to pick a card and read the problem. 
Offer solutions using can or could, e.g. ‘You could try 
cleaning it with bicarbonate of soda…’, etc. Get other Sts  
to offer solutions and get the student who read the card 
to choose his/her favourite solution. 
•	 Sts take turns to pick up the top card and read the 
problem. The person who offers the best solution keeps 
the card. The person with the most cards at the end of  
the game is the winner. Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Get feedback about the most inventive solutions to  
the problems.
 EXTRA IDEA   Sts can do this as a mingle activity instead.  
Copy and cut up one worksheet per 20 Sts and give each 
one a card. Sts mingle and ask their question and answer 
others. At the end, ask them about their favourite answers.
7A	Talking of money…
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts complete questions with particles and then ask each 
other some of the questions. Copy one worksheet per pair 
and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Phrasal verbs
I don’t think children over 18 should live off their parents.
I wouldn’t give away any money because…
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Explain that they have different questions and tell Sts they 
have five minutes to complete the questions individually 
with the correct particle (a preposition or an adverb). 
•	 Check answers by eliciting only the particles, not the 
whole question.
A	 2  down    3  off, back    4  back    5  away    6  out    7  for    
8  off
B	 2  out    3  for    4  back    5  up    6  away    7  after    8  back
•	 Now tell Sts to choose five questions each from their 
worksheet that they would like to ask their partner.
•	 Put Sts face to face if possible and tell them to take turns 
to ask each other their questions. If they don’t understand 
a question, they should ask their partner to repeat it 
slowly. Encourage Sts to react to what their partner says 
and to ask for more information when they can. Monitor 
and correct any mistakes with particles.
 EXTRA IDEA   Fast finishers could ask more questions from  
the worksheet.
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
•	 Give Sts five minutes to write answers in the appropriate 
places in the chart. When they have finished, take back 
the instructions sheet or tell Sts to turn it over.
•	 Now get Sts to swap ‘shapes’ charts. Demonstrate the 
activity by taking a chart from a student and saying OK, 
Circle 1. I think you wrote ‘tennis’ because… Get the student 
to tell you if you guessed correctly or not. Ask follow-up 
questions to continue the conversation.
•	 Make it clear to Sts that they were given different 
instructions, and stress that they can guess the information 
in any order. Sts now do the activity in their pairs. Monitor 
and help where necessary. Stop the activity when most 
Sts have guessed all their partner’s information.
 EXTRA IDEA   While Sts are doing the activity, monitor and 
make notes on any errors they are making with the use of 
the present perfect continuous. Use these for a whole-class 
error correction activity by writing some of the errors on the 
board and asking Sts to correct them in pairs.
6A	What’s the problem?
A pairwork role-play activity
Sts revise the topic of the lesson by taking the parts of waiter 
or waitress / customer and cashier / customer. Copy one pair 
of worksheets (A and B) per pair.
LANGUAGE
At a restaurant
Do you have a reservation?
I’d like to eat in, please.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. Make sure Sts can’t see each other’s 
worksheets. If you have odd numbers of Sts, make one 
pair a three and have two As (or take part in the role-play 
yourself).
•	 Tell Sts they are going to role-play two situations. Tell 
them to read Role-play 1 and prepare the information 
they will need. Encourage the waiters / waitresses and 
customers to be as imaginative and inventive as possible 
in their questions and answers.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to make a few notes about 
what they want to say.
•	 When Sts are ready, tell Sts A to begin the conversation. 
Give Sts time to act out the role-play. Monitor and note 
down anything you might want to draw their attention to 
afterwards.
•	 Repeat the process for Role-play 2. Tell Sts B to begin the 
conversation.
•	 Get feedback from some pairs on what the outcomes of 
the conversations were and if the customers think they 
got good service.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 176@@
176
7B	Talk for 30 seconds
A group board game
Sts move around the board and talk about a topic using 
different verb patterns. Copy one worksheet per group of 
three or four Sts. You also need one dice per group and one 
counter per student.
LANGUAGE
Verb patterns
A person I know who’s very good at telling jokes is my 
brother. He’s really funny.
Something I do to relax is watch series on Netflix.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters.
 !   If you don’t have a dice, give each group a coin. Sts toss 
the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Each player puts a counter on START.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to throw the 
dice and move their counter. When they land on a circle, 
they must talk about that topic, completing it with a 
gerund, infinitive with to, or infinitive without to. Focus on 
the example on the worksheet (A time I did something that 
someone told me not to do, was when my friend Sarah told 
me not to tell another friend…) to show how Sts should use 
the correct verb pattern as they speak. If the other Sts hear 
the speaker use an incorrect verb pattern, they should try 
to correct it. Be the final judge in case of dispute. 
•	 If the sentence is wrong, Sts move back a circle. If it is 
correct, they stay on the circle.
•	 Sts play the game in their groups. Monitor and correct any 
mistakes. The first student to reach FINISH wins.
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
8A	Do it yourself or have it done?
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts talk about things they do or have done for them. Copy 
one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
have something done
I prefer having things repaired. I hate repairing things in  
my house.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets.
•	 Explain to Sts that they are going to discuss some topics 
in pairs, saying whether they do the things themselves, or 
have them done for them. 
•	 Allow a minute for Sts to read through the list of topics 
with the two options. Then focus on the example.  
Role-play this conversation with a student as a 
demonstration of the activity.
•	 Remind Sts that they will need to give reasons for their 
answers and that their partners should ask for more 
information. People answering a question can use What 
about you?
•	 In their pairs, Sts take turns to choose a topic from the 
list and ask questions about which option their partner 
prefers or normally does and why. Monitor and correct  
any mistakes.
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
8B	The History Quiz
A pairwork quiz
Sts revise active / passive verb forms by completing 
questions in a quiz. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut  
into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Passive and active in question forms
Why did the British royal family change its name in 1917?
The sale of what was banned in the USA in January 1920?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Focus on a. Tell Sts to complete the questions using the 
verb in brackets in the correct form (past simple active or 
passive). Tell them not to discuss the answers at this stage.
•	 Check answers by eliciting only the missing verbs, NOT 
the whole question.
A	 1  did, take    2  were, killed    3  was given    
4  was assassinated    5  were, used    6  did, change    
7  was destroyed    8  wrote
B	 1  was banned    2  were, allowed    3  attacked    
4  was, made    5  invented    6  was, built    
7  was, introduced    8  appeared
•	 Now focus on b and tell Sts that the correct answers are 
in bold. Sts A read their questions to Sts B with the three 
options. Sts B choose an option and Sts A circle their 
answer. Then Sts swap roles.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to add up their partner’s 
score. Each correct answer is worth one point. 
•	 Sts swap worksheets so that they can see their score and 
what questions they got wrong. The student with more 
points wins.
•	 Get some quick feedback from pairs to find out which 
facts were surprising / new to them. Find out if any Sts got 
all the answers correct.
9A	Find the pair
A group card game
Sts revise reported speech by playing a card game in small 
groups. Copy one worksheet per group of four Sts and cut 
up into cards.
LANGUAGE
Direct speech / reported speech
‘Do you like your present?’ she asked.
She asked me if I liked my present.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four and give each group one set of 
cards divided into the 12 large and 12 small rectangles.
 !   This activity can also be played in pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 177@@
177
•	 Show Sts how to play the game by pointing out that 
there are two types of card (two different sizes). Shuffle 
the cards and arrange them one by one, face down on 
your table in the two groups: the sentences in direct 
speech (small rectangles) on the left and the sentences 
in reported speech (large rectangles) on the right. Ask a 
student to turn over a direct speech card and read out 
what it says  (e.g. ‘Do you like your present?’ she asked.). 
Then elicit from the student the sentence in reported 
speech (e.g. She asked me if I liked my present.). Now ask 
the student to try to find this sentence in the reported 
speech group by turning over one card. If he / she finds 
the corresponding sentence, he / she keeps both cards 
and has another turn. If not, he / she must put the cards 
back in the place where they were, and another student 
has a turn.
•	 Highlight that:
	 –  Sts have to say what they think the reported speech 
card will say before they try to find it.
	 –  Sts must always put the cards back in the same place, 
unless they get a pair, in which case they keep both cards.
	 –  this is a memory game, so Sts must watch the cards 
other Sts turn over and try to remember where the 
cards are so they can try and find the matching pair.
•	 Monitor and ensure that Sts are doing the activity 
correctly. Stop after a group has no cards remaining, or 
after time is up, e.g. after ten minutes.
•	 Get feedback from each group (or pair) to find out who 
has won / got the most pairs.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one worksheet per pair and 
fold into two sections down the centre line. Put Sts in pairs. 
Sts take turns to read the direct speech and to try to say / 
write the reported speech. When Sts have finished, ask them 
to check answers on the reported speech side of the sheet.  
Get feedback from each pair to find out who got most 
answers correct.
9B	What had happened?
A group writing activity
Sts revise the third conditional and the past perfect by 
writing group stories. Copy one worksheet per group of 
eight Sts and cut up into cards.
LANGUAGE
Third conditional, other uses of the past perfect
Jamie would never have married Nicola if he had known 
her terrible secret.
When Sheila opened the door, she saw that someone had 
cleaned her house.
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Then put four pairs together in a group. 
Give each group a set of cards, face down.
•	 Explain that Sts are going to write some short stories in 
their groups, each pair of Sts contributing a sentence to 
each story. Tell each pair to take a card. Set a time limit, 
e.g. two minutes, for Sts to complete the first sentence on 
their card. When the time is up, say ‘Stop’, and tell Sts to 
pass their card to the pair on their left. Now tell Sts, in their 
pairs, to read the first sentence of the new story passed to 
them and add a second sentence. Monitor and check Sts 
are using tenses correctly.
•	 Repeat the process for the third sentence. When time is 
up and Sts have passed on their story, tell Sts that now 
they have to finish the story with their fourth sentence.
•	 Get Sts to read out their stories in their groups and decide 
which one they like best.
•	 If there’s time, get Sts to repeat the process with the 
remaining cards.
•	 Finally get each group to read out their best story to the 
class. You could have a class vote on the best stories.
10A	What’s the question?
A group card game
Sts revise asking questions with forms of be, do, and have 
as auxiliary and main verbs by playing a card game in small 
groups. Copy one worksheet per group of four Sts and cut 
up into cards.
LANGUAGE
be, do, and have: auxiliary and main verbs
Where are you going on your next holiday?
What have you bought online recently?
•	 Put Sts in groups of four and give each group a set of cards.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts take turns to pick up 
a card, complete the questions with a form of be, do, or 
have, and then answer the questions. Demonstrate the 
activity by picking up a card. Write the prompts on the 
board and elicit the complete questions from students. 
Answer the questions yourself and provide as much 
information as you can. 
•	 Sts must try and ask the questions correctly. If the other 
students hear the speaker use an incorrect verb or verb 
form, they should try to correct it. 
•	 Encourage Sts to ask for more information. Sts who are 
answering can ask What about you?
•	 Sts play the game in their groups. Monitor and correct  
any mistakes.
What is your favourite name? What do you like about it?
What colour do you almost never wear, or use in your house? 
Why do you think you dislike it?
Where are you going on your next holiday? Why have you 
chosen that place?
What have you bought online recently? Why did you buy it?
What were you like ten years ago? How have you changed 
since then?
What is your favourite photo of yourself? What do you like 
about it?
What are some things that people could do to help reduce 
waste? How do you think they would help?
What would your ideal job be? Why?
Do you prefer watching films at home or at the cinema? Why?
Have you ever thought of living in the countryside? Why (not)?
Do you like eating out? What is the best restaurant you have 
ever been to?
What things in your house have you mended? Do you think 
you are good at DIY? Why (not)?
What would you do if you had one million pounds? Would 
you leave your job or stop your studies? Why (not)?
Did you go out or stay in last New Year’s Eve? What did you do? 
When did you last have your hair cut? Do you like it? Why (not)? 
How many different historical sites in your local area have you 
been to? Which is your favourite? Why?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 178@@
178
Do you usually forget to take things with you when you leave 
home (keys, phone)? What do you do to help you remember?
What is the best wedding you have ever been to? What was 
special about it?
What do you think is the best thing about the USA? And the 
worst?
Have you ever taken any official English exams? Was it a good 
experience? Why (not)?
•	 The activity ends when the group runs out of cards.
•	 Get feedback on some of the more interesting answers.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage the student who is answering 
the questions to give extra information and the other Sts in 
the group to ask follow-up questions as appropriate.
10B	Speaking exam
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts practise common speaking exam tasks. Copy one 
worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Answering personal questions, describing photos,  
a discussion, general revision and exam practice
My full name is Maria Gonzalez.
In my photo there’s a…
I like visiting museums. How about you?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, face to face if possible, and 
give out the worksheets. You could explain that the 
activity they are going to do is similar to the Cambridge 
Preliminary exam.
•	 Focus on 1. Sts A ask Sts B their five questions. Remind Sts 
B to give as much information as they can. Set a time limit, 
e.g. three minutes. Then Sts swap roles.
•	 Focus on 2. Sts A describe their photo. Sts B listen. Set a 
time limit, e.g. two minutes. Then Sts swap roles. At the 
end, they compare the two photos.
•	 Finally, focus on 3. Sts interact by discussing the topics. 
Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes. Remind them to ask 
questions for more information.
 EXTRA IDEA   Monitor for any grammar or vocabulary errors 
during the activity. Use them at the end of the lesson to do  
a whole-class error correction activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 179@@
179
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1A  COMMUNICATIVE  Talk for a minute
The best cook I know is my  
mum. She cooks dinner every 
day, and most of her dishes are 
fantastic, especially her  
desserts – I love them!
a TV series 
or film  
you love
your  
parents
your 
favourite 
relative
the best 
cook you 
know
your 
favourite 
month / 
season
the first 
group or 
singer you 
saw live
one of your 
best friends
a town or 
city you 
really like
animals / 
insects you’re 
afraid of
a sport you 
play or like 
watching
your first 
English 
teacher
an app you 
use a lot
an actor 
you like
a brand you 
use a lot
a photo 
you took 
recently
a gadget 
you use all 
the time
a place 
you want 
to go to
a family 
member you 
don’t see 
very often
a person you 
call or message 
when you have 
a problem
a name you 
really like
START
FINISH
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
20
19
18
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 180@@
180
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1B  COMMUNICATIVE  Good, better, the best
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the questions with the correct comparative form (+ than if necessary) or the + superlative 
form. Use the adjective in brackets.
 a
 	
Complete the questions with the correct comparative form (+ than if necessary) or the + superlative 
form. Use the adjective in brackets.
 a
	
Ask B your questions. Ask for more information. Then answer B’s questions.
 b
	
Answer A’s questions. Then ask A your questions. Ask for more information.
 b
1	 Do you think that a holiday with your friends is more enjoyable than one 
with your family? (enjoyable)
2	 What’s 
 meal you’ve had recently? (delicious)
3	 Are you 
 during the week or at weekends? (busy)
4	 Who’s 
 person you know? (old)
5	 Are you 
 in the mornings or at night? (creative)
6	 What’s 
 brand and model of phone you’ve ever 
had? (good)
7	 Who’s 
 person in your family? (lazy)
8	 When you feel stressed, what do you do to feel 
 ? 
(calm)
9	 What’s 
 you’ve ever travelled? (far)
 
10	 If you wanted to get 
 you are now, what should 
you do? (fit)
1	 What’s the most beautiful country you’ve ever visited? (beautiful)
2	 Which do you think is 
 – a yellow bedroom or a 
black bedroom? (good)
3	 Do you think buying something online is always 
 
buying it from a shop? (cheap)
4	 Which person are you 
 to in your family? (close)
5	 How important is it to you to have 
 gadgets? (late)
6	 Are you 
 in the mornings or in the evenings? 
(active)
7	 Who’s 
 sportsperson in your country? (great)
8	 Apart from English, what would be 
 language for 
you to learn? (useful)
9	 What do you think is 
 form of transport? (safe)
 
10	 Do you think vegetarians are 
 people who eat 
meat? (healthy)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 181@@
181
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2A  COMMUNICATIVE  Ask me a question
 	
Complete the questions with the present simple or continuous form of the verbs in brackets.
 a
	
Choose eight questions to ask your partner.
 b
1	 How often do you go to the hairdresser’s? And to the 
dentist’s? (go)
2	 Are you happy with your lifestyle or 
 you 
 it could be healthier? (think)
3	 Why exactly 
 you 
 English? 
(learn)
4	 
 anybody in your family 
 a 
foreign language really well? (speak)
5	 
 you 
 away this weekend? (go)
6	 
 anyone you know 
 for a job at 
the moment? (look)
7	 
 you 
 of doing any official 
English exams in the near future? (think)
8	 
 you usually 
 seeing films 
which are dubbed, or films which are subtitled? (prefer)
9	 What 
 your best friend 
 like? 
(look)
 
10	 What book 
 you 
 at the 
moment? (read)
 
11	 What 
 you 
 tomorrow night? 
(do)
 
12	 What clubs, organizations, or charities 
 you 
 to? (belong)
 
13	 What time 
 you usually 
 work 
or school in the morning? (start)
 
14	 What kind of things 
 you 
 your 
phone for? (use)
 
15	 
 you 
 anybody who 
 
 married soon? (know, get)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 182@@
182
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  Describe and draw
Student A
 	
Look at your picture.
	
Describe it to B. Answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
 	
Listen to B’s description of a picture and draw it. Ask questions if you need to.
 c
	
Now compare your drawing to B’s picture. Are there any differences?
 d
Draw
Draw
Describe
Describe
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 183@@
183
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  Describe and draw
Student B
 	
Look at your picture.
	
Listen to A’s description of a picture and draw it. Ask questions if you need to.
 a
 b
 	
Now compare your drawing to A’s picture. Are there any differences?
	
Describe your picture to A. Answer A’s questions.
 c
 d
Describe
Draw
Draw
Describe
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 184@@
184
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3A  COMMUNICATIVE  When you were younger
 	
Tick three topics in each group that you can talk about. Write notes for each topic you’ve ticked.
	
Compare with a partner. Look at the topics you’ve ticked. Take turns to tell each other about them.
 a
 b
I’m going to tell you 
about some food I used 
to love eating…
Past habits
Past events
a kind of food you 
used to love eating
the first trip you 
went on without 
your family
a group or singer 
you used to like, but 
don’t any more
an embarrassing 
situation you  
once had
a TV programme 
you used to love 
watching
a childhood  
holiday you will 
always remember
what you used to 
want to be when  
you were little
a time when you  
lost something 
important 
a place you used  
to love going to
a memorable 
celebration you  
once had
a game you used  
to play a lot
a really nice present 
you once received
something naughty 
you used to do
the first film you 
saw in a cinema
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 185@@
185
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3B  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s the preposition?
 	
Look at the questions. Write the missing preposition for each box.
	
Take turns to choose one of the boxes and ask your partner all the questions in it.
 a
 b
•	If you had to speak in front 
 a large 
audience, how would you feel?
•	Do you know anyone who has a phobia, 
or is really afraid 
 something?
•	When was the last time you felt proud 
 something you had done?
•	Are there any things in your home that 
you’re really tired 
 ?
of
•	What sports clubs or organizations do / did 
you belong 
 ?
•	Is there anyone who you talk 
 every day, 
in person or on the phone? Who is it?
•	What are you most looking forward 
 
this year?
•	What are the advantages of being married 
 someone from another country?
•	Can people still be friends if they don’t 
agree 
 each other about politics?
•	Do you feel pleased 
 your progress 
in English this term?
•	What kind of photos do you share 
 
friends on social media?
•	Have you ever been given a present that 
you were really disappointed 
 ?
•	How do you feel about waiting 
 people 
when they’re late?
•	Should a man pay 
 a woman’s meal on a 
first date?
•	Are you (or is anyone you know) applying 
 
a job or course at the moment?
•	Who’s usually responsible 
 cooking dinner 
in your house?
•	What period of history are you most interested 
 ?
•	Do you believe 
 love at first sight?  
Why (not)?
•	When you arrive 
 a new city or country, 
what’s the first thing you usually try to find out?
•	What things do you normally carry 
 your 
bag or wallet?
•	Who can you rely 
 when you have a 
problem? Can they rely 
 you, too?
•	What do you always have 
 your desk 
at home?
•	Would you prefer to live 
 the ground 
floor or 
 the top floor of a flat?
•	What kind of entertainment do you spend 
most money 
 ?
•	What sport or activity would you like to be really good 
 ?
•	Why do you think some people are bad 
 learning languages?
•	What’s the first thing you do when you arrive 
 a nice hotel?
•	Do you like telling jokes? Do people laugh 
 the jokes you tell?
•	What are some of the typical things couples argue 
 ?
•	What would you tell visitors 
 before they visit your city or country?
•	Is there anything you always worry 
 before or during a trip? What?
•	When you were little, did you get excited 
 your birthday? How did you use to celebrate it?
1
3
6
4
7
8
5
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 186@@
186
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4A  COMMUNICATIVE  The Green Quiz
Student A
Student B
1	 The average person in the UK throws away their 
body weight in rubbish every…
	
a	 5–6 weeks.
	
b	 7–8 weeks.
	
c	 9–10 weeks.
2	 Scientists predict that by the year 2100, 
temperatures will be…
	
a	 the same as today.
	
b	 between 1.5 and 3.2°C higher.
	
c	 between 3.2 and 5.9°C higher.
3	 How many tonnes of plastic end up in the ocean 
every year?
	
a	 4 million
	
b	 12 million
	
c	 20 million
4	 It’s predicted that between 2030 and 2050, 
250,000 people will die each year because of…
	
a	 air pollution.
	
b	 climate change.
	
c	 landfill sites.
5	 If you’re going out for the night, it’s less 
wasteful to…
	
a	 turn the lights off.
	
b	 leave the lights on.
	
c	 do nothing. It makes no difference.
6	 How long will it take most plastics to 
decompose?
	
a	 200 years.
	
b	 300 years.
	
c	 More than 400 years.
7	 On the motorway, you’ll use less fuel if you…
	
a	 drive at the speed limit.
	
b	 drive at an average speed of 55–60 miles 
per hour.
	
c	 drive really slowly.
8	 Which of these things can’t be recycled?
	
a	 computers
	
b	 paint
	
c	 used pizza boxes
9	 What percentage of all plastics ever produced 
have been recycled?
	
a	 9%
	
b	 17%
	
c	 22%
 
10	 Which country recycles  
the most?
	
a	 the USA
	
b	 Germany
	
c	 Sweden
1	 In which of these products can you find plastic?
	
a	 a teabag
	
b	 a wine bottle
	
c	 a bar of soap
2	 If you throw a pair of shoes away, how long will it 
take for them to decompose?
	
a	 30 years
	
b	 40 years
	
c	 50 years
3	 Scientists think that by the year 2100, sea levels 
will rise by…
	
a	 25 cm.
	
b	 45 cm.
	
c	 65 cm.
4	 By what year do experts think there will be more 
kilos of plastic than fish in the ocean?
	
a	 2030
	
b	 2050
	
c	 2070
5	 Scientists predict that by the year 2070, winter 
rainfall in parts of the UK will increase by…
	
a	 up to 20%.
	
b	 up to 35%.
	
c	 up to 50%.
6	 What percentage of plastic bottles  
in the UK gets recycled?
	
a	 around 50%
	
b	 around 60%
	
c	 around 70%
7	 The UK government hopes that all new  
cars will be electric by the year…
	
a	 2040.
	
b	 2045.
	
c	 2050.
8	 How many single-use plastic bottles are used in 
the UK every day?
	
a	 21.5 million
	
b	 38.5 million
	
c	 50.5 million
9	 How many tonnes of food waste does the UK 
send to landfill sites every year?
	
a	 about 5.3 million tonnes
	
b	 about 6.3 million tonnes
	
c	 about 7.3 million tonnes
 
10	 How much domestic waste in the UK is recycled?
	
a	 about 35%
	
b	 about 45%
	
c	 about 55%
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 187@@
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4B  COMMUNICATIVE  What if…?
If I had a 
problem with 
someone at 
work, I…
More people 
would work 
part-time if…
If my boss 
asks me to do 
a webinar, I…
If I received 
an interesting 
job offer, I…
I’d get stressed 
at a job 
interview if…
If I did a  
PhD, I…
If you want 
a better job, 
you…
You should 
get an English 
qualification 
if…
More people 
would go to 
university if…
Unless  
they offer  
me more 
money, I…
I’ll update my 
CV if…
I wouldn’t sign 
a contract if…
If I had more 
qualifications, I…
I might leave 
my job if…
If I went on 
a training 
course, I…
I’ll work 
overtime if…
If a  
colleague 
asks for my 
help, I…
I wouldn’t  
do an internship 
unless…
START
FINISH
If I went  
to university 
(again), I…
1
2
19
3
18
4
17
7
14
8
13
9
12
10
11
5
16
6
15
If I had 
more work 
experience, 
I…
20
If I went to university again, 
I would study history.
What if…?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 188@@
188
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5A  COMMUNICATIVE  Soap opera
 	
Read the information about the characters. In groups, draw a family tree showing the relationship 
between the people.
	
An independent television company is planning to make a one-hour pilot for a soap opera. If 
it’s successful, a series will be made. The television company wants your group to present a plot 
outline for the pilot, based on the descriptions of the people you’ve just read about.
	
The soap opera will begin on Lizzie’s 45th birthday. She has organized a big dinner and she wants 
everyone to be there. In your group, discuss:
	
•	the relationship between the people.
	
•	incidents that might happen before, during, and after the dinner.
 	
Now plan your presentation. Make notes about what each person in your group is going to say.
	
Now, with your group, explain your plot for the pilot to the class, and listen to other groups’ plans. 
Which pilot do you think is the best?
 a
 b
 c
 d
Charlie Blake is Lizzie’s 
45-year-old husband. He’s 
being investigated for 
fraud at the moment. He’s 
only interested in himself 
and making ‘fast’ money. 
He has never worked and 
was married before.
Talia is Alexis’s 
two-year-old 
daughter.
Gloria-Mae is Lizzie and 
Charlie’s 18-year-old 
daughter. She doesn’t get on 
with Alexis. She’s studying 
computing at college. She’s 
engaged to Jackson and is 
desperate to get married 
and leave home as soon as 
possible.
Elvis is Lizzie and Charlie’s 
10-year-old son. He’s 
jealous of Talia because 
he thinks she gets all 
the attention. He hates 
Jackson and would like him 
to leave the house forever.
Simon works for Lizzie. He 
repairs anything that is 
broken in her properties. He 
went to the same school 
as Alexis and Gloria-Mae. 
He’s very good friends with 
Gloria-Mae, but he never 
speaks to Alexis.
Lizzie Blake is the 
44-year-old ‘head’ of 
the family. She has 
several properties she 
rents out and so she 
doesn’t have to work. 
She will protect her 
family at all costs.
Alexis is Charlie’s 21-year-old daughter 
from a previous marriage. She had a 
baby at the age of 19 and has always 
refused to say who her daughter’s 
father is. She has always had a bad 
relationship with Lizzie. She and Talia 
live with Lizzie and Charlie. She works 
as a PA to a fashion designer.
Lizzie
Charlie
Alexis
Talia
Elvis
Simon
Gloria-Mae
Jackson is Gloria-Mae’s 
boyfriend. He lives with her 
and the rest of her family. 
He’s unemployed, so he 
volunteered to look after 
Talia while Alexis is at work. 
He’s engaged to Gloria-Mae, 
but he’s not in love with her. 
He’s attracted to Alexis!
Jackson
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 189@@
189
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Why did you write…?
 	
Read your instructions and write your answers in shapes 1–10 in the chart.
In circle 1, write the name of a sport / activity you’ve been doing a lot recently.
In triangle 2, write an adjective which describes how you’ve been feeling this week.
In square 3, write the name of a person who you’ve been talking to a lot recently.
In circle 4, write how long you’ve been living in your present house or flat.
In triangle 5, write the name of a TV series you’ve been watching since it started.
In square 6, write the name of a social media website or app you’ve been using for a long time, e.g. Facebook.
In circle 7, write the name of some food you’ve been eating a lot recently.
In triangle 8, write the time you’ve been going to bed this week.
In square 9, write something you’ve been doing to improve your English recently.
In circle 10, write the name of a book you’ve been reading, but haven’t finished yet.
	
Swap charts with B. Try to guess what B’s answers are about. Ask for more information.
OK, circle 1. I think you wrote ‘Coke’ because it’s something you drink a lot. 
	
No. It’s a drink I’ve been trying to cut down on.
How long have you been trying to cut down?
 	
Now listen to B’s guesses about your answers. Tell B if they’re right or wrong and answer his / her 
questions.
 a
 b
 c
4
1
10
7
9
6
3
2
5
8
Why did  
you write…?
Student A
  instructions
Student A
  chart
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 190@@
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Why did you write…?
 	
Read your instructions and write your answers in shapes 1–10 in the chart.
In circle 1, write the name of a food / drink you’ve been trying to cut down on.
In triangle 2, write the name of someone who’s been helping you a lot this year.
In square 3, write an activity you’ve been thinking of trying for a long time.
In circle 4, write the name of a song that you’ve been listening to a lot recently.
In triangle 5, write the name of a sports team you’ve been following since you were young.
In square 6, write the number of years you’ve been studying English.
In circle 7, write the name of something you’ve been thinking of buying.
In triangle 8, write the name of a TV programme you’ve been watching a lot recently.
In square 9, write a holiday you’ve been hoping / planning to go on for a long time.
In circle 10, write the name of a restaurant or bar you’ve been going to for a long time.
	
Swap charts with A. Listen to A’s guesses about your answers. Tell A if they’re right or wrong and 
answer his / her questions.
 	
Now try to guess what A’s answers are about. Ask for more information.
OK, circle 1. I think you wrote ‘tennis’ because it’s a sport you’ve been doing for a long time. 
	
Close! It’s a sport I’ve been doing a lot recently.
How long have you been playing?
 a
 b
 c
4
1
10
7
9
6
3
2
5
8
Why did  
you write…?
Student B
  instructions
Student B
  chart
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 191@@
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s the problem?
Student A
 	
Role-play 1  You’re a waiter / waitress in a restaurant. B is a customer.
Begin the role-play. B will start the conversation.
Begin the role-play. You start the conversation: Good evening. How can I help you?
 	
Role-play 2  You’re a customer. B works in a fast food restaurant.
You’re having a terrible day. Your boss shouted at you 
at work, you have a really important project that you 
need to finish today, and you left your lunch at home. 
You only have 20 minutes for lunch, so you rush to the 
fast food restaurant right next to your office. When 
you get there, there’s a long queue. By the time you 
are served, you only have 10 minutes for lunch!
•	 You’re a vegetarian, so you order the vegetarian 
burger. Make sure it isn’t cooked with the meat 
burgers. You want to eat in because you want a 
break from the office.
•	 When B asks you if you want anything else, ask for 
a Diet Coke (you don’t like any other soft drinks) and 
some chips. Tell B to make sure he / she is charging 
you for a meal deal and not the separate items.
•	 Tell B you’ll never come to the restaurant again if you 
don’t get what you ordered quickly. You really need 
to be back at work in 10 minutes, so you’ll take the 
food away if you have to.
It’s Saturday night and you think that you’re going to be very busy. This is good because the restaurant hasn’t 
been very full recently. If the restaurant closes, you’ll lose your job and so you always do everything you can 
to keep your customers happy and get good tips. You smile a lot, 
listen, and remember that the customer is always right! It’s 8.20 in 
the evening and B walks into the restaurant with his / her partner.
•	 Greet B. Ask for his / her name, if he / she has a reservation, 
and at what time.
•	 The only table that you have left is one at the back of the 
restaurant in a corner next to the kitchen. Offer it to B. Try 
to make it sound nice (it’s intimate, dark, quiet, perfect for a 
romantic evening).
•	 A short time later B calls you back to the table. He / She has 
several problems. Try to deal with them politely. You don’t want 
B to leave. However, bear in mind the following:
–	 There are no other free tables, though there should be one in 
30 minutes.
–	 The kitchen is very busy because one of the chefs is ill, and B 
arrived at the same time as a lot of other customers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 192@@
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s the problem?
Student B
 	
Role-play 1  You’re a customer in a restaurant. A is a waiter / waitress.
Begin the role-play. You start the conversation: Hello. How can I help you today?
Begin the role-play. A will start the conversation.
 	
Role-play 2  You work in a fast food restaurant. A is a customer.
You’re excited because you’re on a first date and you’ve organized the perfect evening, so nothing could go 
wrong… or could it? You arrive at the restaurant at 8.20.
•	 Ask for your table. Your booking was for 8 p.m. for a 
table near the window and you know that you’re only 
20 minutes late.
•	 You are given another table. After a few minutes, you 
decide you’re not happy because:
–	 the table you’ve got is next to the kitchen, which 
means it’s noisy and hot.
–	 you need to get your food quickly, because you’re 
going to a nearby cinema after dinner. The film 
starts at 9.30. The waiter hasn’t even taken your 
order yet!
•	 Call A and ask him / her to deal with your problems. 
You don’t really want to leave, because it’s Saturday 
night and you probably wouldn’t find anywhere else, 
but you want a good explanation and solution.
It’s your first day in this job. You’ve been training with 
the manager all morning and he’s just left you on your 
own for the first time. You don’t really know all the 
burger options yet. You really want to do well in this 
job because you need the money. A comes to your till.
•	 Greet A. Ask him / her what he / she wants to eat 
and if it is to eat in or take away.
•	 You don’t think the vegetarian burger is cooked with 
the meat, but you’re not sure.
•	 Ask politely if he / she wants anything else. The till 
automatically charges customers ordering a burger, 
chips, and a soft drink for a meal deal.
•	 You don’t have any Diet Coke at the moment. Try 
to convince A to have a different soft drink (make 
suggestions). If he / she doesn’t have a drink, 
you will have to charge for the burger and chips 
separately and it will be more expensive.
•	 The kitchen is very busy and A is getting impatient. 
Try to find a solution. You don’t want to lose  
a customer!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 193@@
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6B  COMMUNICATIVE  What can I do?
I’ve spilt some coffee 
on my friend’s new 
carpet and I can’t 
get it out. I know 
she’s going to be 
really angry with me. 
What can I do?
I bought a new 
table. It comes 
already assembled, 
but now I can’t get 
it up the stairs to my 
flat! What can I do?
I bought some flat-
pack furniture, but 
I don’t understand 
the instructions and 
can’t put it together. 
What can I do?
I have a red spot on 
my nose and I have 
a really important 
meeting today. 
What can I do?
There’s a hole in 
my favourite work 
trousers. They’re 
grey and they’re 
very delicate.  
What can I do?
I need to change 
a lightbulb in my 
bathroom, but it’s 
quite high up and I 
don’t have a ladder. 
What can I do?
When I was opening 
the door to my flat, 
the key broke inside 
the lock. I can’t get it 
out. What can I do?
It’s really cold and 
my car won’t start. 
What can I do?
I dropped my 
earring into the sink 
and it’s gone down 
the plughole. What 
can I do?
My brother kicked 
the door and now 
there’s a hole in it. 
Our parents aren’t 
home. What can  
we do?
My watch has 
stopped working. 
What can I do?
I borrowed a very 
old, valuable book 
from a friend and 
then I pulled one  
of the pages out. 
What can I do?
My neighbours can 
see into my garden. 
I really want to be 
able to spend time 
outside, but I don’t 
want my neighbours 
to see everything I 
do. What can I do?
My room always 
looks untidy because 
I have a lot of 
clothes and books 
and I only have one 
shelf and a small 
wardrobe. What can 
I do?
I put up a painting 
on my wall, but it 
keeps falling down. 
I’m afraid it will 
break. What can  
I do?
I have a lot of 
charging cables 
in my drawer and 
they’re always in a 
mess – I can never 
find the one I want. 
What can I do?
I hit my partner’s car 
when I parked next 
to it. He / She will 
be upset when he /  
she sees it! What 
can I do?
One of the legs on 
my bed broke. I tried 
to fix it, but it broke 
again. It’s late and all 
the shops are closed. 
What can I do?
I took apart my 
bookshelf and I 
painted it. Now I’m 
putting it together 
again, but I’ve lost 
one of the screws! 
What can I do?
I want to make 
something for 
my sister for her 
birthday. I have some 
wood, screws, a drill, 
nails, and a hammer. 
What can I do?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 194@@
194
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  Talking of money…
Student A
 	
Complete the questions with the correct particle.
1	 When you go shopping, do you just buy the things on your list, or do you like to look round for other 
things you might want to buy?
2	 Are any kinds of businesses closing 
 in the area where you live?
3	 Would you prefer to get a loan that you have to pay 
 quickly, or one that you’ll have  
for many years? Why?
4	 If you were given too much change in a shop or restaurant, would you give it 
 or 
keep it?
5	 If you won a lot of money, would you give any 
 ? Who to?
6	 Do you prefer taking money 
 of a cash machine in the street or inside the bank? Why?
7	 If you asked 
 the bill in a bar or restaurant and found you didn’t have enough money, 
what would you do? 
8	 Do you think it’s OK for children over 18 to live 
 their parents, or do you think they 
should get a job? Why?
	
Choose five questions to ask your partner.
 a
 b
 	
Complete the questions with the correct particle.
1	 Do you think that the minimum wage in your country is enough to live on ?
2	 When you take someone 
 for dinner, do you usually pay for them or do you  
pay separately?
3	 When you go shopping, do you look 
 special offers in shops and supermarkets?
4	 Has anyone ever stolen your purse or wallet? Did you get it 
 ?
5	 Are there any activities you’d like to take 
 but can’t afford? 
6	 If you saw someone being robbed, would you try to help, or run 
 ?
7	 When it comes to managing your money, do you take 
 someone in your family? 
8	 What do you do if you lend money to someone and they don’t pay you 
 ?
	
Choose five questions to ask your partner.
 a
 b
Student B
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  Talking of money…
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 195@@
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7B  COMMUNICATIVE  Talk for 30 seconds
A time I did something  
that someone told me not to do, 
was when my friend Sarah told me 
not to tell another friend, Lucy, that 
we were going to a party. I felt really 
bad, so I told Lucy and they both  
got really angry!
1
2
3
4
7
8
10
11
12
13
15
16
17
18
20
START
a time you  
did something 
that someone  
told you not 
 
(DO)
a café you 
love 
 to 
(GO)
something  
you shouldn’t 
 about with 
your colleagues 
(TALK)
a place your 
parents made 
you 
  
(VISIT)
something  
you do 
  
(RELAX)
a job around  
the house  
you’ve finished 
 recently 
(DO)
a person  
you know who’s 
very good at 
 jokes 
(TELL)
something  
a family member 
has persuaded 
you 
  
(DO)
something  
you can’t 
imagine 
 
without 
(LIVE)
a person  
you’re looking 
forward to  
 soon 
(SEE)
a TV  
programme 
you refuse 
  
(WATCH)
something 
you’ve always 
wanted 
 
(HAVE)
a sport you  
hate 
  
(WATCH)
an activity  
you started 
 years ago  
(DO)
a drink you 
agreed 
 
and hated  
(TRY)
something  
you promised 
 but  
never did  
(DO)
6
FINISH
Talk for  
30 seconds 
about…
14
an activity  
you really  
miss 
  
(DO)
9
a film  
everybody  
needs 
  
(WATCH)
5
a kind of  
food you really 
enjoy 
  
(EAT)
19
a person you 
can always 
 to 
(TALK)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 196@@
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8A  COMMUNICATIVE  Do it yourself or have it done?
Which do you prefer, taking photos or having your photo taken? 
	
I prefer taking photos. I hate having my photo taken! Which do you normally do?
I normally take photos on my phone, of my friends and me. But I never take selfies.
	
taking photos	
OR	
having your photo taken
	
cutting your hair yourself	
OR	
having your hair cut
	
repairing things in your house or flat	
OR	
having things repaired
	
cooking a meal for someone else	
OR	
having a meal cooked for you
	 washing and ironing your own clothes	
OR	
having your clothes washed and ironed
	
taking your shopping home yourself	
OR	
having your shopping delivered
	
cleaning your house or flat	
OR	
having your house or flat cleaned
	
doing your nails yourself	
OR	
having your nails done
	
decorating your house or flat	
OR	
having your house or flat decorated
	
washing your car	
OR	
having your car washed
	
going out to a restaurant	
OR	
having a takeaway delivered
	
organizing a holiday	
OR	
having a holiday organized for you
	
tidying your room	
OR	
having your room tidied
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 197@@
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  The History Quiz
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the questions with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: active or passive.
1	 In which city 
 the second Olympic Games of the modern era 
 
place in 1900? (take)
	
a  Athens  b  Paris  c  Rome
2	 In what year 
 Tsar Nicholas II and his family 
 by the Bolsheviks? (kill)
	
a  1916  b  1917  c  1918
3	 In 1922, a 14-year-old boy 
 the first human experimental dose of what? (give)
	
a  penicillin  b  insulin  c  paracetamol
4	 Which famous American 
 on 4th April 1968? (assassinate)
	
a  Martin Luther King  b  Bobby Kennedy  c  Malcolm X
5	 When 
 bar codes first 
? (use)
	
a  the 1960s  b  the 1970s  c  the 1980s
6	 Why 
 the British royal family 
 its name from ‘Saxe-Coburg and 
Gotha’ to ‘Windsor’ in 1917? (change)
	
a  because it sounded too German  b  because it was too long  
c  because it was too difficult to pronounce
7	 Which Italian city 
 when a volcano erupted in 79 AD? (destroy)
	
a  Rome  b  Naples  c  Pompeii
8	 Who 
 his thoughts in a ‘Little Red Book’? (write)
	
a  Lenin  b  Mao Zedong  c  Gandhi
	
Ask your partner the questions.
 a
 b
 	
Complete the questions with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: active or passive.
1	 The sale of what 
 in the USA in January 1920? (ban)
	
a  cigarettes  b  tobacco  c  alcohol
2	 What 
 Swiss women finally 
 to do in 1971? (allow)
	
a  get a divorce  b  vote in national elections  c  open a bank account
3	 Who 
 the ancient city of Troy, according to Homer? (attack)
	
a  the Greeks  b  the Egyptians  c  the Persians
4	 When 
 the first Hollywood film 
? (make)
	
a  1910  b  1920  c  1930
5	 Who 
 champagne in 1697? (invent)
	
a  Monsieur Moët  b  Señor Freixenet  c  Dom Perignon
6	 Who was the American president when the Berlin Wall 
 first 
 in 
1961? (build)
	
a  Bill Clinton  b  Richard Nixon  c  John F Kennedy
7	 When 
 the electric washing machine 
? (introduce)
	
a  1908  b  1918  c  1928
8	 Which first 
 in 2006? (appear)
	
a  tablets  b  blu-ray discs  c  smartphones
	
Ask your partner the questions.
 a
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 198@@
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
9A  COMMUNICATIVE  Find the pair
‘Do you like your present?’  
she asked.
She asked me if I liked my present.
‘Don’t start!’ the teacher told 
them.
The teacher told them not to start.
‘Please help me!’ the old 
woman said.
The old woman asked me to help her.
‘What time are we meeting?’  
I asked her.
I asked her what time we were meeting.
‘We’re leaving tomorrow,’  
they said.
They said they were leaving the next day.
‘I won’t tell anybody,’  
he told me.
He told me he wouldn’t tell anybody.
‘I can’t remember your name,’ 
she said.
She said she couldn’t remember my name.
‘I bought my trousers in the 
sales,’ she told me.
She told me she’d bought her trousers in the sales.
‘Who invited you to the party?’ 
Mike asked.
Mike asked who had invited me to the party.
‘What were you doing in New 
York?’ she asked.
She asked me what I’d been doing in New York.
‘I haven’t spoken to Susan 
since Christmas,’ Mary said.
Mary said she hadn’t spoken to Susan since Christmas.
‘You must turn off the alarm 
first!’ he told me.
He told me I had to turn the alarm off first.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 199@@
199
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
9B  COMMUNICATIVE  What had happened?
1	
Jamie would never have married Nicola if 
he had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
I didn’t recognize Jonathan when I saw  
him because he had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
I would never have found out about 
Richard’s new job if I hadn’t… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
When I picked up the phone, a voice told 
me that I had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
Harriet wouldn’t have met Ben if she 
hadn’t… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
When Sheila opened the door, she saw 
that someone had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
The moment I bought the painting I knew  
I had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
1	
Jenny was absolutely furious with her 
sister because she had… 
	
2	
	
3	
	
4	
	
Story 1
Story 5
Story 2
Story 6
Story 3
Story 7
Story 4
Story 8
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 200@@
200
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
10A  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s the question?
What / your 
favourite name? 
What / you like 
about it?
What colour /  
you almost never 
wear, or use in 
your house?  
Why / you think 
you dislike it?
Where / you 
going on your 
next holiday? 
Why / you chosen 
that place?
What / you 
bought online 
recently? Why / 
you buy it?
What / you like  
ten years ago? 
How / you 
changed since 
then?
What / your 
favourite photo of 
yourself? What / 
you like about it?
What / some 
things that 
people could / 
to help reduce 
waste? How / you 
think they would 
help?
What would your 
ideal job / ? Why?
/ you prefer 
watching films at 
home or at the 
cinema? Why?
/ you ever 
thought of 
living in the 
countryside?  
Why (not)?
/ you like eating 
out? What / the 
best restaurant 
you / ever / to? 
What things in 
your house / you 
mended? / you 
think you / good 
at DIY?  
Why (not)?
What would you /  
if you / one 
million pounds? 
Would you leave 
your job or stop 
your studies?  
Why (not)?
/ you go out or 
stay in last New 
Year’s Eve?  
What / you /?
When / you last /  
your hair cut? / 
you like it? Why 
(not)?
How many 
different historical 
sites in your local 
area / you / to? 
Which / your 
favourite? Why?
/ you usually 
forget to take 
things with you 
when you leave 
home (keys, 
phone)? What / 
you / to help you 
remember?
What / the best 
wedding you / 
ever / to? What / 
special about it?
What / you think 
/ the best thing 
about the USA? 
And the worst?
/ you ever taken 
any official 
English exams?  
/ it a good 
experience?  
Why (not)?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 201@@
201
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
Student A
Student B
1
 	
Ask B your questions.
1	 What’s your full name?
2	 How do you spell your surname?
3	 Where do you live?
4	 Can you tell me what you enjoy doing in 
your free time?
5	 Why are you learning English?
	
Answer B’s questions. Give as much 
information as you can.
2
 	
Describe your photo to B.
	
Listen to B describing his / her photo. 
What do the two photos have in common? 
How are they different?
3	
Now talk to each other about:
•	 the kind of places you like visiting when 
you’re on holiday.
•	 places you wouldn’t go to on holiday.
•	 your favourite holiday.
•	 one of your favourite cities.
 a
 b
 a
 b
1
 	
Answer A’s questions. Give as much 
information as you can.
	
Ask A your questions.
1	 What’s your full name?
2	 How do you spell your surname?
3	 What do you do?
4	 Can you tell me about a typical day in 
your life?
5	 How do you think you’ll use English in  
the future?
2
 	
Listen to A describing his / her photo.
	
Describe your photo to A. What do the 
two photos have in common? How are  
they different?
3	
Now talk to each other about:
•	 the kind of places you like visiting when 
you’re on holiday.
•	 places you wouldn’t go to on holiday.
•	 your favourite holiday.
•	 one of your favourite cities.
 a
 b
 a
 b
10B  COMMUNICATIVE  Speaking exam
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 202@@
202
1B	Adjective suffixes
	 	
A pairwork activity
Sts read definitions and write the adjectives. Then they 
complete sentences with the correct adjective form. Copy 
one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Adjectives describing people, places, and things, 
suffixes -ful and -less
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Tell Sts that they have to read the definitions in a and 
write the correct adjectives, using the words in the 
list with a suffix. After that, they have to complete the 
sentences in b with the correct adjective form of the 
words in bold. Remind Sts to write their answers in the 
column on the right.
•	 Check answers.
a	 2  creative    3  reliable    4  assertive    5  envious    
6  affectionate    7  helpful    8  powerful    9  impulsive   
10  glamorous    11  sociable    12  rebellious
b	 2  restful    3  noisy    4  profitable    5  careless    6  risky    
7  spacious    8  hopeful    9  impressive    10  suitable   
11  useful    12  stressful
•	 Now focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the columns 
on the right and read the definitions in a and say the 
adjectives. Then have Sts read the sentences in b with the 
missing words. They can test each other or themselves.
2A	Packing
	 	
A card game
Sts define words for other Sts to guess. Copy and cut up one 
set of cards per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
Things to take on holiday, documents, and packing verbs
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Give each pair / group a 
set of cards face down or in an envelope.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Choose another word (not one 
of the ones on the cards) from Vocabulary Bank Packing 
p.153. Describe it, e.g. It’s a noun. It’s a liquid or cream which 
you put on your body when it’s very hot, until a student 
guesses the word (sunscreen). Highlight that Sts are not 
allowed to use the word(s) on the card in their definition.
•	 Sts play the game, taking turns to pick up a card and 
describe the word. Sts describing mustn’t let their partners 
see what’s on the card. Tell Sts to wait until their partner 
has finished his / her description before trying to guess 
the word.
 EXTRA IDEA   If Sts are playing in groups, they could play this 
as a competitive game. Sts who correctly guess the word first 
keep the card. The student with the most cards at the end  
of the game wins.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one sheet per pair and fold it 
down the middle. Put Sts in pairs. Sts look at one half each, 
and take turns to describe the words on their half of the 
sheet to their partners until they guess the correct answer.
2B	Shops and services
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts read a series of clues and write the words. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Places, phrasal verbs related to shops and shopping
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Set a time 
limit. Tell Sts that they have to write as many words as  
they can within the time limit. Each word begins with  
a different letter of the alphabet. Letters K, X, and Y don’t 
have clues and can be ignored.
•	 Check answers. The first pair to complete all the words 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts a few minutes to revise the 
vocabulary in Vocabulary Bank Shops and services p.154 
before they start.
butcher’s    chain    dry-cleaner’s    estate agent’s    florist’s    
greengrocer’s    hairdresser’s    in stock    jeweller’s    
launderette    market stall    newsagent’s    on    pound shop   
queue    round    stationer’s    travel agent’s    upstairs    
vitamins    wood    Zara
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts to turn over or cover their 
worksheets. Sts go through the alphabet in pairs and try to 
remember the words they wrote (remind them of the letters 
K, X, and Y which don’t have words). If they can, they should 
think of some more examples for some of the letters.
3B	Photography
	 	
A pairwork photo description
Sts describe photos to each other and ask questions. Copy 
one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Describing a photo, taking photos
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give out 
the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and get Sts A to describe their photo to Sts B. 
You could set a time limit if you wish. 
•	 Focus on b. Sts swap roles and Sts B describe their photo 
to Sts A. Again, set a time limit if you wish.
•	 Focus on c. Give Sts time to discuss the questions. Remind 
them to ask for more information if possible.
Vocabulary activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 203@@
203
 EXTRA IDEA   Monitor for any errors during the activity. At the 
end of the lesson do a whole-class error correction activity.
4A	Rubbish and recycling
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts identify the missing words and complete sentences. 
Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Rubbish nouns and phrasal verbs, packaging, the 
prefix re-
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Set a time 
limit. Tell Sts that they have to complete as many words as 
they can within the time limit. 
•	 Check answers. The first pair to complete all the sentences 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
2  lid    3  can    4  packet    5  plastic bags    6  carton    
7  tin    8  sell-by date    9  bin bag    10  refuse collectors   
 11  waste-paper basket    12  tub    13  wrapper   
 14  give away    15  pot    16  take out    17  throw away   
 18  Recycle    19  rethink    20  reuse
4B	Study and work
	 	
An information gap activity
Sts define words to help their partner complete a crossword. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Higher education, applying for a job or course
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give out 
the crosswords. Make sure that Sts can’t see each other’s 
worksheet. Explain that A and B have the same crossword 
but with different words missing. They have to define 
words to each other to complete their crosswords.
•	 Give Sts a minute to read their instructions. If Sts 
don’t know what a word means, they can look it up in 
Vocabulary Bank Study and work p.157. Remind them 
that they can’t use any part of the word in their definition. 
•	 Sts take turns to ask each other for the definitions of their 
missing words (e.g. What’s 3 across?). Their partner must 
define / describe the word until the other student is able 
to write it in his / her crossword. Sts should help each 
other using clues if necessary.
•	 When Sts have finished, they should compare their 
crosswords to make sure they have the same words and 
have spelled them correctly.
5A	Television
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts read a series of clues and write the words. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Types of programme, TV phrasal verbs
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Set a time 
limit. Tell Sts that they have to write as many words in a 
and b as they can in the time limit.
•	 Check answers. The first pair to write all the words 
correctly wins, or the pair with the most correct answers 
at the end of the time limit wins.
a	 2  advert    3  chat show    4  cookery programme    
5  documentary    6  current affairs programme    
7  quiz show    8  reality show    9  weather forecast   
10  soap    11  live sport    12  period drama
b	 2  season    3  streaming services    4  series    5  turn over    
6  turn, down    7  Turn, up    8  Turn, off    9  Turn, on   
10  is on
5B	The country
	 	
A pairwork labelling activity
Sts look at a picture and write the words for the items in it. 
Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Nature, on a farm
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Focus on a. 
Set a time limit. Tell Sts that they have to write as many 
words as they can in the time limit. The first pair to write 
all the words correctly wins, or the pair with the most 
correct answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  tractor    3  hens    4  sheep    5  leaves    6  stream    7  bush  
8  farmhouse    9  donkey    10  field    11  hedge    12  path   
 13  rocks    14  cow    15  hill
•	 Focus on b. Tell Sts to write the words from a in the 
correct category in the mind map. 
•	 Check answers.
Buildings: barn, farmhouse
Animals: hens, sheep, cow, donkey
Equipment: tractor
Nature: leaves, stream, bush, field, hedge, path, rocks, hill
 EXTRA IDEA   Give Sts time to add other words to the 
different categories to complete the mind map. Remind Sts 
that they can refer to Vocabulary Bank The country p.159 
for ideas.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 204@@
204
6A	At a restaurant
	 	
An error correction activity
Sts correct vocabulary mistakes. Copy one worksheet 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
Things on the table, things people do in restaurants
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give out the worksheets, and focus on 
the instructions. Focus on sentence 1 and elicit that it 
is correct. Then focus on sentence 2 and elicit that it is 
wrong, as the bold word should be spoon.
•	 Sts continue in pairs. 
•	 Check answers.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts a few minutes to revise the 
restaurant vocabulary in Vocabulary Bank At a restaurant 
p.160 before they start.
3  courses    4  ✓    5  knife    6  ✓    7  ✓    8  ✓    9  glass   
 10  meal    11  clear    12  ✓    13  cups / mugs    14  ✓   
 15  ✓    16  send it back    17  ✓    18  leave a tip    19  ✓   
 20  ask for the bill    21  ✓    22  lay the table
6B	DIY and repairs
	 	
A card game
Sts define words / phrases for other Sts to guess. Copy and 
cut up one set of cards per pair or small group.
LANGUAGE
Things in a shed, things in a drawer, verb phrases
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups. Give each pair / group a 
set of cards face down or in an envelope.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Choose another word (not one 
of the ones on the cards) from Vocabulary Bank DIY and 
repairs p.161. Describe it, e.g. It’s a noun. It’s the thing you 
use to stick together something that’s broken, until a student 
guesses the word (glue). Highlight that Sts are not allowed 
to use the word(s) on the card in their definition.
•	 Sts play the game, taking turns to pick up a card and 
describe the word / phrase. Sts describing mustn’t let their 
partners see what’s on the card. Tell Sts to wait until their 
partner has finished his / her description before trying to 
guess the word / phrase.
 EXTRA IDEA   If Sts are playing in groups, they could play this 
as a competitive game. Sts who correctly guess the word first 
keep the card. The student with the most cards at the end of 
the game wins.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one worksheet per pair and 
fold it down the middle. Put Sts in pairs. Sts look at one half 
each, and take turns to describe the words / phrases on their 
half of the sheet to their partners until they guess the correct 
answer.
7A	Phrasal verbs
	 	
A gapfill revision race
Sts read the sentences and complete the phrasal verbs.  
Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Revision of phrasal verbs, phrasal verbs to do with 
money, phrasal verbs with away, back, and take
•	 Give out the worksheets. Tell Sts that they have to read the 
sentences and write as many of the particles (prepositions 
or adverbs) as they can in five minutes. Remind Sts to 
write their answers in the column on the right.
•	 Check answers. The first student to write all the particles 
correctly wins, or the student with the most correct 
answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  over    3  on    4  out    5  away    6  apart    7  back    
8  round / in    9  away    10  on    11  back    12  after   
 13  away    14  on    15  away    16  out    17  away    18  back   
 19  back    20  back
•	 Focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the column on the 
right and read the sentences with the missing words. They 
can test each other or themselves.
8A	Looking after yourself
	 	
A team game
Sts explain the difference between two words / phrases. 
Copy and cut up one set of cards.
LANGUAGE
At the hairdresser’s / barber’s, keeping fit, beauty 
treatments
•	 Put Sts in two teams (or more if you have a lot of Sts) and 
explain the activity. 
•	 Give a card to each team and give Sts a minute to decide 
what the difference is between the two words / phrases. 
•	 Write the two words / phrases on each team’s card on the 
board. 
•	 A spokesperson from the team takes turns to explain the 
difference to the rest of the class. If the explanation is 
correct, the team gets a point. If it isn’t correct, the other 
team can try to win an extra point by explaining the 
difference correctly, before having their own turn.
•	 Then give each team another card.
•	 Write up the teams’ points on the board. The team with 
the most points wins.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Put Sts in pairs. Copy one sheet per 
pair. Set a time limit, e.g. ten minutes, and Sts take turns to 
ask each other What’s the difference between…?, choosing 
words at random. Sts decide if their partner’s explanation is 
correct. Finally, check answers with the whole class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 205@@
205
Possible answers
A facial is a beauty treatment for the face.
A massage is a treatment for the body involving 
rubbing and pressing muscles and joints.
Yoga is an activity which involves doing physical and 
breathing exercises, and simple meditation.
Pilates is a type of exercise which develops the 
abdomen muscles in order to control your body 
movement.
Lift weights is to exercise by lifting heavy objects.
Do cardio exercises is to do exercises which raise your 
heart rate.
Stretch your muscles is doing exercises which 
deliberately flex or stretch specific muscles in your body, 
releasing pain and tension.
Tone your muscles is doing exercises which aim to 
change the shape and definition of your muscles.
A manicure is a beauty treatment for your hands and 
nails.
A pedicure is a beauty treatment for your feet and 
toenails.
A fringe is short hair that hangs down over your 
forehead.
A parting is the line of head showing when sections of 
hair are brushed or combed in opposite directions.
Have your hair dyed is to have the colour of your hair 
changed.
Have highlights is to have parts of your hair made 
lighter than the rest.
Have a shave is to cut the hair off the face.
Have a buzz cut is to have a very short haircut where 
the hair is shaved close to the head.
A cross-trainer is an exercise machine with parts that 
you stand on and parts that you hold. You can then 
move your arms and legs backwards and forwards.
A rowing machine is an exercise machine with a 
moving handle and a sliding seat. You pull the handle 
towards you, as if you are rowing a boat.
A running machine is an exercise machine with a flat 
moving surface that you walk or run on.
An exercise bike is a bicycle that stays in one place and 
is used for exercise.
Do sit-ups is to do a physical exercise where you sit 
up from lying down without using your arms or lifting 
your feet.
Do press-ups is to do a physical exercise where you 
lie down facing the floor and lift your body up on your 
hands whilst keeping your back straight.
Do aerobics is to do very active physical exercises while 
listening to music.
Do spinning is to do aerobic exercises on an exercise 
bike while listening to music.
A ponytail is a hairstyle where hair is tied at the back of 
the head and hangs down.
Plaits are a hairstyle where each plait is formed by 
twisting three separate lengths of hair over each other.
Have your hair curled is to have your hair styled in 
curls, usually using curling tongs.
Have your hair straightened is to have your hair styled 
straight, usually using a hairdryer and/or straightening 
irons.
Have a treatment is to have hair and beauty products 
used on your hair, skin, etc. to improve quality and look.
Have a trim is to have your hair cut so that it looks tidy.
Have a blow dry is to have your wet hair dried by the 
warm air from a hairdryer.
Have your hair put up is to have your hair styled and 
pinned up off your neck, shoulders, and back.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 206@@
206
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1B  VOCABULARY  Adjective suffixes
Definitions
 	
Read the definitions. Choose the correct word from the list and make an adjective using a suffix. 
Write your answers in the column on the right.
affection  assert  create  envy  glamour  help  impulse  power  rebel  rely  sense  social
1	 He’s easily hurt, especially if you criticize him.	
sensitive
2	 She has an amazing imagination and she’s very original.	
3	 He can be trusted to do something well.	
4	 She can express her opinions clearly and confidently.	
5	 He always wants what other people have.	
6	 He shows caring feelings towards everyone he knows.	
7	 She likes to offer solutions if you have a problem.	
8	 She has lots of control and influence over people and events.	
9	 He does things suddenly, without thinking about what might happen.	
 
10	 She’s beautiful, exciting, and different from ordinary people.	
 
11	 He really enjoys going out with his friends and meeting new people.	
 
12	 She doesn’t like rules, or doing what other people tell her to do.	
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the words in bold. Write your answers in the 
column on the right.
1	 My living room was white, but now it’s really 
 . colour	
colourful
2	 My idea of a 
 holiday is to stay at a nice hotel and do absolutely nothing. rest	
3	 Marie’s class is very 
 . I can hear them from the next floor! noise	
4	 The café is a successful business and it’s very 
 . profit	
5	 Ruth’s very 
 – she never checks what she’s written. care	
6	 Travelling alone can be 
 , so I prefer doing it with other people. risk	
7	 The flat is really 
 – the living room is enormous! space	
8	 The government is 
 that unemployment will go down this year. hope	
9	 The architect’s buildings are really 
 – they’ve won lots of awards. impress	
 
10	 It’s a violent film, so it isn’t 
 for children under 15. suit	
 
11	 This app is really 
 for learning new vocabulary. use	
 
12	 I don’t like crowded places, like shops during the sales. I find them really 
 ! stress	
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the columns on the right. Read the definitions in a and say the adjectives. 
Then read the sentences in b aloud with the correct form of the words in bold.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 207@@
207
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2A  VOCABULARY  Packing
a driving licence
flip-flops
a first-aid kit
a hairdryer
(to) pack
a phone charger
headphones
a towel
a guidebook
insect repellent
slippers
swimming trunks
(to) wrap
a washbag
a comb
an adaptor
a bathrobe
a razor
(to) fold
nail scissors
make-up
a rain jacket
a passport
a toothbrush
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 208@@
208
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2B  VOCABULARY  Shops and services
If you want to make  
a shelf, you can  
buy a tool to cut the 
 in a  
DIY store.
You can buy  
multi-
  
from a health food 
store. Take one a day 
to keep you healthy.
We’re on the first floor. 
Women’s clothing  
is 
 , on the 
second floor.
Students might buy  
pens and exercise  
books from this shop. 
We had a look 
 the shop, 
but we didn’t  
buy anything.
Sometimes you  
have to wait in one 
when you want to pay 
for something. 
If you want to make  
sure that clothes fit,  
you should try them 
 before  
buying them.
Newspapers, 
magazines, and 
sweets are  
sold here.
A table or a small shop 
with an open front.  
It often sells fruit  
and vegetables.
 
People might get 
their wedding  
rings here.  
If a shop is out of  
something, it means  
they don’t have it
 
 .
You go here to get 
your hair cut.
It’s the name of the 
shop where they sell 
fruit and vegetables.
You can wash and dry 
your own clothes in 
this place.
 is a very 
popular chain store 
that sells clothes.
This shop is 
very popular on 
Valentine’s Day!
You can buy or rent a 
house here.
 
This shop sells a  
variety of goods, all  
at one cheap price!
 
The place you take some 
types of clothes to  
be cleaned.
-
The Body Shop and 
H&M are examples of 
 stores.
Vegetarians don’t 
usually buy anything  
in this shop!
An exciting city break,  
or a restful stay at a  
beach resort? Book your  
next holiday here!
 
Off-licences sell 
alcohol, but only to 
people over 18.
A
D
E
F
G
L
Z
B
C
H
M
Q
R
S
T
N
O
P
I
J
U
V
W
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 209@@
209
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3B  VOCABULARY  Photography
Student A
 	
Describe your photo to B. Say what 
you can see in the foreground, in  
the background, and in the distance. 
Add any more details about where 
things are.
 	
Listen to B describing his / her photo.
 	
Now discuss the questions together.
1	 What do you think are the advantages 
and disadvantages of being:
	
a	 a celebrity photographer?
	
b	 a wildlife photographer?
	
c	 a war photographer?
	
d	 a portrait photographer?
2	 If you were a professional 
photographer, what kind of photos 
would you like to take? Why?
 a
 b
 c
Student B
 	
Listen to A describing his / her photo.
 	
Describe your photo to A. Say what 
you can see in the foreground, in  
the background, and in the distance. 
Add any more details about where 
things are.
 	
Now discuss the questions together.
1	 What do you think are the advantages 
and disadvantages of being:
	
a	 a celebrity photographer?
	
b	 a wildlife photographer?
	
c	 a war photographer?
	
d	 a portrait photographer?
2	 If you were a professional 
photographer, what kind of photos 
would you like to take? Why?
 a
 b
 c
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 210@@
210
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4A  VOCABULARY  Rubbish and recycling
1	 There’s a j a r of mayonnaise in the fridge if you want some.
2	 I can’t get the l 
 
 off the honey. It’s stuck.
3	 You can buy soft drinks in a bottle or a c 
 
 .
4	 Shall we get a p 
 
 
 
 
 of biscuits?
5	 Most supermarkets don’t give away pl 
 
 
 
 
  b 
 
 
 any more – they charge for them.
6	 Please don’t drink milk out of the c 
 
 
 
 
 . Use a glass!
7	 Paolo cut himself when he was opening a t 
 
 of tuna.
8	 Is this chicken safe to eat? The s 
 
 
-b 
  d 
 
 
 was yesterday!
9	 We put rubbish that can’t be recycled in a black b 
 
  b 
 
 , and recycling in a clear one.
 
10	 What day of the week do the r 
 
 
 
 
  c 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 come to take away  
your rubbish?
 
11	 The w 
 
 
 
-p 
 
 
 
  b 
 
 
 
 
 in my office is always full. I never remember to 
empty it!
 
12	 A	Is there any ice cream left? 
	
B	 There’s a whole new t 
 
 in the freezer.
 
13	 Don’t drop that sweet wr 
 
 
 
 
 on the floor, Kirstie. I’ve just finished tidying!
 
14	 I usually g 
 
 
  a 
 
 
 my old clothes to a charity shop in the town centre.
 
15	 I want to throw away this yogurt p 
 
 , but I don’t know if it’s recyclable or not.
 
16	 I’ll t 
 
 
  o 
 
 the rubbish tonight. You did it last week.
 
17	 You can’t just th 
 
 
  a 
 
 
 batteries with your normal rubbish. You need to take them to a 
recycling centre.
 
18	 Don’t throw away that bottle! R 
 
 
 
 
 
 it!
 
19	 We have to r 
 
 
 
 
 
 the way we produce and use plastic if we want to stop pollution. 
 
20	 Some people say you shouldn’t r 
 
 
 
 plastic water bottles because they contain dangerous 
chemicals.
What’s the word?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 211@@
211
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
4B  VOCABULARY  Study and work
D
I
I
S
N
S
C
T
P
R
O
F
E
S
S
O
R
F
A
C
U
L
T
I
E
S
R
M
R
T
P
A
T T
E
N D
V
A
C
A N
C
Y
U
S
T
S
H
I
W
I
O
O
P
N
R
K
P
E
R
M
I
T
W E
B
I
N A
R
A
P
A
P
S
R
S
S
C
H O
L
A
R
S
H
I
P
E
I
E
N
S
C
U N D
E
R
G
R
A
D
U
A
T
E
T
T
I
U
C
R
R
E
F
E
R
E
N
C
E
E
E
S
H
I
T
U
T
O
R
P
Student A
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the 
meaning of all the words you have.
 a
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the 
meaning of all the words you have.
 a
 	
Ask B to define one of your missing 
words for you. Ask, for example, 
What’s 8 down? Listen to B’s definition 
and write the word in your grid.
 	
Now B will ask you to define a word.
 b
 c
 	
Ask A to define one of your missing 
words for you. Ask, for example, 
What’s 8 across? Listen to A’s definition 
and write the word in your grid.
 	
Now A will ask you to define a word.
 b
 c
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 212@@
212
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5A  VOCABULARY  Television
C A R T O O N
 	
Read the speech bubbles. Write the type of programme.
 a
 	
Complete the second sentence so that it means the same as the first.
1	 ‘I can’t wait to see what happens next week!’
2	 ‘I’m sad this series is finished for now, but 
there will be more.’
3	 ‘I don’t watch TV anymore, I just use Netflix 
and Amazon Prime.’
4	 ‘Which one is my favourite? Game of Thrones, 
I think.’
5	 ‘Oh, I hate this programme! Please change 
the channel!’
6	 ‘Please make the TV quieter!’
7	 ‘I can’t hear the TV. Make it louder, please!’
8	 ‘Don’t leave the TV on when you go to bed.’
9	 ‘Why is the TV off? It’s time for the news.’
 
10	 ‘Channel 4 is showing my favourite film 
right now!’
‘I can’t wait to see next week’s episode.’
‘There will be another s 
 .’ 
‘I just use s 
  s 
 .’ 
‘Game of Thrones is my favourite s 
 .’ 
‘Please t 
  o 
 .’ 
‘Please t 
 the TV d 
 .’
‘T 
 the TV u 
 , please.’
‘T 
 the TV o 
 when you go to bed.’
‘T 
 the TV o 
 . It’s time for the news.’
‘My favourite film i 
  o 
 Channel 4 
right now.’
 b
1	
Hey Marge, what time does Bart get 
home tonight?
2	
Buy two, get one free.
3	
With me in the studio is Drake, who’ll 
be talking about his new album.
4	
For this recipe, you’ll need 250 g flour, 
two eggs, and some sugar.
5	
Elephants live in groups and are very 
sociable animals.
6	
In tonight’s show, we’re investigating 
education in UK schools.
7	
And now, for €500, what’s the capital 
of Australia?
8	
What a surprise! Kylie’s nominated 
Barry to leave the house.
9	
Tomorrow, it’ll be sunny and dry.
 
10	
But if Leo’s not the father, who is?
 
11	
And it’s a penalty for Chelsea!
 
12	
My Lady, the carriage is at the door 
and His Majesty awaits us at noon.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 213@@
213
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5B  VOCABULARY  The country
 	
Write the words.
 a
 	
Now put the words from a in the correct category in the mind map.
 b
1	 barn
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
 
11	
 
12	
 
13	
 
14	
 
15	
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
hens
barn
tractor
leaves
Buildings
Equipment
Animals
THE COUNTRY
Nature
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 214@@
214
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6A  VOCABULARY  At a restaurant
Right or wrong?
 	
Look at the word / phrase in bold. Right (✓) or wrong (✗)?
If you think it’s wrong, write the correct word / phrase in the column on the right.
1	 We use paper napkins at home. It saves on the washing!	
	
2	 You usually eat soup with a teaspoon.	
	
spoon
3	 We had three plates every night on holiday – a starter, a main course,  
and a dessert.	
	
4	 Screw-top wine bottles aren’t opened with a corkscrew.	
	
5	 This fork doesn’t cut very well. Could you change it, please?	
	
6	 That new waitress is really nervous. There’s more coffee in the saucer than  
in the cup.	
	
7	 Would you like me to bring you some oil and vinegar for your salad?	
	
8	 Most people make tea in a mug, but my grandmother always uses a teapot.	
	
9	 Would you like a cup of champagne before dinner?	
	
 
10	 What’s your favourite dish: breakfast, lunch, or dinner?	
	
 
11	 Excuse me, could you clean the table? These glasses are from the  
previous customers.	
	
 
12	 Can you get one more soup bowl from the cupboard, please?	
	
 
13	 My husband has cereal and two jugs of coffee for breakfast.	
	
 
14	 Would you like a tray to carry those drinks?	
	
 
15	 I don’t like it when people serve hot food on cold plates.	
	
 
16	 This fish isn’t cooked. Call the waiter, I’m going to take it back.	
	
 
17	 The waiter asked me to try the wine.	
	
 
18	 In New York, if you don’t put a tip, the waiters aren’t very happy.	
	
 
19	 For my birthday, I’ve booked a table at my favourite restaurant.	
	
 
20	 Look at the time! It’s really late. Shall we ask the bill?	
	
 
21	 I’m starving. Are we all ready to order our food?	
	
 
22	 Dinner’s nearly ready. Can you put the table?	
	
✓
✗
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 215@@
215
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6B  VOCABULARY  DIY and repairs
a bucket
(to) put up curtains
nails
(to) change a wheel
a screwdriver
(to) stick something 
together
a penknife
a handle
(to) tie (your)  
shoelaces
bricks
a tap
Sellotape
a hammer
a padlock
(to) assemble  
flat-pack furniture
string
a box of matches
(to) drill a hole
a torch
a ladder
a light bulb
(to) set up  
a home cinema
a paintbrush
a needle
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 216@@
216
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7A  VOCABULARY  Phrasal verbs
What’s the particle?
 	
Read the sentences. Write the missing particle(s) in the column on the right.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the column on the right. Read the sentences aloud with the correct particles.
1	 I got a loan from the bank to redecorate my house. It’s going to take me six  
months to pay it 
 .	
off
2	 Mr Franklin’s going to retire, so his daughter will take 
 the family business.	
3	 When I was younger, my mum stayed at home, so we lived 
 my dad’s salary.	
4	 My husband’s taking me 
 to dinner tonight. It’s our first wedding anniversary!	
5	 Your room’s a mess! You’re not going out until you’ve put all your things 
 .	
6	 My husband took our toaster 
 to try to fix it, but now he can’t put it back  
together!	
7	 I’m going to the cinema, but I’ll be 
 in time for dinner.	
8	 Let’s look 
 this shop. I need a present for my mum. It’s her birthday soon!	
9	 If you don’t switch the sound off on your phone, I’ll take it 
 .	
 
10	 I really like this skirt, but I think I need to try it 
 .	
 
11	 I hope we get our tests 
 today. I want to know how I did.	
 
12	 Everyone says I take 
 my dad because we both love sport.	
 
13	 Bill Gates and his wife are very rich, but they give 
 a lot of their money.	
 
14	 Shall we have a look at what films are 
 at the cinema this week?	
 
15	 Someone knocked on our door last night, but then ran 
 .	
 
16	 I need to find a cash machine and take 
 some money.	
 
17	 We’re going to be 
 for a week. We’re going to Paris!	
 
18	 When do you think you’ll be able to pay 
 the money I lent you?	
 
19	 Give me 
 my shoes right now! Don’t borrow my things without asking me first.	
 
20	 I have a missed call from Monica. I’d better call her 
 .	
PARTICLE
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 217@@
217
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Intermediate Plus  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8A  VOCABULARY  Looking after yourself
a facial
a massage
yoga
Pilates
lift weights
do cardio 
exercises
stretch your 
muscles
tone your 
muscles
a manicure
a pedicure
a fringe
a parting
have your 
hair dyed
have  
highlights
have  
a shave
have a  
buzz cut
a running 
machine
an exercise  
bike
do sit-ups
do press-ups
do aerobics
do spinning
a ponytail
plaits
have your  
hair curled
have your hair 
straightened
have a 
treatment
have  
a trim
have a  
blow dry
have your  
hair put up
a cross-trainer
a rowing 
machine
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 218@@
© Copyright Oxford University Press
