@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Pre-intermediate
Teacher’s Guide
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Jerry Lambert
Paul Seligson 
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 

@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2019
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2019 
2023  2022  2021  2020  2019
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly 
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford 
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for 
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked 
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers 
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach. 
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this 
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403762 4	
Teacher’s Guide
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world whose 
feedback has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both 
in Oxford and around the world) and the design team who have contributed 
their skills and ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and from 
Christina to Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina would also like 
to thank her children Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their constant inspiration.
The publisher would like to thank the following for their permission to reproduce 
photographs: Getty pp.242 Scarlett Johansson/Paul Zimmerman/WireImage, 
Rihanna/Jerritt Clark, Justin Timberlake/Peter Andrews/Corbis via Getty 
Images, 243 (Bob Dylan/Kevin Mazur/WireImage, Jakob Dylan/Steve Granitz/
WireImage); Oxford University Press p.265 (Gareth Boden); Shutterstock 
pp.173, 185, 188, 195, 220, 223, 228, 230, 237, 242 (Orlando Bloom, Oprah 
Winfrey, Robert de Niro), 253, 254, 257, 258, 261, 262, 264, 267.
Illustrations by: Bill Brown pp.182, 184, 196, 199, 259, 266; Emma Brownjohn 
pp.181, 193, 200, 201; Mark Duffin pp.192, 197, 244; Joy Gosney p.240; Ben 
Hasler p.204, 206; Joanna Kerr/New Division pp.176, 180, 225, 235, 263, 271; 
Roger Penwill pp.175, 177, 178, 186, 194, 199, 205, 268; Kath Walker pp.174, 
183, 202, 203, 206, 247, 251, 263, 269.
Grammar photocopiable activities written by: Amanda Begg
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Pre-intermediate students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 1
p.28
File 2 A–C	
1&2 Revise and Check
p.41
File 3 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 2
p.55
File 4 A–C	
3&4 Revise and Check
p.66
File 5 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 3
p.80
File 6 A–C	
5&6 Revise and Check
p.92
File 7 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 4
p.106
File 8 A–C	
7&8 Revise and Check
p.119
File 9 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 5
p.132
File 10 A–C	
9&10 Revise and Check
p.143
File 11 A–C	
Practical English  Episode 6
p.157
File 12 A–C	
11&12 Revise and Check
p.167
Photocopiable activities
p.167
Introduction
p.168
Grammar activity answers
p.172
Grammar activity masters
p.208
Communicative activity instructions
p.217
Communicative activity masters
p.253
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.257
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A	Are you? Can you?  
Do you? Did you? 
word order in questions
common verb phrases
the alphabet
8
B	 The perfect date?
present simple 
describing people: 
appearance and personality
final -s and -es
10
C	 The Remake Project
present continuous
clothes, prepositions  
of place
/ə/ and /ɜː/
12
Practical English Episode 1	
calling reception   
2
14
A	OMG! Where’s my 
passport?
past simple: regular and 
irregular verbs
holidays 
regular verbs: -ed endings
16
B	 That’s me in the picture!
past continuous 
prepositions of time and 
place: at, in, on
weak forms: was, were
18
C	 One dark October 
evening
time sequencers and 
connectors
verb phrases
word stress
 
20
Revise and Check 1&2
3
22
A	TripAside
be going to (plans and 
predictions)
airports 
the letter g
24
B	 Put it in your calendar!
present continuous (future 
arrangements)
verbs + prepositions,  
e.g. arrive in
linking
26
C	 Word games
defining relative clauses
paraphrasing
silent e
28
Practical English Episode 24
at the restaurant    V restaurants
4
30
A	Who does what? 
present perfect + yet,  
just, already
housework, make or do?
the letters y and j
32
B	 In your basket 
present perfect or past 
simple? (1)
shopping
c and ch
34
C	 #greatweekend
something, anything, 
nothing, etc.
adjectives ending -ed  
and -ing
/e/, /əʊ/, and /ʌ/
36
Revise and Check 3&4
5
38
A	I want it NOW! 
comparatives adjectives  
and adverbs, as…as 
types of numbers
/ə/
40
B	 Twelve lost wallets
superlatives (+ ever + 
present perfect)
describing a town or city
sentence stress
42
C	 How much is enough?
quantifiers, too, (not) 
enough 
health and the body
/ʌ/
44
Practical English Episode 34
taking something back to a shop    V shopping
6
46
A	Think positive – or 
negative?
will / won’t (predictions)
opposite verbs
’ll, won’t
48
B	 I’ll always love you
will / won’t / shall  
(other uses)
verb + back
word stress: two-syllable 
verbs
50
C	 The meaning of 
dreaming
review of verb forms: 
present, past, and future 
modifiers
the letters ea
52
Revise and Check 5&6
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
exchanging information
understanding personal information
describing a person
identifying the person  
being described
understanding a description
describing a picture, talking  
about preferences
checking hypotheses
talking about your last holiday
understanding the key events in a story
understanding the key events in  
a story
talking about preferences
listening for gist and detailed 
information
checking hypotheses (using  
visual evidence)
retelling a story
listening for specific information
planning a tour
listening for specific information
understanding text cohesion – 
connectors
making arrangements
understanding times, dates and 
appointments
understanding a questionnaire
describing and paraphrasing
guessing words from definitions
understanding rules of a game
talking about housework
checking hypotheses using  
background knowledge
understanding opinions
talking about shopping experiences
understanding a theory
describing your weekend
understanding historical information
checking and correcting information
comparing habits: present and past
identifying key points
scanning for data (facts and numbers)
talking about memorable experiences
understanding ranking
talking about your lifestyle
understanding advice
identifying pros and cons
making predictions
using existing knowledge to  
predict content
summarizing the main point of a text
giving examples and reasons
understanding specific details
understanding the order of events
talking about the past, present,  
and future
checking hypotheses, understanding 
specific information
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
7
54
A	First day nerves
uses of the infinitive with to 
verbs + infinitive: try to, 
forget to, etc.
weak form of to, linking
56
B	 Happiness is …
uses of the gerund  
(verb + -ing)
verbs + gerund
-ing, the letter o
58
C	 Could you pass the test?
have to, don’t have to,  
must, mustn’t
adjectives + prepositions: 
afraid of, etc.
stress on prepositions
60
Practical English Episode 4	
going to a pharmacy    V feeling ill
8
62
A	Should I stay or should  
I go?
should
get
/ʊ/ and /uː/
64
B	 Murphy’s Law
if + present, + will + 
infinitive (first conditional)
confusing verbs
homophones
66
C	 Who is Vivienne?
possessive pronouns
adverbs of manner
reading aloud
 
68
Revise and Check 7&8
9
70
A	Beware of the dog
if + past, would + infinitive 
(second conditional)
animals and insects
word stress
72
B	 Fearof.net
present perfect + for and 
since
words related to fear, 
phrases with for and since
sentence stress
74
C	 Scream queens
present perfect or  
past simple? (2) 
biographies
word stress, /ɔː/ 
76
Practical English Episode 54
asking how to get there    V directions
10
78
A	Into the net
expressing movement
sports, expressing 
movement
word stress
80
B	 Early birds
word order of phrasal verbs
phrasal verbs
linking
82
C	 International inventions
the passive
people from different 
countries
/ʃ/, /tʃ/ and /ʤ/
84
Revise and Check 9&10
11
86
A	Ask the teacher
used to 
school subjects
used to / didn’t used to
88
B	 Help! I can’t decide!
might
word building: noun 
formation
diphthongs
90
C	 Twinstrangers.net
so, neither + auxiliaries 
similarities and differences
/ð/ and /θ/
92
Practical English Episode 64
on the phone   
12
94
A	Unbelievable!
past perfect
time expressions
the letter i
96
B	 Think before you speak
reported speech
say or tell?
double consonants
98
C	 The English File quiz
questions without auxiliaries revision of question words
question words
100
Revise and Check 11&12
102
Communication
113 Writing
120 Listening
126 Grammar Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
retelling an article
understanding a problem
text coherence / understanding 
content words
describing feelings
understanding how something works
talking about language learning 
understanding the events in a story
using topic sentences
discussing habits and preferences
understanding opinions
understanding opinions
using the right word in conversation
understanding an anecdote
scanning for specific information
reacting to a story
using information to interpret a story
understanding a short story
Would you know what to do?
understanding facts
understanding specific information
How long…?
taking notes
recognizing topic links
talking about life events
understanding biographical 
information
using textual clues to match 
information with a person
responding to opinions 
understanding opinions
retelling a person’s day
understanding reasons
extracting main points from a text
passives quiz
understanding historical information
talking about school days
understanding attitude
finding key information in a text
choices and decisions
identifying the main points in a talk
finding similarities and differences
understanding similarities and 
differences
understanding similarities and 
differences
retelling a news story
understanding the order of events
gossip
understanding a conversation
recognizing text type
general knowledge quiz
understanding quiz questions
150
Vocabulary Bank
164 Irregular verbs
165 Appendix
166 Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 8@@
8
	 	
Course overview
Vocabulary
•	 Revision and reactivation of previously learnt vocabulary
•	 Increased knowledge of high-frequency words and phrases
•	 Tasks which encourage students to use new vocabulary
•	 Accessible reference material
Every lesson focuses on high-frequency vocabulary and 
common lexical areas, but keeps the load realistic. All new 
vocabulary is given with the phonemic script alongside, to 
help students with the pronunciation of new words.
Many lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which 
help present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an 
audio model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
•	 A solid foundation in the sounds of English
•	 Targeted pronunciation development
•	 Awareness of rules and patterns
There is a pronunciation focus in every lesson, which 
integrates clear pronunciation into grammar and vocabulary 
practice. There is an emphasis on the sounds most useful for 
communication, on word stress, and on sentence rhythm. 
Online Practice contains the Sound Bank videos which show 
students the mouth positions to make English vowels and 
consonants. They can also review the pronunciation from 
the lesson at their own speed.  There is more practice of 
pronunciation in the Workbook, with audio, which can be 
found on Online Practice.
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A, B, C Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
•	 videos that can be used in class in every File: Practical 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
•	 Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, an End-of-course Test, and an Entry Test, which you 
can use at the beginning of the course
•	 photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities 
for every A, B, C lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Pre-intermediate 
students need? 
Pre-intermediate students are at a crucial stage in their 
learning. Students at this level need material that maintains 
their enthusiasm and confidence. They need to know how 
much they are learning and what they can now achieve. 
At the same time they need the encouragement to push 
themselves to use the new language that they are learning.
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation
If we want students to speak English with confidence, 
we need to give them the tools they need – Grammar, 
Vocabulary, and Pronunciation (G, V, P). We believe that  
‘G + V + P = confident speaking’, and in English File Pre-
intermediate all three elements are given equal importance.
Each lesson has clear G, V, P aims to keep lessons focused 
and give students concrete learning objectives and a sense 
of progress.
Grammar
•	 Clear and memorable presentations of new structures
•	 Regular and varied practice in useful and natural contexts
•	 Student-friendly reference material
We have tried to provide contexts for new language that 
will engage students, using real-life stories and situations, 
humour, and suspense. The Grammar Banks give students 
a single, easy-to-access grammar reference section, with 
example sentences with audio, clear rules, and common 
errors. There are at least two practice exercises for each 
grammar point. Students can look again at the grammar 
presented in the lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook 
provides a variety of practice exercises and the opportunity 
for students to use the new grammar to express their  
own ideas.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 9@@
9
accessible material and tasks they can do. In English File Pre-
intermediate, reading texts have been adapted from a variety 
of real sources (the British press, magazines, news websites, 
online forums, etc.) and have been chosen for their intrinsic 
interest and ability to generate discussion. The opinions 
expressed in these texts do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the English File authors or of Oxford University Press.
Writing
•	 Clear models
•	 An awareness of register, structure, and fixed phrases.
English File Pre-intermediate provides guided writing tasks 
covering a range of writing types from a biography to a 
social media post. Students can use Online Practice to 
develop their writing skills further. The Discussion board also 
provides opportunities for informal written interaction.
Practical English
•	 Understanding high-frequency phrases
•	 Knowing what to say in typical situations
•	 Learning how to overcome typical travel problems
The Practical English lessons give students practice in key 
language for situations such as explaining that there are 
problems in a hotel or in a restaurant, or taking something 
back to a shop. To make these everyday situations come 
alive, there is a storyline involving two main characters, 
Jenny (from New York) and Rob (from London). There is 
a clear distinction between what students will hear and 
need to understand and what they need to say. The lessons 
also highlight other key ‘Social English’ phrases. On Online 
Practice, students can use the interactive video to record 
themselves and hear their own voice in the complete  
conversation. They can also listen and record the Social 
English phrases. The Workbook provides practice of all the 
language from the Practical English lessons.
Revision
•	 Regular review
•	 Motivating reference and practice material
•	 A sense of progress
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a 
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page revises 
the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of each File. 
The right-hand page provides a series of skills-based 
challenges, including street interviews, and helps students 
to measure their progress in terms of competence. These 
pages are designed to be used flexibly according to the 
needs of your students. On Online Practice, for each File, 
there are three Check your progress activities. The first is a 
multiple choice activity for students to test themselves on 
the Grammar and Vocabulary from the File. The second is a 
dictation related to the topic and the language of the File 
for students to practise the new language in context. Finally, 
there is a Challenge activity, which involves a mini-research 
project based on a topic from the File. Every two Files, the 
Workbook contains a Can you remember...? page, which 
provides a cumulative review of language students have 
covered in the Student’s Book.
Speaking
•	 Topics that will inspire students’ interest
•	 Tasks that push students to incorporate new language
•	 A sense of progress in their ability to speak
The ultimate aim of most students is to be able to 
communicate orally in English. Every lesson has a speaking 
activity which activates grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation. The tasks are designed to help students to 
feel a sense of progress and to show that the number of 
situations in which they can communicate effectively is 
growing. Every two Files, students can use Online Practice 
to record themselves doing a short task.
Listening
•	 A reason to listen
•	 Confidence-building tasks
•	 Help with connected speech
At Pre-intermediate level students need confidence-building 
tasks which are progressively more challenging in terms 
of speed, length, and language difficulty, but are always 
achievable. They also need a variety of listening tasks which 
practise listening for gist and for specific details. We have 
chosen material we hope students will want to listen to. 
On Online Practice, for each File students can find further 
listening practice related to the topic. They can also access 
the listening activities from every lesson, to practise in their 
own time, and to read the script to check anything that they 
have found difficult.
Reading
•	 Engaging topics and stimulating texts
•	 Manageable tasks that help students to read
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to give them motivating but 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 10@@
10
	 	
Course overview
Workbook 
For language practice after class.
•	 All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Practical English
•	 Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
•	 Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
•	 Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 12 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A, B, and C lessons
Each File contains three two-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the C lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Practical English
Every two Files (starting from File 1), there is a two-page lesson with  
integral video which teaches language for typical situations (for example 
buying medicine or complaining in a restaurant) and also ‘Social English’ 
(useful phrases like By the way, You must be tired.). The video is in the  
form of a drama, featuring the two main characters, Rob and Jenny.  
The lessons have a storyline which runs through the level.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, Listening, 
Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and  
Sound Bank. 
The Student’s Book is also available as  
an eBook.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or 
catch up on a class they have missed.
•	 Look again: students can review the language from  
every lesson.
•	 Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, 
Writing, Listening, and Speaking practice.
•	 Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main 
language from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an 
extra challenge.
•	 Interactive video to practise the language from the Practical  
English lessons.
•	 Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
•	 Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, 
dyslexia-friendly texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
•	 Individual sounds
•	 Sounds in key words
•	 Speak and record  
functionality
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
•	 an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
•	 Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
•	 Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
•	 Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 80 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 168 – 207
•	 An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp.208 – 252
•	 Extra speaking practice for every A, B, C lesson
Vocabulary
see pp.253 – 271
•	 An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 167 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
•	 All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
•	 Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 Answer keys
•	 All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
•	 All the Workbook audio files and scripts
•	 Tests and assessment material, including: an Entry Test; 
Progress Tests; an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every 
File; and complete test for every File. There are A and B 
versions of all the main tests and audio files for all the 
Listening tests
•	 CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
•	 The complete Student’s Book
•	 Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
•	 Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
•	 Dyslexia-friendly texts
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
•	 Short documentary, drama, or 
animation for students at the 
end of even-numbered  
C lessons (2C, 4C, 6C, etc.)
Practical English
•	 A unique series of videos that 
goes with the Practical English 
lessons in the Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
•	 Street interviews filmed in 
London, New York, and Oxford 
to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for the 
Student’s Book can be found on 
the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, 
Online Practice, Student’s eBook,  
and the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 12@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
1A
12
 G   word order in questions
 V   common verb phrases
 P   the alphabet
Lesson plan
This first lesson has three main objectives: to help you and 
the Sts to get to know each other, to give you a clear idea of 
the level of your class, and to provide some quick, efficient 
revision of some Elementary language points.
The first exercise provides the context for revising an 
important grammar point: the order of words in questions. 
The vocabulary focus is on common verb phrases. Sts use 
these to complete the questions, which they then ask each 
other. They then focus on the word order and practise it in 
the Grammar Bank. The pronunciation of the alphabet is 
revised, and the listening activity gives Sts the chance to 
revise spelling. Sts then bring all the language together by 
interviewing each other and completing a form.
There is an Entry Test on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, which 
you can give Sts before starting the course.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  word order in questions p.172 
Communicative  Student profile p.217   
(instructions p.208)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Entry test
For students
Workbook  1A
Online Practice  1A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before the class, choose some party music. 
Introduce yourself to the class. Say Hello, I’m… .
Tell Sts to stand up. Divide the class into two groups, A and B. 
Ask both groups to make a circle, A inside B. Tell them to 
imagine that they’re at a party. When you play the music, 
tell them to walk round in their circle, one clockwise and the 
other anticlockwise. Each time you stop the music, tell them 
to introduce themselves to the person standing opposite 
them. Elicit that they can say Hello or Hi, I’m…, or  
My name’s…, and should respond Nice to meet you.
1	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  
	 common verb phrases
Vocabulary notes
Sts at this level should be familiar with all these verb 
phrases. You may want to highlight the two meanings of 
have, as in have brothers and sisters and have lunch.
a	 If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, and your Sts don’t 
know each other, set a time limit of, for example, two 
minutes, and tell Sts to stand up and move round the 
room, introducing themselves to other Sts. Tell them to 
say Hello / Hi, I’m. . . and Nice to meet you, and to try to 
remember other Sts’ names.
	 Books open. Focus on the photos and the questions in 
Getting to know you. Point out to Sts that the first two (are, 
were) have been done for them.
	 Tell Sts to complete the other questions, individually or in 
pairs, with the correct verbs. 
b	 e 1.2   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, making sure that Sts understand the 
whole question, not just the missing verb.
3  live    4  live    5  have    6  have    7  do    8  get    9  have 
10  go    11  study / learn    12  speak    13  listen    14  watch / 
like    15  do    16  read    17  go    18  do
e 1.2 
1	 Where are you from? 
2	 Where were you born?
3	 Where do you live? 
4	 Do you live in a house or a flat? 
5	 Do you have any brothers and sisters? 
6	 Do you have any pets? 
7	 What do you do?
8	 What time do you get up during the week?
9	 Where do you usually have lunch?
10	 What time do you usually go to bed?
11	 Where did you study English before?
12	 Can you speak any other languages? Which?
13	 What kind of music do you listen to?
14	 What TV programmes or series do you watch?
15	 Do you do any sport or exercise? What?
16	 What kind of books or magazines do you read?
17	 How often do you go to the cinema?
18	 What did you do last weekend?
c	 e 1.3   Tell Sts to listen to the rhythm and intonation in 
the first six questions. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 1.3
See questions 1–6 in script 1.2
	 Now play it again, stopping after each question for Sts to 
repeat. Remind Sts that we usually stress the important 
words in a question, e.g. question words, verbs, and 
nouns, and say the other words less strongly, e.g. Where 
were you born? Do you have any brothers or sisters?
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
	1A	 Are you? Can you? Do you? Did you?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 13@@
1A
13
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 1.4 and e 1.5 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1A on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full questions.
a	 1	 Where can we park?
	
2	 How old are you?
	
3	 Does the class finish at 8.00?
	
4	 Where do your friends live?
	
5	 Why didn’t you answer my email?
	
6	 Do you often go to the cinema?
	
7	 What does this word mean?
	
8	 What time did your friends arrive?
	
9	 Who are you talking to?
	 10	 Where were you last night?
b	 1	 Do you have a car?
	
2	 Where was your brother born?
	
3	 How often does he phone you?
	
4	 What time does their flight arrive?
	
5	 Is your girlfriend from Brazil?
	
6	 How many languages can you speak?
	
7	 How was the party?
	
8	 Where did you go last summer?
	
9	 Is there a doctor here?
	 10	 Did you come to school by bus?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the instructions, the questions, and the example. 
Demonstrate the activity by asking the first question (Do 
you drink a lot of tea or coffee? ) until someone answers Yes, 
I do. Then ask the follow-up question (How many cups do 
you drink a day? ). 
	 Give Sts a few minutes to work out how to form the 
questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to write the 
questions.
	 Check answers.
PRESENT
What gym do you go to?
How many hours do you sleep?
What games do you play?
What sports do you like watching?
PAST
What time did you go to bed?
What did you cook?
Where did you go?
What film did you see?
What did you buy?
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Ask Sts to stand up and move around the class, asking 
each other the questions. If it’s difficult to move around 
the class, do this in pairs or small groups.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
d	 Focus on the ‘Returning’ a question box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the example. 
	 Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you 
questions first. Give full answers, with extra information.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage Sts to ask follow-up 
questions, e.g.: 
A	Do you have any brothers and sisters? 
B	 I have one brother. 
A	How old is he? / What’s his name? / What does he do?
!   You may have Sts who are neither at school / university 
nor working, e.g. they are unemployed or at home with 
children. If so, point out that question 7 (What do you do?) 
can be answered with, for example, I’m unemployed / looking 
for a job / looking after my children, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs. Give them time to ask and answer all the 
questions. Monitor their conversations to give you an idea 
of their oral level.
	 Get feedback from several pairs to see what they have in 
common. At this point, you could teach them the word 
both and its position (before all verbs except be and 
modal verbs like can), e.g. We both live in the city centre. 
We’re both doctors. We can both speak German.
2	GRAMMAR  word order in questions
a	 Focus on the instructions and point out that the first one 
has been done for them. 
	 Give Sts time to read questions 2–6 and tick or correct 
them. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 g Where does your father work?
3	 f
4	 f
5	 g Do you have cereal for breakfast?
6	 g Where did you go for your last holiday?
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer 
the six questions.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.126. Explain 
that all the grammar rules and exercises are in this part of 
the book.
Grammar notes
In questions with the auxiliaries do, does, and did, Sts 
might leave out the auxiliary or get the word order wrong. 
Typical mistakes are: You live with your parents? Why she 
didn’t like the film?
The memory aids ASI (Auxiliary, Subject, Infinitive) and 
QuASI (Question word, Auxiliary, Subject, Infinitive) may 
help Sts here.
In questions with be and can, Sts sometimes forget to 
invert the subject and verb. Typical mistakes are: Ana is a 
student? Where I can sit?
If a verb is followed by a preposition (e.g. talk about, listen 
to), the preposition goes at the end of the question: What 
did you talk about?
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 14@@
1A
14
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to go to the Sound Bank on pp.166–167. 
If your Sts didn’t use English File Elementary, explain that this 
is a reference section of the book, where they can check the 
symbols and see common sound−spelling patterns. Look 
at the spelling rules for the seven sounds. Model and drill 
the example words for the vowels and elicit / explain their 
meaning. 
Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
c	 Now focus on the letters in the list, but don’t elicit their 
pronunciation yet. Tell Sts, in pairs, to write the letters in 
the correct column according to their sound. Tell Sts that 
this exercise is easier to do if they say the letters aloud. 
Point out that the first one (J) has been done for them.
d	 e 1.8   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 1.8
1  train	
A H J K
2  tree	
B C D E G P T V
3  egg	
F L M N S X Z
4  bike	
I Y 
5  phone	
O
6  boot	
Q U W
7  car		
R
	 Now play it again for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Ask Sts which letters are difficult for them. Highlight the 
difference between pairs and groups of letters which are 
often confused, e.g. a / e / i, g / j, k / q, etc. You could tell 
Sts that zed is pronounced zee in American English and is 
the only letter of the alphabet that is different from British 
English.
	 In pairs, Sts practise saying the letters in each column.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Alphabet quiz, A on p.102, B on p.108. 
	 Tell Sts to take turns asking and answering their questions. 
Point out that the answers are in italics after each 
question.
	 When they have finished, find out if any Sts got all the 
answers correct.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
3	PRONUNCIATION  the alphabet
Pronunciation notes
Emphasize the importance of being able to spell in 
English, particularly your name or email address. Point 
out that it is very useful to be able to recognize and write 
down letters correctly when people spell words to you.
If your Sts didn’t use English File Elementary, this will be 
the first time that they have seen the sound pictures (train, 
tree, etc.). Explain that the pictures will give Sts a clear 
example of the target sound and that they will help Sts 
remember the pronunciation of the phonetic symbol. This 
is very important if Sts want to check the pronunciation 
of a word in the dictionary. Even if they have a dictionary 
app, the phonetic symbol will help to clarify which sound 
it is.
Tell Sts that the two dots in /iː/, /uː/, and /ɑː/ mean that 
they are long sounds.
a	 e 1.6  Put Sts in pairs and get them to say the groups of 
letters to each other.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
e 1.6 
See the alphabet in Student’s Book on p.7
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the alphabet from the class before 
playing the audio.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
letters for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 1.7   Focus on the box The alphabet and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on the sound pictures and instructions. Point 
out that the first one (train) has been done for them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and write the words. 
	 Check answers.
2  tree    3  egg    4  bike    5  phone    6  boot    7  car
e 1.7
1	 train /eɪ/
2	 tree /iː/
3	 egg /e/
4	 bike /aɪ/
5	 phone /əʊ/
6	 boot /uː/
7	 car /ɑː/
	 Now play it again, pausing after each one for Sts to repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 15@@
1A
15
3	 A	 Welcome to our mobile phone helpline. Please say the number 
of the mobile phone you have a problem with. 
	
B	 Oh-seven-seven-double oh-nine-eight-seven-seven-eight-two.
4	 A	 Now, every Friday I’m going to give you some writing to do for 
homework at the weekend. You can either give it to me in class 
on the Monday, or you can send it to me by email. I’m going to 
give you my email address and I’d like you to write it down. OK? 
It’s J-V-I-N-E-six-four at kings dot co dot U-K. 
	
B	 Can you repeat that, please?
	
A	 Yes, J-V-I-N-E-six-four at kings dot co dot U-K. OK, now I’m 
going to write it on the board for you. Did you get it right?…
Well done. Remember, this symbol is called at in English, and 
this one is dot. 
5	 A	 Good evening.
	
B	 Hi. We have a table booked for seven thirty.
	
A	 Yes, madam. What name, please?
	
B	 Ann Rathbone. R-A-T-H-B-O-N-E.
	
A	 Ah, yes, here we are. Can you come this way, please? 
6	 A	 OK, Susannah, that’s great. Here’s your student card. Your 
classes start on Monday at nine a.m. Now, the classes are not 
here in the main school, but in a different building.
	
B	 Oh?
	
A	 But it’s very near – just five minutes’ walk from here, in Russell 
Street.
	
B	 Sorry, what’s the address?
	
A	 It’s sixteen Russell Street. That’s R-U-double S-E-double L. Let 
me show you on the map.
	
B	 Thank you.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the form. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. If Sts 
don’t want to give their real address and phone number, 
tell them to invent one. Remind Sts that when we say 
phone numbers in English, we say the individual digits, 
and that 0 can be oh or zero. Elicit how to say an email 
address, e.g. that @ = at and . = dot.
	 When they have finished, get Sts to show each other their 
forms to check the information.
	 Get some feedback.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 personal information
a	 e 1.9   Focus on the instructions. Make sure Sts 
understand that they aren’t going to listen to six complete 
conversations. They must listen to six people giving some 
information and write down the letters and numbers. 
	 Go through the words in 1–6, making sure Sts know what 
they mean, e.g. first name, postcode, etc. Point out that the 
first one (Wayne) has been done. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and write the letters and 
numbers. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by eliciting the information onto the board.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the audio, you might want 
to check that Sts know how to say an email address, e.g. 
that @ = at and . = dot. You might also want to check that 
Sts understand the term double, e.g. My name’s Anna – 
A-double N-A.
2  SE21 8GP    3  07700 987782    4  jvine64@kings.co.uk    
5  Rathbone    6  16 Russell Street
e 1.9
1	 A	 How do you spell your first name?
	
B	 W-A-Y-N-E.
2	 A	 What’s the postcode?
	
B	 It’s S-E-twenty-one-eight-G-P.
3	 B	 Oh-seven-seven-double oh-nine eight-seven-seven-eight-two.
4	 A	 It’s J-V-I-N-E-six-four at kings dot co dot U-K. 
	
B	 Can you repeat that, please?
	
A	 Yes, J-V-I-N-E-six-four at kings dot co dot U-K.
5	 B	 Ann Rathbone. R-A-T-H-B-O-N-E.
6	 A	 It’s sixteen Russell Street. That’s R-U-double S-E-double L. Let 
me show you on the map.
b	 e 1.10   Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Go through situations 
a–f and point out that the first one (1b) has been done 
for them. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each conversation to give Sts 
time to number a–f. Play again if necessary. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each 
conversation, and check the answer.
2  a    3  c    4  e    5  f    6  d
e 1.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
1	 A	 Good afternoon. How can I help you? 
	
B	 I have a reservation for five nights.
	
A	 What’s your name? 
	
B	 Wayne Roberts.
	
A	 How do you spell your first name?
	
B	 W-A-Y-N-E.
	
A	 Just a moment. 
2	 A	 So, the sofa is eight hundred and ninety-nine pounds and 
ninety-nine p in total. What’s the address for delivery? Is it a 
London address?
	
B	 Yes, it’s in south London.
	
A	 What’s the postcode?
	
B	 It’s S-E-twenty-one-eight-G-P.
	
A	 And the address is…?
	
B	 Fourteen Dangerford Road, flat two. That’s in Forest Hill, 
London. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 16@@
16
1B
	1B	 The perfect date?
1	VOCABULARY & READING  describing 	
	 people
a	 e 1.11   Books open. Focus on the instructions and the 
two photos. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and decide which speaker is 
the woman in the photos (describing her father).
	 Check the answer, eliciting the words and phrases which 
helped Sts to identify Charlotte’s father, e.g. quite good-
looking, he’s not very tall – a bit taller than me. 
Charlotte is speaker 2.
e 1.11
1	 My dad’s very tall and thin, with a big nose. He looks a bit like a 
tall, thin bird! He has blond hair and blue eyes, which is typical of 
Sweden – his grandmother was from Sweden. Um, he looks a bit 
serious, but he isn’t, really. He’s very funny – he has a great sense 
of humour.
2	 I think my dad’s quite good-looking. He’s not very tall – a bit taller 
than me – and he still has his hair: it was dark, but it’s grey now. 
He’s not thin, but he isn’t overweight – he’s careful about what he 
eats. And he’s got a lovely smile. 
3	 My dad’s short and thin, and he wears glasses. He isn’t exactly 
good-looking, but he’s not unattractive, either. He’s very friendly, 
and very talkative – in fact, he never stops talking. 
b	 e 1.12   Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand height, hair, weight, and smile.
	 Play the audio. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Get Sts to try to spell overweight, and write it on 
the board. Elicit its meaning, as it is probably the first time 
Sts have seen the word.
height  not very tall
hair  was dark, now grey
weight  not thin, but isn’t overweight
smile  lovely
e 1.12
I think my dad’s quite good-looking. He’s not very tall – a bit taller 
than me – and he still has his hair, but less than before – it was dark, 
but it’s grey now. He’s not thin, but he isn’t overweight – he’s careful 
about what he eats. And he’s got a lovely smile. 
Vocabulary notes
Sts are often confused by the difference between the 
questions What does he look like? and What’s he like?.  
What does he look like? only refers to appearance, but 
What’s he like? can refer to both appearance and 
personality.
You may want to explain that blonde is used to describe 
women’s / girls’ hair and blond is used for men’s / boys’ hair.
 G   present simple
 V   describing people: appearance and personality
 P   final -s and -es
Lesson plan
In this lesson, the present simple (all forms) is revised in 
detail through a British newspaper article. A daughter tries 
to find a suitable partner for her father, who is divorced. 
The lesson begins with Vocabulary and Reading. Basic 
language for physical description is revised, and in the 
Vocabulary Bank, new language is presented and adjectives 
of personality are introduced. Sts then read the article about 
Charlotte’s dad, Clint, and focus on the grammar of the 
present simple. This is followed by a pronunciation focus 
on the final -s and -es endings in verbs and nouns. Sts then 
read about two possible dates for Clint and discuss who they 
think is the better date. In Listening, Sts listen to Elspeth, an 
Irish journalist, talking about a dating experiment in which 
her mother chooses dates for her from a dating app. The 
lesson ends with Sts describing a single person – a member 
of their family, or a friend – in detail, and writing a short 
description. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present simple p.173 
Vocabulary  Describing people p.257 
(instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Ask me some questions… p.218   
(instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  1B
Online Practice  1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
DIRECT FAMILY
mother
OTHER RELATIVES
grandmother
HUSBAND / WIFE’S FAMILY
mother-in-law
Put Sts in pairs. Give them a minute to add more words to 
each category.
Get feedback and write the words on the board. Remind Sts 
of the pronunciation of difficult words like daughter. 
Then ask a few Sts What does your father look like? and elicit 
a few adjectives of description, like He’s (very) tall, dark, big, 
good-looking, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 17@@
17
1B
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 You could tell Sts that mean in American English has a 
different meaning (= unkind) and it is sometimes used 
with this meaning in British English. 
	 Focus on the What does she look like? What is she like? 
box and go through it with the class to remind them of 
the difference between the two questions. 
	 Focus on d. Get Sts to cover the adjectives and look at the 
definitions to test themselves or their partner.
	 Finally, for Activation, put Sts in pairs and get them to ask 
and answer questions about a member of their family or a 
good friend. Get some feedback from a few individual Sts.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. job, marital status, etc.
	 Focus on the title of the article and elicit the meaning 
of the verb date (= go out with someone in a romantic 
relationship) and the noun date (= a romantic meeting) 
at the beginning of the article. Give Sts time to read the 
article and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
his age  52
his job  businessman
his marital status  divorced
his personality  warm, generous, a gentleman, romantic, fun
his perfect partner  a woman who works, independent, 
  funny, clever
e	 Focus on questions 1–4 and go through them with 
the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and answer the 
questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Because she doesn’t want him to end up alone.
2	 They go out together and are planning a trip together.
3	 You met people face to face, and, for example, invited them 
for a drink.
4	 He finds dates online / on the internet. Charlotte has helped 
by writing his profile.
f	 Focus on the instructions and do this as a whole-class 
activity.
1  funny    2  fun
	 Finally, deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and 
drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit Sts’ opinions.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Describing people 
on p.150. Focus on 1 Appearance. Focus on the question 
What does he / she look like? and elicit that it refers to a 
person’s physical appearance. Get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs. Point out that the first one has been done 
for them.
	 e 1.13   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts understand the individual 
words in the descriptions. 
e 1.13 
	
1 Appearance What does he look like? What does she look like?
2	 She has curly red hair.
3	 She has long, straight hair.
1	 She has big, blue eyes.
6	 She has short, blonde hair.
5	 He has a beard and a moustache.
4	 He’s bald.
7	 He’s very tall and thin.
9	 He’s medium height and very slim.
8	 He’s quite short and a bit overweight. 
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce, 
e.g. curly, straight, beard, etc. Highlight the different 
pronunciations of height /haɪt/ and weight /weɪt/.
	 Now go through the information box with the class. 
After going through the Using two adjectives together 
section, you might also want to elicit from Sts typical 
colours for hair, i.e. fair / blond(e), red, grey, light / dark 
brown, black, white. In the Handsome or beautiful? 
section, highlight the silent d in handsome. 
	 Finally, focus on c. Get Sts to cover the sentences and use 
the photos to test themselves or their partner. If they are 
testing a partner, encourage them to use the question 
What does he / she look like?.
	 Focus on 2 Personality and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs. Point out that the first one (friendly) has been 
done for them.
	 Check the answers to a before moving on to b.
2  talkative    3  generous    4  kind    5  lazy    6  funny    7  clever
8  shy
	 Now Sts do b by putting the adjectives from the list into 
the Opposite column in a.
	 e 1.14   Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts understand the 
individual words in the descriptions. 
e 1.14
	
Personality
1	 friendly, unfriendly
2	 talkative, quiet
3	 generous, mean
4	 kind, unkind
5	 lazy, hard-working
6	 funny, serious
7	 clever, stupid
8	 shy, extrovert
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 18@@
18
1B
b	 1	 I always go to bed before 11.00.
	
2	 Kate hardly ever sees her family.
	
3	 We never go shopping on Saturdays.
	
4	 I go to the dentist’s twice a year.
	
5	 They sometimes have breakfast in bed. / Sometimes they 
have breakfast in bed.
	
6	 I usually listen to the radio in the car.
	
7	 Alan runs in the park every day. 
	
8	 Sam is often late for work.
	
9	 John doesn’t often go to the theatre.
	 10	 I visit my mum once a month.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
	 final -s and -es
Pronunciation notes
The pronunciation rules for adding an -s (or -es) to verbs 
(e.g. smokes) and nouns (e.g. books) are the same.
The difference between the /s/ and /z/ sounds is very 
small and only occasionally causes communication 
problems. The most important thing is for Sts to learn 
when to pronounce -es as /ɪz/.
You may want to give Sts these rules:
•	 The s is pronounced /s/ after these unvoiced* sounds: 
/k/, /p/, /f/, and /t/, e.g. walks, stops, laughs, eats.
•	 In all other cases, the final s is voiced and pronounced 
/z/, e.g. plays, parties, etc.
*Voiced and unvoiced consonants
Voiced consonant sounds are made by vibrating the 
vocal chords, e.g. /b/, /l/, /m/, /v/, etc. Unvoiced consonant 
sounds are made without vibration in the vocal chords, 
e.g. /k/, /p/, /t/, /s/, etc.
You can demonstrate this to Sts by getting them to hold 
their hands against their throats. For voiced sounds, they 
should feel a vibration in their throat, but not for unvoiced 
sounds.
a	 e 1.17   Explain that the final -s and -es in the third person 
of the present simple and in plurals can be pronounced in 
three different ways.
	 Focus on the sound pictures. Elicit and drill the words and 
sounds: snake /s/, zebra /z/, and /ɪz/.
!   Sts may have problems distinguishing between the 
/s/ and /z/ sounds. Tell them that the /s/ is like the sound 
made by a snake and the /z/ is a bee or fly.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. 
e 1.17
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.9
	 Then play it again, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now focus on the Pronunciation of final -s and -es box 
and go through it with the class.
2	GRAMMAR  present simple
a	 Focus on the instructions. Give Sts a few minutes to 
complete the gaps. 
	 Check answers.
+   needs    −  doesn’t    ?   do, does
b	 Tell Sts to read the four sentences and tick the ones that 
are correct. Highlight that the correct answer depends on 
the position of the adverbs of frequency often and always.
	 Check answers.
1  A    2  B
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts why the other sentences are 
wrong and elicit the rules for word order.
Adverbs of frequency go before main verbs, but after the  
verb be.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.126. 
Grammar notes
Present simple
Remind Sts:
•	 of the difference in pronunciation between do /duː/, 
don’t /dəʊnt/, and does /dʌz/
•	 of the pronunciation of goes /ɡəʊz/ and has /hæz/
•	 that the contracted forms don’t and doesn’t are always 
used in conversation
Adverbs and expressions of frequency
You may want to point out that usually / normally and 
sometimes can also be used at the beginning of a present 
simple sentence, e.g. Sometimes I get up late on Saturday.
Other common expressions of frequency using every are 
every week, every month, and every year.
In expressions like once a month, twice a day, etc., remind 
Sts that once and twice are irregular (NOT one time, two 
times); times is used with all other numbers, e.g. ten times, 
thirty times (a year).
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 1.15 and e 1.16 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1B on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 1	 Does Anna like music?
	
2	 My sister has a lot of hobbies.
	
3	 I don’t get on very well with my parents.
	
4	 My brother studies English at university.
	
5	 My neighbours don’t have any children.
	
6	 What time does the film start?
	
7	 He goes out twice a week.
	
8	 We don’t often talk about politics.
	
9	 How often do you see your brother?
	 10	 Sally doesn’t go on Facebook very much.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 19@@
19
1B
	 Check answers. When checking the answer to question 2, 
elicit what you do if you don’t like someone (swipe left if 
you don’t like someone).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 She uses a dating app.
2	 You swipe right if you like them.
3	 Elspeth’s mother is going to choose the men she likes for her 
daughter.
4	 Elspeth is going to go on a date with the men her mother 
chooses.
e 1.19
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
My name’s Elspeth. I’m twenty-five, I’m a journalist, I live in Dublin, 
and I’m single. It’s not easy to meet people here. So who can help 
me? My mother…and a dating app. My favourite dating app, 
called Tinder, shows you photos of possible partners, with a bit of 
information about them. You look at the photos and swipe, swipe, 
swipe. Swipe right if you like them, and swipe left…well…swipe left 
if you don’t. If a guy likes you and you like him, you have a match. 
Then you can start messaging the person, and from this, romance 
follows…or so they say. I’ve tried it, but with no success. So I decide 
to give my mother my phone. She can swipe all the men she likes, 
and then look at my matches and choose the people that she likes 
the best. I’ve promised to go on a date with the men she chooses.
b	 e 1.20  Focus on the instructions and the question. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the question. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Pause after the date with John and elicit 
the answer, then repeat for Sebastian.
She likes her mum’s choices and has fun, but she isn’t sure the 
men are right for her.
e 1.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Date 1
My first date is with a nice guy called John. I sit at a table in a bar and 
wait for him to arrive. An old man walks towards the table, and for 
two awful seconds I think it’s all a terrible mistake, but he walks past, 
and then my date arrives. He’s very tall: one metre ninety. Well done, 
Mum! I’m tall myself, so I always look for tall men, as my mum knows 
well. We start chatting, and it’s all very easy. Mum has good taste. 
He’s a teacher. We get on well and it’s a fun date, but sadly, there isn’t 
a spark. So I try again.
Date 2
I arrive a bit early again, and I sit there waiting for Sebastian to arrive. 
Suddenly, I realize that I can’t remember anything at all about him, 
not even where he’s from. Then he comes through the door: tall, 
dark, and handsome. Mum, you’re amazing, I say to myself. He’s from 
Germany, but he lives in Dublin. He’s a real gentleman. At the end of 
the evening, he asks for a second date. Mum is very pleased. I agree 
to the date, but I don’t really think it’s going to work. 
c	 Give Sts time to read 1–6 and see if they can remember 
which man each phrase refers to. Elicit that a spark means 
a feeling of excitement.
	 Play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  S    2  J    3  J    4  S    5  J    6  S 
	 Ask Sts which man they think Elspeth prefers and why.
b	 e 1.18   Write the three phonetic symbols, /s/, /z/, and  
/ɪz/ on the board. Elicit the third person pronunciation of 
the first verb in the list (chooses) and ask Sts which group 
it belongs to (group 3). Write it on the board under the 
correct heading. Get Sts to continue with the other verbs.
	 Then tell them to do the same thing with the plural form 
of the nouns.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and check.
	 Check answers.
/s/
/z/
/ɪz/
verbs
cooks
goes
chooses
stops
lives
teaches
/s/
/z/
/ɪz/
nouns
books
boys
classes
shops
friends
languages
e 1.18
chooses, cooks, goes, lives, stops, teaches
books, boys, classes, friends, languages, shops
	 Highlight that the most important thing to get correct 
is that lives and dates are pronounced /lɪvz/ and /deɪts/, 
NOT /lɪvɪz/ and /deɪtɪz/, but that in chooses, teaches, 
classes, and languages the -es is pronounced /ɪz/.
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each group of words for 
Sts to repeat. 
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication A date for Clint, A on p.102, B on p.108. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face if possible. When they have 
finished reading their profiles, B starts by asking A 
questions 1–7 about Maggie. 
	 When B has finished, they swap roles.
	 When they have finished, tell them to compare photos 
and decide who they think is a better date for Clint.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
d	 With a show of hands, find out if the class think Maggie or 
Tessa is the better date and why.
4	LISTENING  identifying the person being 	
	 described
a	 e 1.19   Focus on the photo of Elspeth Gordon and the 
instructions. Now focus on the four questions and point 
out the Glossary. Demonstrate the meaning of swipe to 
make sure Sts have understood the definition.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner, and play 
the audio again if necessary. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 20@@
20
1B
c	 This is the first time Sts are sent to the Writing section at 
the back of the Student’s Book. In this section, Sts will find 
model texts, with exercises and language notes, and then 
a writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercise(s) in class, but set the actual writing 
(the last activity) for homework. 
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing yourself on p.113.
	 Focus on a and get Sts to read Charlie’s profile and answer 
questions 1–7.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Carlos 
2	 Guadalajara, Mexico
3	 He’s a (physics) student.
4	 His parents and his dog
5	 He has black hair, brown eyes, and a Roman nose.
6	 He’s positive and funny, but he can be serious, too.
7	 He watches TV and plays computer games.
	 Now do b and tell Sts to read the profile again and correct 
the ten mistakes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  I’m 21 years old.    2  studying    3  photo    4  brown   
5  friends    6  can be    7  don’t    8  much    9  because 
10  English
	 Now focus on the chart in c. Get Sts to first write the 
topics from the list in the first column of the chart 
(Content), and then write the highlighted phrases from 
the profile for each paragraph. Point out that Paragraph 1 
has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
Content
Phrases
Paragraph 2
work / study, family
I’m going to tell 
you about…;   
I live with…
Paragraph 3
physical appearance
As you can see 
from the…;  
My father always 
says…
Paragraph 4
personality
I think I’m a…; 
My…say…
Paragraph 5
hobbies and interests
…when I’m not in 
class…;  
…when I can, I 
like…
	 Focus on d and tell Sts they are now going to plan their 
own profile. They should add notes to the last column 
(My information) in the chart.
	 When Sts are ready, focus on e and tell them to write 
their own profiles on a piece of paper. As this writing 
task is quite short, you may like to get Sts to do it in class. 
Otherwise, set it for homework.
	 In f, Sts check their work for mistakes before giving it in.
d	 e 1.21  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Elspeth 
talking about a third date and they must answer the two 
questions. Before playing the audio, pre-teach enthusiastic. 
Model and drill pronunciation /ɪnˌθjuːziˈæstɪk/.
	 Now play the audio the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Check the answer to the first question and elicit ideas for 
the second.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts more questions about the date, e.g. 
What’s his name? What problem is there at the beginning? What 
does George do?, etc.
Yes, it is. The date is going well.
e 1.21
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Date 3
Date number three is George. He suggests a bar on South William 
Street. I arrive early – I’m definitely the most punctual person in 
the world. I stand outside, very confused: the bar is closed. For a 
moment, I think Mum has finally got it wrong. But a few minutes 
later, he arrives – he just didn’t know the bar was closed. We go 
somewhere else and start chatting. He tells me he works in IT and is 
from just outside Dublin. This guy is great fun. He’s very relaxed and 
interesting – he’s travelled a lot. He tells a lot of funny stories. It’s all 
going well, and I’m getting very enthusiastic, when my phone pings.
e	 e 1.22  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the end of 
the date.  They must check their ideas from d and answer 
the two questions.
	 Play the audio the whole way through. 
	 Check the answers to the first two questions and 
elicit opinions on whether Elspeth and George have a 
second date.
The message was from her mother.
She feels very embarrassed and wants to die.
e 1.22
It’s all going well, and I’m getting very enthusiastic, when my phone 
pings. It’s on the table between us and it’s a text. From my mother. 
Well, is he lovely? Love Mum.
George looks at my screen and reads the text. I want to die.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to all parts of the audio with the scripts on p.120, 
so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit Sts’ opinions. Tell 
them what you think, too.
5	SPEAKING & WRITING  describing yourself
a	 Give Sts five minutes to make a few notes about a person 
they know well who is single and looking for a partner. 
Monitor and help with vocabulary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to make notes about their person in 
the form.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A describes his / her person and 
B listens and asks for more information. 
	 Sts swap roles and B describes his / her person to A. Do 
they know someone who would be a good partner for 
this person? Get feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 21@@
21
1C
	1C	 The Remake Project
1	VOCABULARY  clothes
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and then give Sts 
time to look at the painting and photo and read about the 
Remake Project.
	 Elicit opinions from the class. You could also tell Sts what 
you think.
b	 Tell Sts to look at both the painting and the photo and 
look for the items of clothing. Elicit 1 from the class and 
explain the meaning of apron. Sts then continue to say 
who is wearing the other items.
	 Check answers.
1  W    2  M    3  W    4  W    5  M    6  W
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Things you wear 
on p.151. Focus on the four sections (clothes, footwear, 
accessories, and jewellery) and make sure Sts know what 
they mean and how to pronounce them (/kləʊðz/, 
/ˈfʊtweə/, /əkˈsesəriːz/, /ˈdʒuːəlri/). 
Vocabulary notes
Some clothes words only exist in the plural, e.g. jeans, 
leggings, pyjamas, shorts, trousers, tights. These words 
cannot be used with a, e.g. NOT a trousers. If Sts want to 
use an indefinite article, they should use some, e.g.  
I bought some trousers / some shoes.
You could also teach a pair of, which is often used with 
plural clothes words, e.g. a pair of trousers. Other words for 
clothes, e.g. footwear, socks, and gloves are usually plural, 
but can be used in the singular.
	 Now get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 1.23   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 1.23
Things you wear
Clothes
11	 blouse
13	 cardigan
3	 coat
2	 dress
9	 jacket
5	 jeans
14	 leggings
18	 pyjamas
8	 shirt
1	 shorts
6	 skirt
20	 socks
7	 suit
16	 sweater
19	 tights
4	 top
10	 tracksuit
12	 trousers
15	 T-shirt
17	 underwear
Footwear
24	 boots
25	 flip-flops
22	 sandals
23	 shoes
21	 trainers
Accessories
26	 belt
30	 cap
31	 hat
28	 gloves
29	 scarf
27	 tie
Jewellery
33	 bracelet
32	 earrings
35	 necklace
34	 ring
 G   present continuous
 V   clothes: boots, skirt, etc., prepositions of place: under, next 
to, etc.
 P   /ə/ and /ɜː/
Lesson plan
The context for this lesson is a project called Remake, in 
which modern photographers recreate famous paintings. 
The images from one example, a painting by Vermeer 
called The Milkmaid and its corresponding photo, are 
used to present clothes vocabulary, and this is followed 
by a pronunciation focus on two common vowel sounds, 
/ə/ and /ɜː/. Sts then focus again on the images and answer 
questions, and this leads them to the Grammar section, 
which is on using the present continuous for things that 
are happening now, or around now, and for describing 
what is happening in a picture. The present continuous is 
also contrasted with the present simple for habitual actions 
or permanent situations. When Sts come back from the 
Grammar Bank, they have a listening activity where they 
hear an art expert talking about Vermeer and the painting. 
They then revise prepositions of place, and all the language 
of the lesson is pulled together in a final speaking activity, 
where Sts describe two more examples of paintings and 
their remakes to each other in order to find the similarities 
and differences.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present simple or present continuous? p.174 
Vocabulary  Things you wear p.258  
(instructions p.253) 
Communicative  What are they doing? p.219   
(instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  1C
Online Practice  1C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the word CLOTHES on the board (or play Hangman  
with it). 
Then ask Sts how to pronounce it (/kləʊðz/) and if it is 
singular or plural (plural). Explain that there is no singular 
form, and that if they want to talk about an item of clothing, 
they should refer to it by name, e.g. a sweater.
Now draw a line before CLOTHES on the board, e.g. 
__________ CLOTHES, and ask Sts what verbs they can use 
with clothes. They should be able to produce wear, buy, try 
on, and possibly put on and take off.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 22@@
22
1C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. You could get Sts to ask you a couple of 
questions first.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
3	GRAMMAR  present continuous
a	 Focus on the instructions and sentences 1–6. Make sure 
Sts know the meaning of pour /pɔː/. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
	 Now tell Sts to look at both the Vermeer painting and the 
photo, and complete gaps 1–6. 
	 Check answers. 
1  They’re    2  She’s    3  He’s    4  She’s    5  They’re    6  They’re
b	 Focus on the sentences and give Sts time to choose the 
correct form. 
	 Check answers.
1  isn’t wearing    2  wear 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   When Sts have chosen the correct form 
in each sentence, put them in pairs to discuss why the other 
is wrong.
1	 isn’t wearing (because we are describing a photo and saying 
what is happening at that moment)
2	 wear (because it’s something that happens habitually / 
frequently)
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1C on p.126. 
Grammar notes
Some languages do not have an equivalent to the present 
continuous and may always use the present simple. Typical 
mistakes are: The man in the picture wears a hat. We live with 
friends at the moment because builders work on our house.
The present continuous is used to describe what is 
happening in a painting because it is as if we were looking 
at a scene through a window.
The future use of the present continuous (I’m leaving 
tomorrow) is presented in 3B.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 1.26 and e 1.27 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 1C on p.127. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on c. Give Sts a minute to cover the words and look 
at the photos to test themselves or each other.
	 Focus on the information box for wear, carry, or dress? 
and a pair, and go through it with the class. 
	 Finally, focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B.  
A starts by telling his / her partner what someone is 
wearing and B has to guess who it is. They then swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  /ə/ and /ɜː/
Pronunciation notes
The schwa /ə/ is the most common sound in English. It is 
a short sound, and always occurs in an unstressed syllable, 
e.g. doctor /ˈdɒktə/, address /əˈdres/.
You may want to point out to Sts that unstressed -er or 
-or at the end of a word are always pronounced /ə/, e.g. 
teacher, better, etc. and that -tion is always pronounced 
/ʃən/.
/ɜː/ is a similar sound, but it is a long sound and is always 
a stressed syllable, e.g. nurse /nɜːs/, worker /ˈwɜːkə/.
a	 e 1.24   Focus on the instructions and the question. 
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. 
e 1.24 
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.10
	 Then play it again, pausing after each word for Sts to 
repeat.
	 Ask Sts which sound is only in unstressed syllables.
The schwa sound /ə/ is only in unstressed syllables.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
that they have to underline the stress in the words in the 
list and then decide if the highlighted sounds belong to 
1 or 2 in a. Point out that the first one (painter) has been 
done for them.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to complete the task.
c	 e 1.25   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board in the 
two groups and underlining the stressed syllable.
her 2    first 2    photograph 1    picture 1    prefer 2    curly 2  
attractive 1    occasion 1    work 2    university 2
e 1.25
painter 1    her 2    first 2    photograph 1    picture 1    prefer 2
curly 2    attractive 1    occasion 1    work 2    university 2
	 Play the audio again, stopping after each word for Sts to 
repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 23@@
23
1C
e 1.28
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Johannes Vermeer was a seventeenth-century painter from the 
city of Delft, in Holland. He mainly painted the people and things 
he saw around him: the rooms in his house, the people who lived 
or worked there – usually women – and the things they did every 
day. For example, in his work you will see women who are playing 
music, reading or writing letters, or working in the kitchen. Vermeer 
was especially good at painting light coming into a room through 
windows. Partly for this reason, people often describe his work as 
being like photography or film – his paintings can seem very ‘real’.
This painting, The Milkmaid, is one of these very ‘photographic’ 
images. The woman, a maid or a servant, is pouring milk into a bowl. 
Perhaps she’s making a bread and milk pudding, because there are 
pieces of broken bread on the table. Nobody knows if the woman 
he painted was a real servant or a model. However, most people 
think Vermeer usually painted his wife, his daughter, and his servant, 
not models. A famous book and film called Girl with a Pearl Earring, 
inspired by one of his best-known paintings, is an imaginary story 
about Vermeer and his relationship with his young servant.
People admired Vermeer’s paintings a lot in his lifetime, but he was 
never rich. There are two reasons for this. First, because he painted 
very slowly. Today, there are only thirty-four paintings which we can 
be sure are by him. Second, because he used very expensive paints. 
The blue paint he used for the milkmaid’s apron was made of lapis 
lazuli, which was a very expensive stone. 
People loved this painting from the very beginning, and although it 
is very small – only forty-six by forty-one centimetres – twenty years 
after Vermeer died, somebody bought the painting for one hundred 
and seventy-five Dutch guilders. That was an enormous amount of 
money for the time.
c	 Tell Sts to look at 1–6 and focus on the example for 1. 
Then ask Sts to tell you anything they can remember 
about 2–6. 
	 Play the audio again for Sts to make notes. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Pause the audio after each paragraph to 
give Sts time to take in the information. 
	 Then play it again, pausing if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 light coming through windows  He was especially good at 
painting this.
3	 his wife, his daughter, and his servant  Most people think 
they are the women in his paintings.
4	 Girl with a Pearl Earring  It’s a film and a book about his 
relationship with a young servant, inspired by one of his 
paintings.
5	 the milkmaid’s apron  The blue paint he used for this was 
very expensive (made from lapis lazuli, a very expensive 
stone).
6	 175 Dutch guilders  What someone paid for the painting  
20 years after his death. It was then a lot of money.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
a	
1	 Oliver is wearing a suit today!
2	 It’s hot. Why are you wearing a coat?
3	 Jane isn’t sitting in her usual place today.
4	 Hey! You’re standing on my foot!
5	 What book are you reading?
6	 We’re renting a small flat at the moment.
7	 Is she wearing make-up?
8	 I’m planning a trip to the USA.
9	 Is your brother working in London this week?
10	 They aren’t getting on very well at the moment.
b	
1	 He doesn’t bite
2	 Why are you wearing sunglasses? It’s raining.
3	 I’m not listening to it.
4	 I need to find a cash machine.
5	 The baby’s putting your pen in her mouth!
6	 Do you usually cook at weekends?  
No, we normally eat out.
7	 What are you doing here?  
I’m waiting for Emma.
8	 I usually drink tea, but I want a coffee today.
9	 She works from 9.00 to 5.00.
10	 Marc lives in Paris, but he’s working in Nice at the moment.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	LISTENING  checking hypotheses (using visual 	
	 evidence and background knowledge)
a	 Tell Sts that they are going to find out more about the 
painter Vermeer and The Milkmaid. Go through questions 
1–6, making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. a pudding.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Elicit some answers from the class, but don’t tell them if 
they are right or not.
b	 e 1.28 Now tell Sts to listen and check their answers to a.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  b    2  a    3  a    4  c    5  b    6  b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 24@@
24
1C
6	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the Describing a picture box and go through 
it with the class. You might also want to teach Sts the 
words foreground (= the part of a picture that is nearest to 
you when you look at it) and background (= the part of a 
picture behind the main objects, people, etc.). Model and 
drill pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to sit face-to-face 
if possible. Then tell them to go to Communication 
Remakes, A on p.102, B on p.108.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully and make 
sure Sts are clear what they have to do. Stress that they 
have to find the similarities and differences between the 
original painting and the modern photo.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to look at their pictures and think 
about how they are going to describe them. Remind 
them to use the present continuous to say what the 
people are doing.
	 Tell A Sts to start by describing their painting. When they 
have finished, they should swap roles.
	 When Sts have finished, they must look at the paintings 
and photos together.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1C.
b	 Go through the questions and make sure Sts remember 
the meaning of posters, and the difference between paint 
and draw. Put Sts in small groups to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class for each question. Tell 
them what you think for the first question, too.
5	VOCABULARY  prepositions of place
a	 Tell Sts that when you are describing a picture, it’s 
important to use the correct prepositions to say where 
things are. Focus on the prepositions and phrases in the 
list. 
	 Tell Sts to complete each gap with a word or phrase from 
the list. Point out that the first one (in) has been done for 
them. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts don’t remember the prepositions very 
well, you could spend a bit more time recycling them, using 
things in the classroom, e.g. Where’s the TV? It’s on a shelf 
behind the table, etc.
b	 e 1.29   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2  in front of    3  On    4  in the middle of, between    
5  under    6  Behind    7  on the left of    8  In the corner
9  on, above    10  next to
e 1.29 
1	 The young man is in the kitchen.
2	 There’s a table in front of him.
3	 On the table there are some eggs, some bread, and some 
strawberries.
4	 The bread is in the middle of the table. It’s between the eggs and 
the strawberries.
5	 There’s a board under the bread.
6	 Behind the man, there’s an old washing machine.
7	 There’s a window on the left of the photo.
8	 In the corner of the room there’s a sink and some cleaning 
products.
9	 There’s a flower on the wall above the sink.
10	 The sink is next to the window.
	 Now put Sts in pairs. Get them to cover the sentences 
in a and look at the photo, and ask each other where the 
things are.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 25@@
25
PE1
1	r INTRODUCTION
a	 e 1.30   Books open. Focus on the instructions and the 
six photos. Make sure Sts understand the meaning of 
mention. Give Sts a few minutes to think about which 
order to put them in. 
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through. 
	 Then play it again and get Sts to number the photos 1–6 
in the order Jenny mentions them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  B    2  D    3  C    4  F    5  A    6  E
e 1.30
My name’s Jenny Zielinski. I live and work in New York. I’m the 
assistant editor of a magazine called NewYork 24seven.
A few months ago, I visited our office in London to learn more 
about the company. I met the manager, Daniel O’Connor. I had 
lots of meetings with him, of course. And a working dinner on my 
birthday… But I spent more time with Rob Walker. He’s one of the 
writers on the London magazine. We had coffees together. We went 
sightseeing. I even helped Rob buy a shirt! He was fun to be with. I 
liked him a lot. I think he liked me too. Rob isn’t the most punctual 
person in the world, but he is a great writer. We invited him to work 
for the New York magazine for a month…and he agreed! So now 
Rob’s coming to New York. I know he’s really excited about it. It’s 
going to be great to see him again.
b	 Focus on questions 1–7 and give Sts time to read them.
	 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen a 
second time, and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Make sure Sts understand the meaning of 
punctual. Model and drill pronunciation /ˈpʌŋktʃuəl/.
1	 She works for a magazine. / She is the assistant editor of a 
magazine.
2	 She went to London.
3	 Rob is one of the writers for the magazine.
4	 They had coffee and went sightseeing and shopping.
5	 She likes him a lot. He was fun.
6	 He isn’t very punctual. / He’s always late.
7	 He is going to be in New York for a month.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function	
calling reception
Lesson plan
This is the first in a series of six Practical English lessons (one 
every other File) which teach Sts functional language to help 
them ‘survive’ in English in travel and social situations. 
There is a storyline based on two characters, Jenny Zielinski, 
an American journalist who works in the New York office of 
a magazine called NewYork 24seven, and Rob Walker, a British 
journalist who works in London for the same magazine, 
but who is now in New York for a month. If your Sts did 
English File Elementary, they will already be familiar with 
the characters. If your Sts didn’t do English File Elementary, 
you might want to point out that in the You Say section 
of the lessons, they will be watching or listening and then 
repeating what the people say. If the speaker is Jenny, they 
will be listening to an American accent, but they do not 
need to copy the accent when they repeat her phrases.  
The main focus of this lesson is on describing problems and 
asking for help.
These lessons can be used with Class DVD, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, or Class Audio (audio only). Sts can find 
all the video content and activities on Online Practice.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 1 
                     Can you remember...? 1
Online Practice  Practical English 1 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
If your Sts did English File Elementary, elicit anything they can 
remember about Rob and Jenny, and write it on the board in 
columns under their names. Leave it on the board so when 
Sts do exercise c, they can see if Jenny mentions any of the 
points on the board.
If your Sts didn’t do English File Elementary, introduce this 
lesson by giving the information in the Lesson plan.
Focus on the first two photos at the top of the page and tell 
Sts that the woman is Jenny and the man is Rob, and that 
they are the main characters in these lessons. 
Get Sts to describe them, using language that they learned 
in 1B, e.g. Jenny is blonde. She has long, straight hair, etc. 
	 1	
Practical English  Hotel problems
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 26@@
26
PE1
d	 Focus on the I’ll information box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is the receptionist. Get Sts to 
read the conversation aloud, and then swap roles.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to read their 
instructions, and help them to understand exactly what 
they have to do.
	 A is the receptionist and has his / her book open. He / She 
reads the You hear part with the new information. Elicit 
that he / she may need to change Sir to Madam if B is a 
woman.
	 B has his / her book closed. He / She should quickly read 
the You say phrases again before starting. 
	 Sts now role-play the conversation. A starts. Monitor 
and help.
EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts start the role-play, elicit some other 
things they could have in a hotel room, e.g. a TV, a towel, a 
chair, etc., and write them on the board. Then elicit some 
problems they might have with these things in the room, 
e.g. the TV doesn’t work, there’s no towel, the chair is 
broken, etc.
f	 When Sts have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
3	r JENNY AND ROB MEET AGAIN
a	 e 1.33   Focus on the photo and ask Sts where they are 
and how Rob looks.
	 Focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–7. 
Go through them with Sts and make sure they 
understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Make it clear that they don’t need to correct the false 
sentences yet.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    2  F    3  T    4  F    5  F    6  T    7  F
2	r CALLING RECEPTION
a	 e 1.31   Focus on the photo and ask Sts Where is Rob? 
(in his hotel room) and What is he doing? (making 
a phone call).
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the two 
questions and cover the conversation on page 13.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers. 
Rob calls reception because he has some problems in his room.
e 1.31 e 1.32
Re = receptionist, R = Rob
Re	Hello, reception.
R	 Hello. This is room six-one-three. (repeat)
Re	How can I help you?
R	 There’s a problem with the air conditioning. (repeat) It isn’t 
working, and it’s very hot in my room. (repeat)
Re	I’m sorry, sir. I’ll send somebody up to look at it right now.
R	 Thank you. (repeat)
***
Re	Good evening, reception.
R	 Hello. I’m sorry to bother you again. This is room six-one-three. 
(repeat)
Re	How can I help you?
R	 I have a problem with the wi-fi. (repeat) I can’t get a signal. 
(repeat)
Re	I’m sorry, sir. I’ll put you through to IT. 
R	 Thanks. (repeat)
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Ask Sts 
Who says the You hear sentences? and elicit that it is the 
receptionist. Ask What nationality is he? (American). Then 
ask Who says the You say sentences? and elicit that here it 
is Rob. These phrases will be useful for Sts if they have a 
problem in a hotel.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  help    2  send    3  evening    4  put
	 You might want to model and drill the pronunciation 
of wi-fi /ˈwaɪ faɪ/ and signal /ˈsɪgnəl/. Elicit / Explain 
what to put someone through means and that IT stands 
for Information Technology, so here it means the people 
responsible for wi-fi at the hotel.
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. 
 c	e 1.32   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. 
e 1.32
Same as script 1.31 with repeat pauses
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 27@@
27
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3, 1    B  2    C  6    D  4    E  5
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
PE1
e 1.33
J = Jenny, R = Rob
J	 So, here you are in New York at last.
R	 Yeah, it’s great to be here. It’s really exciting.
J	 And how’s your hotel?
R	 It’s fine. My room is really…nice.
J	 Do you have a good view from your room?
R	 I can see lots of other buildings.
J	 Tomorrow, I’m going to show you around the office and introduce 
you to the team. Barbara’s looking forward to meeting you…You 
remember Barbara, my boss?
R	 Oh…yeah, sorry.
J	 And then you can start thinking about your blog and the column. 
Have you got any ideas yet, Rob?…Rob?
R	 What? Sorry, Jenny.
J	 You must be really tired.
R	 Yes, I am a bit. What time is it now?
J	 It’s nine o’clock.
R	 Nine o’clock? That’s two o’clock in the morning for me. 
J	 Let’s finish our drinks. You need to go to bed.
R	 I guess you’re right.
J	 So, I’ll see you in the office at eleven in the morning. 
R	 At eleven?
J	 Is that OK?
R	 It’s perfect. Thanks, Jenny.
J	 There’s just one thing. 
R	 What’s that?
J	 Don’t be late.
R	 By the way, it’s great to see you again.
J	 Yeah. It’s great to see you, too.
b	 Play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen a 
second time and correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Rob says the hotel is fine.
2	 Jenny is going to show him round the office tomorrow.
4	 Rob is tired.
5	 It’s two in the morning for Rob.
7	 Jenny thinks that Rob is going to be late.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 1.34   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  great    2  good    3  must    4  right    5  way    6  too
e 1.34
1	 It’s great to be here.
2	 Do you have a good view?
3	 You must be really tired.
4	 I guess you’re right.
5	 By the way…
6	 It’s great to see you, too.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 28@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
2A
28
 G   past simple: regular and irregular verbs
 V   holidays
 P   regular verbs: -ed endings
Lesson plan
The past simple (regular and irregular verbs) is revised in 
detail in this lesson, through the context of holidays, with 
three stories about trips where people lose something 
important. Sts begin by reading about Stuart, who went on 
holiday with a group of friends and misplaced his phone. 
Sts then listen to a similar story. Sts then thoroughly revise 
the past simple of both regular and irregular verbs. There is 
a pronunciation focus which revises -ed endings in regular 
verbs. After Sts learn new holiday vocabulary, they listen to 
four conversations which focus on showing interest and 
using ‘interested’ intonation. Finally, Sts interview each other 
about their last holiday using a short questionnaire.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past simple: regular and irregular p.175 
Vocabulary  Holidays p.259 (instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Truth or lie? p.220 (instructions p.208)
For students
Workbook  2A
Online Practice  2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write MY LAST HOLIDAY on the board and tell Sts they have 
two minutes to find out from you as much as possible about 
your last holiday. Elicit questions in the past simple,  
e.g. Where did you go?, etc.
1	READING & LISTENING  
	 understanding the key events in a story
a	 Books open. Focus on the title of the lesson and ask what 
Sts think the title means (OMG stands for Oh my God or 
Oh my Goodness). Tell Sts this abbreviation is very informal 
and is used in, e.g. tweets and WhatsApp messages.
	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of lose. Model and drill pronunciation /luːz/. 
You could also elicit the opposite (to find).
	 Either put Sts in pairs or do it as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback.
b	 Give Sts time to read the story and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
He lost his phone. 
Yes.
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do. Point out that the first one has been 
done for them. Now tell Sts to read the story again. 
	 When they have finished reading, they should cover it and 
look at 2–11.
	 Check answers.
2	 One day, they went for a long walk.
3	 It took about two hours to get to the top of the mountain.
4	 They had lunch at the top of the mountain.
5	 The view was amazing.
6	 Stuart wanted to take another photo, but he couldn’t find his 
phone.
7	 He went back up the mountain with all his friends.
8	 They spent about half an hour looking for the phone.
9	 It started to get colder.
10	 He found his phone in his jacket pocket.
11	 His friends were very nice about it.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 e 2.1   Now tell Sts they are going to listen to another 
story about someone losing something, and they must 
answer the two questions. You could write the two 
questions on the board and get Sts to close their books.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare answers, and then play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Marta lost her ID card. 
No.
e 2.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
Marta’s story
This happened two years ago. I’m Spanish, but I was in Ireland at the 
time because I had a job in Dublin. Some friends of mine who lived 
in Lyon, in France, invited me to come and stay, so I decided to have 
a short holiday, a long weekend, from Friday to Tuesday. I looked 
for cheap flights, but I couldn’t find any direct ones. The only thing I 
could find was Ryanair from Dublin to Brussels, and then Air France 
from Brussels to Lyon.
Anyway, the flight to Brussels was fine, and when I arrived, I went  
to the gate for my next flight to Lyon, but then when I needed 
to show my boarding pass and my ID, I couldn’t find my ID card. I 
looked everywhere – in my bag, in my case – but it wasn’t there. The 
people at the gate were very nice and they made some phone calls, 
but nobody could find it. So they told me to wait in a small room  
and I sat there for more than an hour, and my flight to Lyon left 
without me.
It was awful – I cried – I was so stressed and unhappy. In the end, a 
policeman came and he said that I couldn’t go to France because 
I didn’t have any ID – the only place I could go was to Spain to get 
a new ID card! I waited another five or six hours for the flight to 
Madrid, feeling very depressed.
So I never had my holiday! I spent the weekend in Madrid getting 
my new ID card!
	2A	 OMG! Where’s my passport?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 29@@
2A
29
1  wasn’t    2  couldn’t    3  didn’t
c	 Put Sts in pairs or do this as a whole-class activity. Give 
them a minute to remember how to make negatives and 
questions.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
with was / were:
− = wasn’t or weren’t, e.g. It wasn’t cold.
? = Were (you, etc.)?, Was (he, etc.)?, e.g. Was it nice?
with could: 
− = couldn’t, e.g. We couldn’t stay very long.
? = Could (I, you, etc.)?, e.g. Could you swim there? 
with other verbs:
− = didn’t + infinitive, e.g. I didn’t show them, I didn’t want it.
? = Did (you, etc.) + infinitive?, e.g. Did you go…?
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.128. 
Grammar notes
You may also want to remind Sts:
•	 that irregular forms (went, had, etc.) are only used in 
positive sentences
•	 that the vast majority of verbs are regular. The irregular 
verbs need to be learned, but Sts already know the 
most common ones
Tell Sts to go to Irregular verbs on p.164 and explain that 
this is their reference list. Get Sts to go through the list 
quickly in pairs, checking that they know what the verbs 
mean. Encourage them to highlight verbs they didn’t 
know or had forgotten the past form of.  
Let Sts test each other, or test round the class. 
	 e 2.2   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2A on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  drove    ​2  broke    ​3  spent    ​4  got    ​5  went    ​6  couldn’t    ​
7  were    ​8  didn’t know    ​9  found    ​10  stayed    ​11  saw    ​
12  bought    ​13  wanted    ​14  didn’t have    ​15  was    ​16  wasn’t  ​
17  started    ​18  left    ​19  stopped
b
1	 Did you have a good time?
2	 Who did you go with?
3	 Where did you stay?
4	 How much did the plane tickets cost?
5	 What was the weather like?
6	 What did you do in the evening?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA IDEA   Remind Sts that a very good way of learning 
irregular verbs is through reading stories. Show them a few 
Graded Readers if you can, and if you have a class library, 
encourage them to take out a book to read at home.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Marta again. Give them 
time to read questions 1–7. 
	 Play the audio again and get Sts to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Two years ago
2	 Lyon. Her friends invited her to come and stay.
3	 There were no cheap direct flights.
4	 She couldn’t find her ID card.
5	 She felt stressed and unhappy.
6	 He said that she couldn’t go to France because she didn’t 
have any ID.
7	 Madrid. She got a new ID card. / She spent the weekend 
getting a new ID card.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to answer 
the questions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   To help Sts tell their story, write the 
following questions on the board: 
1  WHERE WERE YOU AND WHO WERE YOU WITH? 
2  WHAT HAPPENED? 
3  WHAT DID YOU DO NEXT? 
4  HOW DID IT END?
	 Get some Sts to tell their stories to the class. If you have 
ever lost anything important on holiday, tell Sts about it.
2	GRAMMAR  past simple: regular and  
	 irregular verbs
a	 Focus on the verbs and tell Sts that some are regular and 
some are irregular. Make sure Sts know what they mean, 
but don’t spend too much time on the pronunciation, as 
Sts will be focusing on this later. Elicit the past simple of 
the first one (went) and then get Sts to do the others in 
pairs. Encourage them to do as many as they can without 
looking back at the story and then check their answers in 
Stuart’s story.
	 Check answers.
go – went
climb – climbed
be – was, were 
take – took
have – had
can – could
sit – sat
get – got 
want – wanted
think – thought
decide – decided
say – said
spend – spent
start – started
feel – felt
b	 Tell Sts to complete the gaps in 1–3 with negative past 
simple verbs. 
	 They then check their answers in Stuart’s story.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 30@@
2A
30
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit whether the other verbs are /t/  
or /d/.
asked /t/  called /d/  checked /t/  happened /d/  lived /d/  
stopped /t/  thanked /t/
4	VOCABULARY  holidays
a	 Focus on the instructions and the examples. Highlight 
that the verbs are in the -ing form because they are things 
you like doing. 
	 Give Sts a minute to write five things, then get them to 
compare their list with a partner.
	 Elicit some of the verb phrases Sts have used and write 
them on the board, e.g. swimming, going to restaurants, 
seeing new places, etc.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to decide which activity on the board is 
their favourite and take a vote with a show of hands. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Holidays on p.152. 
Vocabulary notes
Highlight:
•	 the difference between go out (at night) = leave your 
house / hotel, e.g. go to a restaurant, a club, etc., and  
go away (for the weekend) = leave your town, e.g. go to 
the country, to another town, etc.
•	 the difference between swim and go swimming (which 
applies to all the other expressions, e.g. go walking, 
sailing, surfing, etc.). We use go + swimming, etc. when 
we refer to it as an activity rather than an ability or way 
of moving. Compare I go swimming every day and I can 
swim very well, and We went walking in the hills and We 
walked to the shops. 
	
Focus on 1 Phrases with go and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. Some of these phrases should 
already be familiar to them. 
	 e 2.6   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.6
	
Holidays 1 Phrases with go
7	 go abroad
 10	 go away for the weekend
4	 go by bus 
8	 go camping
9	 go for a walk
5	 go on holiday
3	 go out at night
1	 go sightseeing
6	 go skiing
2	 go swimming
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on c and get Sts to cover the phrases and look at 
the photos. They can test themselves or their partner.
	 Focus on 2 Other holiday phrases and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs. 
3	PRONUNCIATION  -ed endings
Pronunciation notes
The regular past simple ending -ed can be pronounced in 
three different ways:
1	 -ed is pronounced /t/ after verbs ending in these 
unvoiced* sounds: /k/, /p/, /f/, /s/, /ʃ/, and /tʃ/, e.g. 
looked, hoped, laughed, passed, washed, watched.
2	 After voiced endings, -ed is pronounced /d/, e.g. arrived, 
changed, showed. This group is the largest.
3	 After verbs ending in /t/ or /d/, the pronunciation of -ed 
is /ɪd/, e.g. hated, decided.
The difference between 1 and 2 is very small and rarely 
causes communication problems. The most important 
thing is for Sts to be clear about rule 3. 
* For information on Voiced and unvoiced consonants, 
see Pronunciation & Speaking 1B on p.18.
a	 e 2.3   Focus on the task and play the audio for Sts to 
listen to the three sentences from Marta's story.
	 Check answers.
1  looked    ​2  happened    ​3  waited 
e 2.3
1	 I looked everywhere – in my bag, in my case – but it wasn’t there.
2	 This happened two years ago.
3	 I waited another five or six hours.
b	 e 2.4   Focus on the three sound pictures. Elicit and drill 
the words and sounds: tie /t/, dog /d/, and /ɪd/.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen to the sounds and 
sentences. 
e 2.4
See sounds and sentences in Student’s Book on p.15
	 Then play it again for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now focus on the Regular past simple verbs box and go 
through it with the class.
c	 Give Sts a minute to practise saying the verbs in the list in 
the past and to decide which ones have /ɪd/ endings.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Draw three columns on the board for the 
sounds. Get Sts to write the verbs in the correct column. 
d	 e 2.5   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Remind Sts that you only pronounce the e 
in -ed endings when verbs finish in a /t/ or /d/ sound, and 
then the -ed ending is pronounced /ɪd/.
decided, rented, started, wanted
e 2.5
asked, called, checked, decided, happened, lived, rented, started, 
stopped, thanked, wanted
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
verb for Sts to listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 31@@
2A
31
5	SPEAKING
a	 e 2.9   Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Now play it again and get Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts understand the meaning 
of the phrases.
1  Wow    2  no, pity    3  Fantastic    4  Really, awful
e 2.9
1	 A  I went to New York last week.
	
B  Wow! Did you like it?
2	 A  The weather was terrible – it rained every day.
	
B  Oh no! What a pity! What did you do?
3	 A  We went to a show in the West End.
	
B  Fantastic! What show was it?
4	 A  I lost my phone on the first day.
	
B  Really? How awful! How did you lose it?
b	 Now play the audio again, pausing after B’s responses 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy B’s 
intonation.
EXTRA IDEA   Say some positive or negative things that have 
happened to you recently, and elicit responses from Sts.
c	 Focus on the questions and elicit what the missing words 
are (did you in most questions and was / were in others).
1	 Where did you go?
2	 When did you go?
3	 Who did you go with?
4	 Where did you stay? What was it like?
5	 What was the weather like?
6	 What did you do during the day?
7	 What did you do in the evening?
8	 Did you have a good time?
9	 Did you have any problems?
	 Drill the complete questions quickly round the class.
d	 Give Sts time to think about their answers to the 
questions. Tell them that they can talk about another 
holiday they remember well, not necessarily their last 
holiday.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts enough time to make notes or 
write full answers to the questions.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A answers B’s questions. B must 
try to show interest and ask for more information. Monitor 
and correct.
	 Sts swap roles.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to interview you first. 
Make sure they ask you for extra information, and then give 
as much information as you can.
	 e 2.7   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.7
2 Other holiday phrases
stay in a hotel / stay at a campsite / stay with friends
take photos
buy souvenirs
sunbathe on the beach
have a good time
spend money
rent an apartment
hire a bicycle
book a flight online
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on the rent or hire? box and go through it with 
the class. You could tell Sts that flat is British English and 
apartment is American English, although British people 
use both words.
	 Now focus on c. Get Sts to test themselves by covering 
the verbs and remembering the phrases.
	 Focus on 3 Adjectives. Elicit the meaning of the What was 
the…like? questions. Then give Sts a minute to match the 
questions and answers. 
	 e 2.8   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 2.8
	
3 Adjectives
1	 What was the weather like?
	
It was warm. It was sunny.
	
It was very windy. It was foggy. It was cloudy.
2	 What was the hotel like?
	
It was comfortable. It was luxurious.
	
It was basic. It was dirty. It was uncomfortable.
3	 What was the town like?
	
It was beautiful. It was lovely.
	
It was noisy. It was crowded.
4	 What were the people like?
	
They were friendly. They were helpful.
	
They were unfriendly. They were unhelpful.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences (It was warm, It was sunny, etc.), or model and 
drill the adjectives (warm, sunny, etc.) yourself. Give further 
practice of any words or phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on the General positive and negative adjectives 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs to discuss 
which alternatives they prefer.
	 Get some feedback.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 32@@
32
2B
	2B	 That’s me in the picture!
b	 Get Sts to read the article to check their answers to a. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  the 1970s    ​2  autumn    ​3  an owl in a tree    ​4  bread, to give 
the animals in the zoo
c	 Focus on questions 1–6 and go through them with Sts.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and answer the 
questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 She was living in London, in her early twenties, working for an 
advertising agency.
2	 She met him at a nightclub on a beach in the south of France. 
She found a job in Paris because she wanted to be with him.
3	 They went for a walk.
4	 They stopped because they heard a lot of noise coming from 
a tree. They saw an owl and some little birds attacking it.
5	 She called Cartier-Bresson, and he sent her a copy.
6	 Because it was a happy time for her.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell the 
class if there is a photo with you in it that you really love.
2	VOCABULARY  at, in, on
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
the gaps. 
	 Check answers.
1  In, in    ​2  at    ​3  On    ​4  in, in
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Prepositions on p.153 
and focus on 1 at / in / on. 
Vocabulary notes
Place
Sts are often confused about the difference between at 
and in + places, as they often encounter both. At this level, 
it is probably better to simplify the rules, and to point out 
that with shops and buildings, e.g. the supermarket or 
the cinema, you can use at or in when you answer the 
question Where were you?. With airport and station, we 
normally use at.
Time
Remind Sts that years from 2000 to 2010 are usually two 
thousand and one, etc. From 2011 onwards, we normally 
say twenty eleven, twenty twelve, etc. 
Point out to Sts that we say in the morning / afternoon /
evening, but at night.
	
 G   past continuous
 V   prepositions of time and place: at, in, on
 P   weak forms: was, were
Lesson plan
This lesson starts with a photo from a feature in the Guardian 
called That’s me in the picture. The photo by Henri Cartier-
Bresson, a well-known French photographer, is of a couple 
in a park in Paris. Sts read an article in which the woman 
in the photo tells the story behind it. They then focus on 
vocabulary and the correct use of the prepositions at, in, 
and on, both for time (revision) and place. The story behind 
the photo also provides the context for the presentation 
of a new structure, the past continuous. Sts then focus on 
the weak forms of was and were in the past continuous. 
This helps them when they go on to listen to a woman 
describing six photos on her Instagram page. The lesson 
ends with Sts talking about their own favourite photos, and 
then writing about one of them.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past continuous p.176 
Vocabulary  Prepositions at, in, on p.260  
(instructions p.253) 
Communicative  Who did it? p.221 (instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  2B
Online Practice  2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write PHOTO on the board. Ask Sts what it is short for 
(photograph) and elicit the verb we use with it (take). 
Elicit / Teach the words for a person who takes photos 
(photographer) and the subject (photography). Write them 
on the board and model the pronunciation. Ask Sts how the 
word stress changes and underline it on the board:
PHOTOGRAPH	
PHOTOGRAPHER	
PHOTOGRAPHY
1	READING  checking hypotheses (using visual 	
	 evidence)
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and the photo 
on p.16. Find out if any Sts have heard of Henri Cartier-
Bresson. You could tell them that he is considered one 
of the major photographers of the 20th century. He was 
born in 1908 and died in 2004. 
	 Now focus on questions 1–4 and make sure Sts know 
what a decade is. You might also want to check that Sts 
know the meaning of time of year (= season).
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss the 
questions.
	 Elicit ideas, encouraging Sts to say why, but don’t tell Sts if 
they are correct or not yet.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 33@@
33
2B
3	GRAMMAR  past continuous
a	 Focus on the highlighted verbs in the two sentences and 
do the questions as a whole-class activity.
1  were looking    2  was living, was working
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.128. 
Grammar notes
If Sts have an equivalent of the past continuous in their L1, 
then it doesn’t normally cause problems. If they don’t, it’s 
important to make the use very clear.
We often use the past continuous at the beginning of a 
story, to set the scene and to say what was happening, 
e.g. On 1st April, I was staying with some friends in the 
country. It was a sunny day and we were having lunch in the 
garden.
Very often these ‘actions in progress’ (past continuous) are 
‘interrupted’ by a short, completed action (past simple), 
e.g. We were having lunch in the garden when suddenly it 
started to rain.
Highlight the similarity in form with the present 
continuous. It is identical except for using was / were 
instead of am / is / are.
You may also want to remind Sts of the spelling rules for 
the -ing form (see Grammar Bank 1C).
when or while?
We can connect two actions with when or while:  
when + past simple, while / when + past continuous.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 2.11 and e 2.12 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2B on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  I took this photo when we were travelling in Greece.
2  He met his wife when he was living in Japan.
3  Was she wearing a coat when she went out?
4  The sun was shining when I went to work.​
5  What were you doing at 7.30 last night?
6  I wasn’t listening when you gave the instructions​
7  They weren’t watching TV when I arrived.
8  It started to rain when we were running in the park.
b
1  I broke my arm when I was playing football.
2  Were you driving fast when the police stopped you?
3  It was snowing when we left the pub.​
4  I didn’t see the match because I was working.​
5  When you called me I was talking to my boss.​
6  We were studying in Cambridge when we met.​
7  Were they living in Rome when they had their first baby?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
	 Focus on a and get Sts to complete the left-hand column 
of the chart. 
	 e 2.10   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. Track 2.10 is quite long, so you might want to 
check answers without playing the audio.
e 2.10
Prepositions 1 at / in / on
1	 in
countries and cities: in Spain, in Madrid
rooms: in the kitchen
buidlings: in a shop, in a museum
closed spaces: in a park, in a garden, in a car
months: in February, in June
seasons: in winter
years: in 2018
times of day: in the morning, in the afternoon, in the evening
2	 on
transport: on a bike, on a bus, on a train, on a plane, on a ship
a surface: on the floor, on a table, on a shelf, on the balcony,  
on the roof, on the wall
dates: on the first of March
days: on Tuesday, on New Year’s Day, on Valentine’s Day
3	 at
places: at school, at home, at work, at university, at the airport,  
at the station, at a bus stop
times: at six o’clock, at half past two, at quarter to eight, at night,  
at the weekend
festival periods: at Christmas, at Easter
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A (book 
open) tests B (book closed) for two minutes. Then they 
swap roles. Allow at least five minutes for Sts to test each 
other. Then get Sts to close their books, and test them 
round the class, saying a word, e.g. home, for Sts to say the 
preposition at.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication at, in, on, A on p.103, B on p.109. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A asks his / her questions to B, 
who replies using a preposition and then asks What 
about you?.
	 B then asks A his / her questions.
	 When they have finished, get some feedback from the 
class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 34@@
34
2B
e 2.14
1	 It was my first term at university.
2	 I was staying with him in the Easter holidays.
3	 We were doing a music course.
4	 We were at school together.
5	 She took this when we were visiting the Colosseum.
6	 We were all drinking champagne, and Roz was doing the 
hard work!
c	 Now play the audio again for Sts to answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
unstressed
d	 e 2.15   Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Anya 
talking about her Instagram photos. They must number 
them 1–6 in the order she describes them. Point out that 
the first one (E) has been done for them. Also point out 
the Glossary.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 2.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.120)
A = Anya, F = friend
1	 A	 This is me and my mum in York. It was my first term at 
university, and she came to visit me, and I took her on a tour 
round the city.
	
F	 Is that, er, the cathedral there?
	
A	 Yes – well, it’s called York Minster, but it’s really a cathedral. 
2	 A	 And this one’s on the beach in Cornwall with my boyfriend, 
Ollie. I was staying with him in the Easter holidays, and he took 
me to the beach and we went for a walk.
	
F	 It looks windy!
	
A	 Yes, it was really windy and cold. I think we were the only 
people on the beach!
3	 F	 Nice photo! I like the moustache.
	
A	 Yeah, that’s me and my friend Maisie. We were doing a music 
course – I do it twice a year, and this was at the party at the end 
of the course. 
	
F	 Why the moustaches and the picture frame?
	
A	 There was this corner that the teachers made where people 
could take funny photos with the big frame, and hats and 
moustaches and things.
4	 A	 OK, this one is me and two of my best friends – we were at 
school together. One of them, Libby, the one on my right, has a 
house by the river, and we went there in September, before we 
all went to university. 
5	 F	 That’s a nice photo. In Rome, I guess?
	
A	 Yes, I was there for a holiday with my mum the summer before 
I went to university. She took this when we were visiting the 
Colosseum – as you can see.
6	 F	 That’s your mum again, isn’t it?
	
A	 Yes, that’s her and her partner, and my sister Roz, on the river 
in Oxford. My mum’s birthday is in July, and every year we 
go punting and then we go for dinner. We were all drinking 
champagne, and Roz was doing the hard work!
c	 e 2.13   Focus on the instructions and the example. Make 
sure Sts understand they are only going to hear sound 
effects and that they must write a sentence using the past 
continuous and the past simple. Put Sts in pairs. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sound effect to give Sts 
time to discuss what they think was happening and to 
write a sentence.
	 Check answers and write the sentences on the board.
e 2.13
(Sound effects to illustrate the following)
1	 They were playing tennis when it started to rain.
2	 She was driving when somebody phoned her.
3	 They were having a party when the police came.
4	 He was having a shower when somebody knocked at the door.
5	 They were sleeping when the baby started to cry.
6	 She was walking her dog when she met a friend.
4	PRONUNCIATION & LISTENING  weak forms: 	
	 was, were
Pronunciation notes
Native speakers use two different pronunciations of was 
and were, depending on whether the words are stressed 
or not, i.e. they can have a strong or weak pronunciation.
Was and were always have a strong pronunciation in 
short answers and negatives, and can have a strong 
pronunciation in yes / no questions, e.g. Was he working 
when you phoned him?. The pronunciation is /wɒz/ and 
/wɜː/.
Was and were tend to have a weak pronunciation in 
positive sentences and are pronounced /wəz/ and  
/wə/, e.g. He was a teacher /wəz/, They were walking in the 
park /wə/.
It is useful for Sts at this level to be aware of these 
differences, but unrealistic to expect them to be able 
to use them properly, and Sts will probably use mostly 
strong forms of was and were.
However, it’s important for Sts to be able to recognize was 
and were when they hear them in speech, and b and c are 
designed to help them with this.
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
Instagram is (= a photo-sharing and social media site). 
	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit Sts’ ideas.
b	 e 2.14   Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences and 
they must write the missing words.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers.
1  It was    ​2  was staying    ​3  were doing    ​4  We were    ​ 
5  were visiting    ​6  were…drinking, was doing
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 35@@
35
2B
	 Now focus on b and get Sts to match the questions to 
paragraphs 1–3. 
	 Check answers.
2	 What was happening when you took the photo?
3	 Where do you keep it?
3	 Why do you like it?
1	 Where were you when you took the photo, and who were 
you with?
1	 What’s your favourite photo?
1	 Who took the photo? When?
	 Focus on c and give Sts time to plan their description. 
They should use the questions in b to help them.
	 Set the writing in d in class or for homework, and ask 
Sts to include the photo if they can. Tell Sts to answer 
the questions in b in the correct order and not as they 
appear on the page, so the first question they write about 
is What’s your favourite photo?. They should also try to 
include the highlighted phrases if they can.
	 In e Sts check their writing for mistakes and attach the 
photo if they can. 
e	 Play the audio again, pausing after each photo has been 
to mentioned, to check answers and elicit any more 
information Sts can remember about each photo.
1	 E  The photo was taken in York, where Anya is / was at 
university. She took her mother on a tour of the city. In the 
background is the Minster (cathedral).
2	 C  The photo was taken in Cornwall. It was really windy and 
cold. Anya and her boyfriend were the only people on the 
beach.
3	 A  The photo was taken at a party on the last day of a music 
course, which Anya does twice a year. The teachers had put 
the big frame in a corner, as well as hats and moustaches, 
etc., for people to take funny photos.
4	 F  The photo was taken at a friend’s house in September, 
before going to university. It shows Anya with her two best 
friends. She went to school with them.
5	 B  The photo was taken in Rome. She went there for a holiday 
with her mother the summer before she went to university. 
Her mother took the photo when they were visiting the 
Colosseum.
6	 D  The photo was taken on the river in Oxford, in July. It shows 
her sister, her mother, and her mother’s partner. They are 
drinking champagne because it is her mother’s birthday.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.120, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
5	SPEAKING & WRITING  describing a photo
a	 Most Sts will have photos on their phones which they can 
show each other during this activity. Focus on the four 
questions. Make sure Sts understand all the vocabulary. 
Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to ask you the 
questions. 
	 Get Sts to discuss the questions in pairs. Encourage them 
to give more information if they can. 
	 Get feedback from a few pairs.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing a photo on p.114.
	 Focus on the information at the top of the image and 
establish that this is for a photo competition on the 
internet.
	 Now focus on a and get Sts to complete the gaps in the 
description.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  of    2  in    3  with    4  in    5  like    6  of    7  at    8  away 
9  on
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 36@@
36
2C
	2C	 One dark October evening
1	GRAMMAR  time sequencers and connectors
a	 Books open. Focus on the story and tell Sts that they are 
going to read it, but that first they should look at the title 
and photos and guess what it is about.
	 Elicit ideas from the class.
b	 e 2.16   Tell Sts to read the story and complete the gaps. 
Tell them that the end of the story is on audio, so the last 
paragraph here is not the end of the story. Point out that 
the first one (Two minutes later) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio for Sts to listen to the story and check.
	 Check answers.
2  When    3  The next day    4  After that    5  One evening in 
October    6  Suddenly
e 2.16
N = narrator, H = Hannah, J = Jamie
N	 Hannah met Jamie last summer. It was Hannah’s birthday, and she 
and her friends went to a club. They wanted to dance, but they didn’t 
like the music, so Hannah went to speak to the DJ.
H	 This music is awful.
N	 …she said. 
H	 Could you play something else?
N	 The DJ looked at her and said…
J	 Don’t worry – I have the perfect song for you.
N	 Two minutes later, he said… 
J	 The next song is by Pink. It’s called Get the Party Started and it’s for 
a beautiful girl over there who’s wearing a pink dress.
N	 Hannah knew that the song was for her. When Hannah and her 
friends left the club, the DJ was waiting for her at the door. 
J	 Hi, I’m Jamie.
N	 …he said to Hannah. 
J	 Can I see you again?
N	 So Hannah gave him her phone number. The next day, Jamie phoned 
Hannah and invited her to dinner. He took her to a very romantic 
French restaurant and they talked all evening. Although the food 
wasn’t very good, they had a wonderful time. After that, Jamie and 
Hannah saw each other every day. Every evening when Hannah 
finished work, they met at five thirty in a coffee bar in the high street. 
They were madly in love. One afternoon in October, Hannah was at 
work. As usual, she was going to meet Jamie at five thirty. It was dark 
and it was raining. She looked at her watch. It was five twenty! She 
was going to be late! She ran to her car and got in. At five twenty-
five, she was driving along the high street. She was going very fast 
because she was in a hurry. Suddenly, a man ran across the road. He 
was wearing a dark coat, so Hannah didn’t see him at first. Quickly, 
she put her foot on the brake…
 G   time sequencers and connectors: suddenly, when, so, etc.
 V   verb phrases
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn to use time sequencers, e.g. after 
that, later, etc. and the connectors so, because, but, and 
although. They also revise the past simple and continuous. 
The context is a short story with a twist. After Sts have read 
most of the story and worked on the grammar, they have a 
pronunciation focus on word stress in two-syllable words, 
and then in Vocabulary they expand their knowledge of verb 
phrases. In the video listening section, the language is pulled 
together, and Sts use picture prompts to retell the story so 
far. They then decide as a class whether they want to watch 
or hear a happy or a sad ending to the story, and then watch 
or listen to the one they have chosen. Finally, in the speaking 
activity, Sts answer some questions in pairs about the ending 
they watched or listened to.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  time sequences and connectors p.177 
Communicative  Sentence race p.222  
(instructions p.209)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  One Dark October Evening
For students
Workbook  2C
Online Practice  2C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the names of these bands / performers on the board 
and ask Sts if they can complete them with colours: 
G
 DAY 
B
 SABBATH 
R
 HOT CHILI PEPPERS 
B
 EYED PEAS 
THE W
 STRIPES 
DEEP P
   
P
 
Green Day    Black Sabbath    Red Hot Chili Pepppers    
Black Eyed Peas    The White Stripes    Deep Purple    Pink
Then tell Sts that they are going to read a short story in 
which a song by Pink plays a part.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 37@@
37
2C
a
2  G    3  B    4  E    5  A    6  F    7  H    8  D
b
1	 Although it was very cold, she wasn't wearing a coat.
2	 I woke him up in the night because there was a noise.
3	 I called him, but his mobile was turned off.
4	 Although she's very nice, she doesn't have many friends.
5	 There was nothing on TV, so I went to bed.
6	 All the cafés were full because it was a public holiday.
7	 She wanted to be a doctor, but she failed her exams.
8	 The garden looked very beautiful, so I took a photograph.
9	 Although the team played well, they didn't win.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Tell Sts to look at the six sentence beginnings and to 
complete them with their own ideas.
	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare their 
sentences with a partner.
	 Get some feedback from the class. You could write some 
of the sentences on the board.
2	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
a	 Focus on the Stress in two-syllable words box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time, in pairs, to 
underline the stressed syllable in the words. 
b	 e 2.20   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Pause the audio after each word, elicit the answer, and 
write the word on the board with the stressed syllable 
underlined.
across    after    again    along    although    awful    
because    birthday    evening    invite    perfect    quickly 
e 2.20
See words in Student's Book on p.19 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word for Sts to 
repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
c	 Focus on the instructions and the example.
	 In pairs, Sts write a sentence using two or more of the 
words in a.
	 Get a few pairs to read their sentence to the class.
c	 Now give Sts time to read the story again. 
	 Then put them in pairs to answer the questions. They can 
answer orally or in writing.
	 Check answers.
1	 Because she didn’t like the music.
2	 Because it’s by Pink, and Hannah was wearing a pink dress.
3	 Jamie was waiting at the door and asked to see Hannah 
again.
4	 It was very romantic, but the food wasn’t very good.
5	 To a coffee bar in the high street
6	 It was dark and raining.
7	 Because she was in a hurry.
8	 Because he was wearing a dark coat.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to try to answer questions 1–8 
from memory.
d	 Focus on the three sentences. Tell Sts not to look back 
at the story, but to try and complete the sentences from 
memory. 
	 Check answers, and elicit / explain the meaning of the 
missing words or ask Sts how to say them in their L1. 
Model and drill the pronunciation of so, because, and 
although. Write them on the board and underline the 
stressed syllable, or write them up in phonetics (/səʊ/,  
/bɪˈkɒz/, and /ɔːlˈðəʊ/).
1  because    2  Although    3  so
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2C on p.128. 
Grammar notes
We usually put a comma before so, although, and but, e.g. 
She was tired, so she went to bed.
Sts may also ask you about though, which is a colloquial, 
abbreviated form of although. Though is not usually used 
at the beginning of a sentence. It is probably best at this 
level if Sts just learn although.
 !   So has another completely different meaning, which is 
to intensify adjectives, e.g. He was so tired that he went to 
bed at 9.00. You may want to point out this meaning too, 
in case Sts get confused.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 2.17, 
e 2.18 and e 2.19 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Focus on the then, after that box and go through it with 
the class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 2C on p.129. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 38@@
38
2C
4	 r VIDEO LISTENING 
	 This is the first of six video listenings, which are 	
	
	 incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable 	
	 to show the video in class, remind students that they can 	
	 find the video on Online Practice and ask them to watch 	
	 the video and do the activities for homework.
a	 Tell Sts they are now going to watch or listen to the end 
of the story. First, Sts have to vote with a show of hands 
on whether they want to hear a happy ending or a sad 
ending. 
	 If Sts vote for the happy ending, play the video / audio  
e 2.21. If they vote for the sad ending, play the video /  
audio e 2.22.
b	 e 2.21 / 2.22   Before playing the ending chosen by Sts, 
elicit ideas from the class about what they think happens, 
but don’t tell them if they are right or wrong, to help build 
suspense.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch or listen.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen.
	 At the end of the story, get Sts to tell you what happened. 
Then play the video / audio again.
e 2.21
Happy ending
N = narrator, H = Hannah, J = Jamie, W = waiter
N	 Suddenly, a man ran across the road. He was wearing a dark coat, so 
Hannah didn’t see him at first. Quickly, she put her foot on the brake. 
She stopped just in time. She got out of her car and shouted at the 
man.
H	 Don’t you usually look before you cross the road? I nearly hit you. I 
didn’t see you until the last moment.
J	 Sorry! Hey, Hannah, it’s me. It’s Jamie.
H	 Jamie! What are you doing here? I nearly killed you!
J	 I was buying something. I was in a hurry and I crossed the road 
without looking.
H	 Come on. Get in!
N	 Hannah and Jamie drove to the coffee bar. They sat down in their 
usual seats and ordered two cups of coffee.
W	 Here you are. Two cappuccinos.
H and J	 Thanks.
H	 What an evening! I nearly killed you.
J	 Well, you didn’t kill me, so what’s the problem?
H	 But what were you doing in the high street? I thought you were 
here, in the café, waiting for me.
J	 I went to the theatre to buy these tickets for the Pink concert. I 
know you wanted to go. And it’s on the fifteenth of October – 
next Saturday. Our anniversary.
H	 Our anniversary?
J	 Yes. Three months since we first met. We met on Saturday the 
fifteenth of July. Remember?
H	 Gosh, Jamie. I can’t believe you remember the exact day! What a 
romantic! It’s lucky I didn’t hit you in the street…
3	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  verb phrases
a	 Focus on the two boxes and the example. Tell Sts that by 
combining a verb from 1 with a phrase from 2, they will 
make verb phrases from the story. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to match the 
verbs and phrases. Tell them that sometimes two verbs 
may be possible with a phrase, but to try to remember the 
phrases from the story. 
	 Check answers. 
have a great time
drive along the high street
meet in a coffee bar
give somebody your phone number
take somebody to a restaurant
wait for somebody
be in a hurry 
play a song
leave the club (very late)
run across the road 
b	 Get Sts to test themselves by covering box 1 and 
remembering the verbs for each phrase.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to close their books and say a 
phrase from box 2, e.g. in a coffee bar, for Sts to respond meet 
in a coffee bar.
c	 e 2.16   Play the audio for Sts to listen to the story again.
e 2.16
See script 2.16 on the previous page
d	 Re-telling a story gives Sts the opportunity for some 
extended oral practice, and in this case, to recycle the 
tenses and connectors they have been studying. Focus 
on the photos in 1 and the example, and tell Sts they are 
going to re-tell the story of Hannah and Jamie, but in first 
person (as either Jamie or Hannah). Tell Sts they should try 
to use the verb phrases from a.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A they are Jamie and Sts 
B they are Hannah. Get Sts A to cover the text and focus 
on the photos. Tell them to tell as much of the story as 
they can for photos 1–3 while Sts B look at the story to 
prompt / correct. They then swap roles for photos 4–6.
	 Get individual Sts to tell the class about each photo in 
their roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 39@@
39
2C
Sad ending
1	 Because he was wearing a dark coat.
2	 She hit him.
3	 She went to the coffee bar and called Jamie.
4	 The police / A policewoman
5	 That Jamie was in a car accident.
6	 He had a bad injury to his head and two broken legs. He’s in 
intensive care.
7	 The car was white and the driver was a woman. 
8	 She asked Hannah about the number plate of her car and 
where she was at 5.25 p.m.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they want to watch / listen to the 
ending they didn’t choose (they almost always do). You 
could let them watch / listen to the other ending for 
pleasure, without doing the tasks.
e 2.22
Sad ending
N = narrator, H = Hannah, P = policewoman
N	 Suddenly, a man ran across the road. He was wearing a dark coat, 
so Hannah didn’t see him at first. Quickly, she put her foot on the 
brake. Although Hannah tried to stop, she couldn’t. She hit the man. 
Hannah panicked. She drove away as fast as she could. When she 
arrived at the coffee bar, Jamie wasn’t there. She called him, but his 
phone was turned off. She waited for ten minutes and then she went 
home.
	
Two hours later, a car arrived at Hannah’s house. A policewoman 
knocked at the door. 
P	 Good evening, Madam. Are you Hannah Davis?
H	 Yes, I am.
P	 I’d like to speak to you. Can I come in?
N	 The policewoman came in and sat down on the sofa.
P	 Are you a friend of Jamie Dixon?
H	 Yes.
N	 …said Hannah.
P	 Well, I’m afraid I have some bad news for you.
H	 What? What’s happened?
P	 Jamie had an accident this evening.
H	 Oh no. What kind of accident?
P	 He was crossing the road and a car hit him.
H	 When…when did this happen? And where?
P	 This evening at twenty-five past five. He was crossing the road in 
the high street, by the theatre.
H	 Oh no! How is he?
P	 He’s in hospital. He’s got a bad injury to his head and two broken 
legs.
H	 But is he going to be OK?
P	 We don’t know. He’s in intensive care.
H	 Oh no. And the driver of the car?
P	 She didn’t stop.
H	 She?
P	 Yes, it was a woman in a black car. Somebody saw the number of 
the car. You have a black car outside, don’t you, Madam? Is your 
number plate G-Y fifty-six, R-Z-R?
H	 Yes…yes, it is.
P	 Can you tell me where you were at twenty-five past five this 
evening?
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 If Sts chose the happy ending (e 2.21), tell them to go to 
Communication Happy ending on p.103.  
If Sts chose the sad ending (e 2.22), tell them to go to 
Communication Sad ending on p.109. 
	 Set a time limit for Sts to answer questions 1–8 in pairs.
	 Check answers.
Happy ending
1	 Because he was wearing a dark coat.
2	 Jamie
3	 He was in a hurry.
4	 To a coffee bar
5	 Two cappuccinos
6	 He was buying tickets for a concert.
7	 It was the Pink concert on 15th October.
8	 15th October is their three-month anniversary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 40@@
40
Revise and Check
	1&2	Revise and Check
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  quiet /aɪ/    2  skiing /iː/    3  booked /t/    4  waited /ɪd/    
5  noisy /z/
d
1  extrovert    2  overweight    3  bracelet    4  online    
5  comfortable
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
1  B    2  C    3  A
b
1  F    2  F    3  T    4  F    5  T    6  F
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  c    5  c
e 2.23
1
I = interviewer, L = Lewis
I	 Who do you look like in your family?
L	 Er, well people say I often look like my dad a lot. We’ve got the 
same sort of nose and the same face shape, but I’ve got my mum’s 
hair colour and my mum’s eyes.
I	 Do you have a similar personality?
L	 Er, again there is, there are quite a lot of similarities between me 
and my dad. We’re both into German and speaking German, and 
also into architecture, which is why I’m here.
2
I = interviewer, S = Susie
I	 Do you have a favourite painting? 
S	 Um, I think so. I’m not sure of the name of the painting, but I like 
Salvador Dali. I really like the painting with the dripping clocks.
I	 Can you describe it?
S	 Er, yes, like I said, there are dripping clocks. It’s very, um, it’s an 
interesting style. It’s not something you see all the time, and it’s 
very colourful.
3
I = interviewer, S = Shosanna
I	 Where did you go for your last holiday?
S	 My last vacation I went to Guyana, which is my parents’ country in 
South America. 
I	 Did you have a good time?
S	 I did. It was actually one of the best vacations I had. It was really 
educational, and I was able to see how my parents grew up, 
which was interesting.
4
I = interviewer, S = Susan
I	 Do you take a lot of photos? 
S	 I take a lot of photos. My telephone is full of photos and I use 
Instagram.
I	 What do you usually take photos of?
S	 Mostly people, places, gardens, lots of flowers. I never post 
photos of people, but I take photos of family, but lots of gardens 
and flowers.
5
I = interviewer, S = Sam
I	 Do you prefer films with a happy or sad ending?
S	 Um, it just has to be a good film. I don’t mind if it’s a happy ending 
or a sad ending.
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, 
in class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and 
the class time available. 
The first page revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 50 
(grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), so 
you can use the first page as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. 
The pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank 
on pp.166–167. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the video showing the mouth position for each sound. If you 
don’t want to use this in class, tell Sts to look at it at home, 
and to practise making the sounds and saying the words.
The second page presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a slightly 
higher level than those in the File, but which revises grammar 
and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The listening is 
some unscripted street interviews, where people are asked 
questions related to the topics in the Files. Sts can either watch 
the interviews on video or listen to them on audio. You can 
find these on the Class DVD, Classroom Presentation Tool, and 
Class Audio (audio only). Finally, there is a speaking challenge 
which assesses Sts’ ability to use the language of the Files 
orally. You could get Sts to do these activities in pairs, or Sts 
can tick the boxes if they feel confident that they can do them.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 1&2 
Quick Test 2 
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  c    2  b    3  a    4  c    5  a    6  c    7  c    8  b    9  b    10  c    
11  a    12  c    13  a    14  b    15  c
VOCABULARY
a
1  do    2  look    3  wear    4  take    5  stay    6  book    7  invite    
8  drive    9  play    10  leave
b
1  on    2  in    3  in    4  on    5  at    6  at    7  in
c
1	 beard (the others are adjectives to describe hair)
2	 lazy (the others are positive adjectives)
3	 clever (the others are negative adjectives)
4	 dress (the others are worn by men)
5	 gloves (the others are worn on your feet)
6	 scarf (the others are pieces of jewellery)
7	 noisy (the others are about the weather)
8	 luxurious (the others are negative adjectives)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 41@@
3A
41
 G 	 be going to (plans and predictions)
 V 	 airports
 P 	 the letter g
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts revise going to, which they learned at 
Elementary level, to talk about plans and predictions. The 
context is a reading and listening based on TripAside, a 
company which helps travellers make the most of stopovers 
at airports. The lesson begins with vocabulary, and Sts learn 
useful vocabulary related to airports. They then focus on the 
pronunciation of the letter g. Sts read an article from the 
British press about TripAside and then listen to a traveller 
meeting his guide at the airport in Rome. This leads Sts into 
the grammar, which is revised and practised. Sts then ask 
and answer questions about their plans. The lesson ends 
with a speaking activity in pairs, in which Sts imagine they 
work for TripAside and plan a tour for travellers on a stopover 
at their nearest airport.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  be going to (plans and predictions) p.178 
Communicative  A day in… p.223 (instructions p.209)
For students
Workbook  3A
Online Practice  3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write AIRPORT on the board. Put Sts in pairs and give them 
two minutes to think of five things people do at an airport, 
e.g. catch a plane, leave, arrive, meet somebody, check in, board, 
fly, etc. 
Elicit answers and write some of their suggestions on 
the board. 
1	VOCABULARY  airports
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions, making sure Sts 
know the meaning of to pick someone up and to drop 
someone off. Sts can answer them in pairs or do it as a 
whole-class activity. 
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to ask for more information 
if possible. For example, if their partner says they were 
travelling somewhere, they should find out where, etc. If 
their partner says they were picking up or dropping off 
someone, they should find out who, etc. 
b	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to look at the 12 
signs and to match them to the words and phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner.
c	 e 3.1   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts know the meaning of all 
the words and phrases.
e 3.1
3	 arrivals 
7	 bag drop
1	 baggage reclaim 
9	 check-in
8	 customs
2	 departures 
11	 gates 
5	 lifts 
10	 passport control 
12	 security check
4	 terminal 
6	 trolley 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself.
	 Then tell Sts to cover the words and look at the signs, and 
try to remember the words and phrases. 
d	 e 3.2   Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Point out that the first one (a lift) 
has been done for them.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary. 
	 Check answers.
2  baggage reclaim    3  security check    4  gates
5  passport control    6  check-in
e 3.2
1	 Doors opening. Second floor. Departures. Check-in and bag drop.
2	 A  Excuse me. My suitcase hasn’t arrived. Do you know where I can 
go to report it?
	
B  Yes, madam. Lost luggage is that window over there.
3	 A  Can you take your boots off, please?
	
B  Sorry?
	
A  Your boots. Take them off and put them on the belt, please.
4	 Boarding for British Airways flight B-A-zero-five-six-four to Milan 
will begin in a few minutes. Passengers in rows fifteen to thirty 
are invited to board first. Please have your passport and boarding 
pass ready.
5	 A  Are you here on vacation?
	
B  Er, yes, I am.
	
A  How long are you staying?
	
B  Two weeks.
6	 Passport and boarding pass, please. Thanks. How many bags are 
you checking in?
	3A	 TripAside
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 42@@
3A
42
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could tell Sts that you can say look around or 
look round (a city).
1  D    2  H    3  E    4  F    5  C    6  G    7  B    8  A
EXTRA SUPPORT   To check comprehension, ask some more 
questions, e.g. What is TripAside? (a company that organizes 
short guided tours for people on stopovers), Which airports 
offer trips with TripAside? (Paris, Frankfurt, London, Brussels, 
Rome and Madrid), Is TripAside unique? (No, other small 
companies offer similar tours.), etc.
c	 Focus on the task and get Sts to work with a partner to 
say what the words and phrases mean. Encourage them 
to go back and look at the words in context if they can’t 
remember their meaning. 
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Model and drill pronunciation.
stopover /ˈstɒpəʊvə/ = a short stay somewhere between two 
parts of a journey
connecting flight /kəˈnektɪŋ flaɪt/ = a second flight where you 
have had to change planes
departure lounge /dɪˈpɑːtʃə laʊndʒ/ = the place at an airport 
where you wait for your flight
duty-free shop /ˌdjuːti ˈfriː ʃɒp/ = a shop in an airport or on a 
ship, etc. that sells things like cigarettes, alcohol, perfume, etc. 
without tax on them
air traveller /eə ˈtrævələ/ = a passenger on a plane
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 e 3.4   Focus on the task and question. Remind Sts that it 
will be one of the six cities mentioned in the article.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer. Ask Sts how they knew (the Colosseum, 
the Forum, the Pantheon, Via del Corso, all the Italian food 
mentioned, etc.).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Rome
e 3.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
A = Anna, J = Jake
A	 Hello, Mr Bevan. I’m Anna, your tour guide. 
J	 Hi. Please, call me Jake. 
A	 OK, Jake. Nice to meet you. How was the flight? Are you 
very tired? 
J	 No, I’m fine. 
A	 Great. Let’s go to the car park, then. Is it your first time here?
J	 Yeah. I was in Europe when I was a student, but somehow I never 
got here.
A	 And your final destination is London, is that right? 
J	 Yes. I’m going to give a talk at a conference in Oxford. 
A	 So work, not pleasure?
J	 Yes – well, maybe some pleasure, too. I have a friend – well, an ex-
girlfriend, really, who I was with when I was a student. She’s British 
– she lives in Oxford – and we’re planning to meet up.
A	 That’s nice! OK, so now I’m going to tell you a bit about our tour 
today. We’re going to drive to the centre – it takes about forty-five 
minutes – and then we’re going to start at the Colosseum. 
J	 Great. I’ve always wanted to see it.
A	 And then we’re going to visit the Forum. After that, we’re going to 
see the Pantheon – one of the oldest buildings in the city.
2	PRONUNCIATION  the letter g
Pronunciation notes
The letter g can be pronounced in two different ways, /ɡ/ 
or /dʒ/.
g before a, o, and u, and before a consonant, is 
pronounced /ɡ/, e.g. gas, go, gun, great.
gu + vowel is also pronounced /ɡ/, e.g. guard.
g is also always pronounced /ɡ/ when it comes after a 
vowel at the end of a word, e.g. bag, dog.
ge and gi can be pronounced /ɡ/ or /dʒ/, e.g. get, give, but 
also generous, page, giraffe.
gg is usually pronounced /ɡ/, e.g. bigger, but there are 
two exceptions where it is pronounced /dʒ/: suggest and 
exaggerate.
You could also tell Sts that the letter g is sometimes silent, 
e.g. foreign, sign, etc.
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
gg = /ɡ/    ge = /dʒ/
b	 Focus on the chart. Elicit the two sound-picture words (girl 
and jazz) and the sounds /ɡ/ and /dʒ/.
	 Now tell Sts to put the words in the list in the correct row. 
Remind Sts that this kind of exercise is easier to do if they 
say the words aloud.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 3.3   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.3
girl /ɡ/  gate, foggy, forget, guide, guest, begin, gift, guarantee, 
organize
jazz /dʒ/  large, village, engineer, agent, region, emergency, general 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
	 Finally, ask Sts When can g be pronounced /dʒ/?
When it is followed by the letter e or i.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts,it 
will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	READING & LISTENING  understanding text 	
	 cohesion – connectors
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the article. Tell 
them not to worry about the gaps for the moment.
	 Elicit opinions from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the words or phrases in c.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article again and complete the gaps 
with phrases A–H.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the task. Tell 
them to focus on the words that come before or after the 
gaps, which are mainly connectors like and, or, so, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 43@@
3A
43
b	 First, make sure that Sts are clear about what the difference 
is between a plan (something you intend to do) and 
a prediction (something that you think is going to happen).
	 Now, in pairs, Sts focus on whether sentences 1–6 in a are 
plans (Pl) or predictions (Pr). 
	 Check answers.
1  Pl    2  Pl    3  Pl    4  Pr    5  Pr    6  Pr
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.130. 
Grammar notes
Be going to is revised here with its two main uses: plans 
(I’m going to stay for six months.) and predictions (It’s going 
to be a big surprise for him.).
You may want to point out that when people speak fast, 
going to often sounds like gonna, and it is even sometimes 
written like that, for example, in song lyrics.
	 e 3.6   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 3A on p.131. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  Is…going to learn    2  aren’t going to go, ’re going to stay    
3  ’re going to be    4  ’s going to get    5  ’m going to cook    
6  ’m not going to listen    7  are…going to do , 'm going to study
b
1  ’s going to win    2  ’re going to be    3  ’re going to break
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What are your plans?, A on p.103,  
B on p.109.
	 Go through the instructions carefully and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to look at the prompts and give 
them time to write the questions. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A asks B his / her questions 
and, when possible, for more information. Then they 
swap roles.
	 When they have finished, elicit some answers from 
individual Sts.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any errors they make with 
going to. 
EXTRA IDEA   In a large class, you may prefer Sts to do the 
activity in groups of three or four.
b	 When Sts are ready, get each pair to present their tour to 
the class.
	 With a show of hands, get Sts to vote for the best tour.
J	 Wow.
A	 So, then we are very near the Via del Corso, where all the best 
shops are. Would you like to maybe do some shopping?
J	 Well, I’d like to see the shops, but I’m probably not going to buy 
anything.
A	 Maybe a little present – a present for your friend in Oxford?
J	 Well, maybe.
A	 And then I’m sure you’re going to be hungry, so I’m going to 
take you to a really nice restaurant for lunch. We can have pizza, 
or a good carbonara, a gelato – an ice cream, that is. Our typical 
dishes, but I promise you, very different from Italian food in 
America.
J	 Sounds great. And then back to the airport, I guess?
A	 That’s right. We need to allow time for that.
J	 Yes, I don’t want to miss my flight.
A	 Don’t worry. We do this tour every day – and nobody has ever 
missed their flight.
J	 Is it going to be very hot today? 
A	 No, not too hot. It’s going to be nice: about twenty-two degrees.
J	 Perfect. It’s going to be a fantastic day.
A	 Here we are. If you can just wait a minute while I pay for the 
parking. Oh, Mr Bevan – Jake – is this yours?
J	 My passport! Thanks, Anna. Typical me. I always lose things when 
I’m travelling.
e	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 
1–10. Make sure they understand all the lexis, e.g. sites, 
looking forward to, etc.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen again and complete the 
task. Remind them to correct the F sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 T
2	 F (He has been to Europe before.)
3	 F (His next flight is to London.)
4	 T
5	 F (He has an old friend / ex-girlfriend there.) 
6	 T
7	 T
8	 F (They are going to have lunch at a nice restaurant.)
9	 F (The weather forecast is very good.)
10	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.121, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you have ever had a 
long stopover at an airport, tell Sts about it.
4	GRAMMAR  be going to (plans and predictions)
a	 e 3.5   Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to 
complete the gaps with the correct form of be going to.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, then play the audio for 
them to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.5
1	 I’m going to give a talk at a conference.
2	 We’re going to drive to the centre.
3	 And then we’re going to visit the Forum.
4	 I’m probably not going to buy anything.
5	 Is it going to be very hot? 
6	 It’s going to be a fantastic day.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 44@@
44
3B
	3B	 Put it in your calendar!
c	 Tell Sts to go to Communication How organized are 
you? on p.103. 
	 Give Sts time to calculate their score and then read the result. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
d	 Back in their same pairs, Sts compare their results and 
discuss whether or not they agree with them.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. 
	 Ask the class if they know anybody who is very organized 
or very disorganized.
2	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
	 verbs + prepositions; linking
Vocabulary notes
Certain verbs are often followed by a particular 
preposition, which may well be different in Sts’ L1. When 
Sts learn these verbs, they should make a note of the 
preposition that follows each verb.
a	 Focus on the two extracts from the quiz and explain 
that in each sentence there is a preposition missing. 
Highlight the fact that certain verbs are often followed by 
a particular preposition, e.g. It depends on the weather.
	 Get Sts to complete the sentences, and then check 
answers.
1  at    2  for
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Prepositions on p.153 
and do 2 Verbs + prepositions. 
	 Focus on a and get Sts to complete the Prepositions 
column individually or in pairs. 
	 e 3.7   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen  
and check.
	 Check answers. When looking at 13 and 14, you might 
want to highlight the difference between think about 
and think of: think about = action verb, e.g. ‘Why are you so 
happy?’ ‘I’m thinking about my holiday’, and think of = non-
action verb, to have an opinion, e.g. ‘What do you think of 
Coldplay?’ ‘I don’t like them.’
e 3.7
	
Prepositions 2 Verbs + prepositions
1	 I arrived in Paris on Friday night.
2	 I was very tired when I arrived at the hotel.
3	 I hate waiting for people who are late.
4	 A  What are you going to do at the weekend?
	
B  I don’t know. It depends on the weather.
5	 I’m sorry, but I really don’t agree with you.
6	 I asked for a chicken sandwich, but this is tuna!
7	 Please listen to what I’m saying.
8	 Who’s going to pay for the meal?
9	 I need to speak to Martin about the meeting.
10	 I don’t spend much money on food.
11	 Don’t worry about the exam. It isn’t very hard.
12	 Do you believe in ghosts?
13	 You’re not listening! What are you thinking about?
14	 A  What do you think of this painting?
	
B  I really like it. I think it’s beautiful.
15	 Who does this bag belong to?
 G   present continuous (future arrangements)
 V   verbs + prepositions, e.g. arrive in
 P   linking
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn a new use of the present continuous: 
to talk about fixed arrangements. The context is the 
continuation of the story of Jake, the man who went on 
a guided tour in 3A, who was going to a conference and 
hoping to meet up with an ex-girlfriend. Sts begin this 
lesson by doing a quiz to see how organized they are. They 
answer the questions individually, compare answers in pairs, 
calculate the score of their quiz, and then discuss the results. 
The lesson continues with a vocabulary focus on verbs 
which are normally followed by prepositions, and then there 
is a pronunciation focus on linking, to help Sts understand 
fast speech. Sts then listen to a conversation between Jake 
and Sarah, the ex-girlfriend, in which they make contact – 
Sts complete a calendar with Jake’s appointments – and 
arrange to see each other. Finally, they listen to the meeting 
to find out how it went. After focusing on the grammar, 
Sts get more practice in a speaking activity where they 
try to make arrangements to go out with other Sts in the 
class. The lesson ends with Writing, where Sts use both the 
grammar and the vocabulary to write an email about travel 
arrangements.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present continuous (future arrangements) p.179 
Vocabulary  What’s the preposition? p.261  
(instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Come fly with me! p.224  
(instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  3B
Online Practice  3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Quickly revise months. Write SPRING, SUMMER, AUTUMN, and 
WINTER on the board and tell Sts, in pairs, to write the months 
in each season. 
Check answers, and model and drill the pronunciation of any 
months which Sts find difficult, e.g. February /'februəri/,  
July /dʒu'laɪ/, etc.
1	READING & SPEAKING
a	 Books open. Focus on the quiz and give Sts time to read 
it and choose their answers. You may want to check that 
they know the meaning of some of the lexis, e.g. Post-it 
note, list, pack, etc. 
b	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 45@@
45
3B
3	LISTENING  understanding times, dates and 	
	 appointments
a	 e 3.9   Ask Sts if they can remember Jake Bevan from 3A. 
If not, remind them that he is the American man who had 
a stopover in Rome with the tour guide Anna. 
	 Now focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the situation.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the audio, focus on the 
phone and ask Sts the times. Elicit both ways of telling the 
time where possible.
(a) quarter past eight / eight fifteen 
eleven / eleven o'clock
two / two o'clock
four / four o'clock
half past seven / seven thirty
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the phone 
calendar.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Tuesday at 11.00
e 3.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
S = Sarah, J = Jake
S	 Hello?
J	
Sarah?
S	 Hi, Jake.
J	
Hi. Great to hear your voice! How are things?
S	 Oh fine, fine. How was the journey? When did you arrive in the 
UK?
J	
Last night. The journey was fine. I got a cheap flight with Alitalia, 
but it meant a long stopover in Rome, but I went on a guided tour 
and I had a great time. 
S	 That sounds like fun. What did you think of Rome?
J	
Fantastic. I loved it. So when can we meet?
S	 I’m afraid I’m really busy this week. The only possible day for me is 
Tuesday. I’m going to London from Wednesday to Friday…
J	
Tuesday. Let me look at my calendar. 
S	 Wow, Jake, you put things in your calendar! You’re much more 
organized than when we were going out. 
J	
Well, I’m better than I was. But I nearly lost my passport when I 
was in Rome. OK, Tuesday. I’m not free in the evening. I’m having 
dinner with Mark Taylor, my old professor. Do you remember him? 
It’s at seven thirty. I can’t change that. How about lunch? 
S	 It depends on the time. A late lunch would be OK, around one 
forty-five? 
J	
The problem is I’m giving my talk at two. And I’m having a 
breakfast meeting at eight fifteen with some colleagues. 
S	 Well, morning coffee, or tea in the afternoon, then. What are you 
doing then?
J	
Let’s see…I’m going to a talk about climate change at four, so 
I think maybe morning coffee is best. And then we can try to 
arrange another time.
S	 OK. There’s a nice coffee bar in the high street called The Grand 
Café. Meet there at eleven?
J	
Perfect. I’m really looking forward to it!
S	 Me too. Bye.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the arrive in or arrive at? box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Focus on a in Activation and get Sts to cover the 
Prepositions column and say the sentences.
	 Finally, in b, get Sts to complete the gaps with a 
preposition, and then check answers.
1  on    2  about, to    3  in    4  to    5  for    6  for
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the prepositions on the board in 
random order to help Sts.
	 Make sure Sts understand all the questions, e.g. love at first 
sight, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 3.8   Here Sts practise deciphering connected speech. 
Focus on the Connected speech box and go through 
it with the class. Highlight that this is an aspect of 
pronunciation that is particularly important to help them 
understand spoken English.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear six sentences said at normal 
speed. The first time, tell them just to listen, not to write. 
Play the audio once the whole way through.
e 3.8
1	 We arrived at the airport.
2	 It depends on the time.
3	 Let’s talk about it.
4	 What does she think of him?
5	 Don’t think about the past.
6	 How much did you spend on food? 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
See sentences in script 3.8
	 Finally, play the audio again, pausing after each sentence 
for Sts to repeat and copy the rhythm.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 46@@
46
3B
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.130. 
Grammar notes
Sts already know how to use the present continuous to 
talk about things happening now, but may find this future 
use (What are you doing this evening?) quite strange. They 
may find it more natural to use the present simple tense 
for this because of L1 interference.
A typical mistake is: What do you do this evening? I go to the 
cinema.
The difference between using be going to and the 
present continuous is quite subtle, so it is probably worth 
stressing that they can often be used as alternative forms 
when we talk about plans and arrangements, e.g. What 
are you going to do tonight? / What are you doing tonight?
You may want to point out that whereas it is very 
common to use the present continuous with verbs such 
as leave, arrive, go, and come because these often refer 
to previously-made travel arrangements, be going to is 
more common with actions for which you don’t usually 
make special arrangements, e.g. I’m going to wash my hair 
tonight is more common than I’m washing my hair tonight.
It is also important to highlight that the present 
continuous is not used for predictions, e.g. I’m sure you’re 
going to find a job. NOT I’m sure you’re finding a job.
	 e 3.12   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the be going to or present continuous? 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Focus on the exercises for 3B on p.131. Sts do the exercises 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  N    2  F    3  F    4  N    5  N    6  F    7  F    8  N    9  N    10  F
b
1	 I’m packing my suitcase.
2	 I’m flying to Vienna at eight o’clock tonight.
3	 Why are you going to Vienna?
4	 I’m meeting the boss of VTech Solutions tomorrow.
5	 Why are you seeing him?
6	 He’s working on a project with me at the moment…
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on Jake’s phone and the example. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions 
about Jake’s phone calendar.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read all the 
appointments in the list. Make sure Sts realize that there 
are two appointments they do not need to use.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
8.15 breakfast meeting    2.00 my talk    4.00 talk: climate 
change    7.30 dinner with Mark
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.121, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 e 3.10   Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Jake and 
Sarah talking. They must listen and decide if they think 
Jake and Sarah will meet again.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit 
opinions.
e 3.10
J = Jake, S = Sarah
J	 Sarah! Sorry I’m late!
S	 Same old Jake. You were always late. Good to see you. You look 
really well.
J	 You look fantastic.
S	 Thank you. What would you like? I’m having a cappuccino. 
J	 The same for me. And a croissant or something. Excuse me…can 
we order some coffee please?
***
J	 It’s great to see you again, Sarah – just like old times. You really 
haven’t changed. We need to meet again. Are you doing anything 
on Saturday? 
S	 Well, actually…
J	 Lunch? Dinner? Breakfast?
S	 Jake, there’s something I need to tell you. I’m not single now. 
In fact, um…in fact, I’m with someone. He’s called Mike, and…
we’re getting married on Saturday. That’s why I’m so busy all this 
week…
J	 Wow! That’s…that’s great news! I wish you all the best!
S	 Thanks, Jake. Would you like another coffee, or a croissant?
4	GRAMMAR  present continuous (future 	
	 arrangements)
a	 e 3.11   Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts the first time 
they listen they must complete the gaps in 1–5.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
e 3.11
1	 I’m going to London from Wednesday to Friday.
2	 I’m having dinner with Mark Taylor.
3	 I’m giving my talk at two o’clock.
4	 Are you doing anything on Saturday?
5	 We’re getting married on Saturday.
	 Now ask Sts whether they refer to the present or the 
future.
They all refer to b) the future.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 47@@
47
3B
	 Now either do questions 1–3 as a whole-class activity or 
put Sts in pairs.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
1  a    2  b    3  Yes
c	 Now focus on the instructions and tell Sts they are going 
to write an email to Sally. Give them time to plan their 
email.
Details to give Sally: 
The time the plane / flight arrives.    the flight number    
a (mobile) phone number
Need to decide which room to sleep in and what to visit
d	 Go through the layout of the email with the class, pointing 
out the three different paragraphs.
	 Set the writing in class or for homework.
e	 Make sure Sts check their emails for mistakes before 
handing them in.
5	SPEAKING
a	 e 3.13   Focus on the task and tell Sts that the first time 
you play the audio, they should just listen and read at the 
same time. They should pay attention to B’s intonation in 
the highlighted phrases, which helps to show how she is 
feeling, e.g. enthusiastic, apologetic.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
e 3.13
See the conversation in Student’s Book p.25
	 Now tell Sts they must listen and repeat the conversation.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each line for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the intonation.
b	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversation.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
c	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to complete 
their calendar with different activities for three evenings 
next week. Encourage them to write the activities with the 
verb in the infinitive, or without the verb, as this is how 
people normally put things in a diary, e.g. (go to) cinema 
with friends NOT I’m going to the cinema with friends.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit some activities Sts could do in 
the evening and write them on the board, e.g. study, do 
homework / housework, go to the cinema / a concert, go to a 
restaurant, cook dinner, watch a film at home, etc.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do. Read the example with a student.
	 Tell Sts to mingle and try to make arrangements with a 
different person for every free evening they have.
	 When time is up, find out who is doing what when.
6	WRITING  an informal email
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An informal email on p.115.
a	 Focus on the instructions. Get Sts to read the email, and 
help them with any vocabulary, e.g. for some reason, to 
share a room, attaching, etc. 
	 Now get Sts to read the email again and answer questions 
1–5. Tell them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Last August
2	 By plane
3	 Sally and her family
4	 Because she doesn’t have it; it isn’t on her phone.
5	 He needs to decide if he wants to share a bedroom, and if 
there’s anything he’d like to do in the UK.
b	 Focus on the expressions in the list and give Sts a few 
minutes in pairs to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers. 
1	 Hi   
2	 Thanks for your email   
3	 Looking forward to hearing from you.   
4	 Best wishes   
5	 PS
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 48@@
48
3C
	3C	 Word games
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding rules 	
	 of a game
a	 Books open. Focus on the questions. Do the first one as a 
whole-class activity and tell Sts if you like word games.
	 Now give Sts, in pairs, three minutes to find as many 
words as possible of four letters or more (not including 
the letters in the circle).
	 Get some possible answers.
fear, brother, bread, learn, angel, danger, etc.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could play other word games with 
these letters, e.g. give Sts three minutes to try to make the 
longest word they can.
b	 Focus on the photo of the quiz show. Use it to elicit the 
word wheel, and ask Sts if any of them recognize the show. 
	 Then give Sts time to read the text.
	 Elicit answers. The original show on TV in the UK was 
called The Alphabet Game, and it has been adapted in 
many countries around the world, e.g. in Spain, where it is 
called Pasapalabra and is very popular.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the text the first time, check 
whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Tell Sts to read the text again and then cover it.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer questions 1–5. 
	 Check answers.
1	 To complete the wheel by saying the correct word for  
each letter
2	 Two minutes
3	 The place where you catch a plane, airport
4	 He or she says ‘pass’, and the presenter goes on to the next 
letter.
5	 They get all 25 words correct.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 e 3.14   Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the situation. Explain that they are going to 
listen to the end of the show and they should try to write 
down the last six words the contestant needs to guess. 
Tell Sts not to call out the answers.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each ‘ping’ to give Sts time to 
write their answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, but don’t check 
answers yet.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
 G   defining relative clauses (a person who…, a thing 
which…)
 V   paraphrasing: like, for example, etc.
 P   silent e
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is word games. First, Sts are 
introduced to simple, defining relative clauses through 
the context of a TV game show where contestants have to 
complete the alphabet wheel by saying the correct word for 
definitions for each letter of the alphabet. This context shows 
Sts that relative clauses can help them with the essential 
language skill of paraphrasing. After practising the grammar, 
they go on to learn other useful phrases which will help 
them keep going in a conversation when they don’t know 
the exact word for something. Sts then play the game with 
letters A–E only. The pronunciation focus is on how the silent 
letter e at the end of words, e.g. site, fate, etc., changes the 
preceding vowel sound. Finally, Sts define words to each 
other in order to complete a crossword.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  defining relative clauses p.180 
Communicative  Can you explain the word? p.225 
(instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  3C
Online Practice  3C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts you are going to play a word game. Play Hangman 
with the word DICTIONARY.
!   If you don’t know how to play Hangman, see Elementary 
Teacher’s Book p.24.
Tell Sts that the lesson is going to be about word games.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 49@@
49
3C
2	GRAMMAR  defining relative clauses
a	 Focus on the three sentences from the game show and 
get Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  where    2  who    3  which
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to focus on the three sentences 
in a and elicit when the words who, which, and where 
are used. 
We use who with people, which with things, and where with 
places. 
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3C on p.130. 
Grammar notes
You may want to point out that in conversation and 
informal writing, native speakers often use that rather 
than who and which, e.g. A waiter is somebody that works in 
a restaurant. 
The relative pronoun can be omitted in sentences like 
This is the book I told you about, where the subject of the 
relative clause changes. This is not actively focused on 
at this level, but is probably worth pointing out, as its 
omission sometimes causes comprehension problems 
when Sts are reading or listening, especially when they 
cannot leave it out in their L1.
	 e 3.16   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the information box on that and go 
through it with the class.
	 Focus on the exercises for 3C on p.131. Sts do the exercises 
individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   After checking the answers to a, you 
could tell Sts to close their books and then ask them What’s 
an octopus? What’s a lawnmower?, etc. and see if they can 
remember the definitions.
a
1	 An octopus in an animal which lives in the sea
2	 A lawnmower is a machine which cuts the grass.
3	 A surgeon is a doctor who does operations.
4	 A changing room is a room where people try on clothes.
5	 A porter is the person who helps you with your luggage.
6	 Garlic is a kind of food which keeps vampires away.
7	 A garage is a place where mechanics repair cars.
b
1	 That’s the dog which always barks at night.
2	 That’s the shop where I bought my wedding dress.
3	 He’s the actor who was in the last James Bond film.
4	 They’re the children who live next door to me.
5	 This is the restaurant where they make great pizza.
6	 That’s the switch which controls the air conditioning.
7	 He’s the teacher who teaches my sister.
8	 That’s the room where we have our meetings.
9	 This is the light which is broken.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e 3.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
P = presenter, V = Victoria
P	 OK. It begins with B. It’s an adjective for a man who has no hair on 
his head! 
V	 (ping)
P	 Right. It begins with C. It’s an adjective. It describes a place where 
there are a lot of people, for example a restaurant or a beach in 
the summer.
V	 (ping)
P	 Right. It begins with G. They’re things which people wear on their 
hands.
V	 (ping)
P	 Right. It begins with K. It’s the room where people cook.
V	 (ping)
P	 Right. It begins with L. It’s an adjective for a person who doesn’t 
like studying or working, for example. It’s the opposite of  
hard-working.
V	 (ping)
P	 Right. It begins with T. It’s a thing which you use in an airport 
to help you with your cases, or in a supermarket to put your 
shopping in. Just three seconds left…
V	 (ping)
e	 e 3.15   Tell Sts that they are going to listen to Victoria 
again, but this time they will hear her answers. They must 
compare their answers to hers.
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts to compare 
their answers.
	 Check answers. Find out with a show of hands how many 
Sts got all six answers correct.
1  bald    2  crowded    3  gloves    4  kitchen    5  lazy    6  trolley
e 3.15
P	 OK. It begins with B. It’s an adjective for a man who has no hair on 
his head! 
V	 Bald.
P	 Right. It begins with C. It’s an adjective. It describes a place where 
there are a lot of people, for example a restaurant or a beach in 
the summer.
V	 Crowded.
P	 Right. It begins with G. They’re things which people wear on their 
hands.
V	 Gloves. 
P	 Right. It begins with K. It’s the room where people cook.
V	 Kitchen. 
P	 Right. It begins with L. It’s an adjective for someone who doesn’t 
like studying or working, for example. It’s the opposite of hard-
working.
V	 Lazy. 
P	 Right. It begins with T. It’s a thing which you use in an airport 
to help you with your cases, or in a supermarket to put your 
shopping in…Just three seconds left.
V	 Trolley!
P	 Congratulations, Victoria! You’ve done it!
V	 Oh, great!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with script 3.14 on p.121, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 50@@
50
3C
d	 Focus on the six words and give Sts time in pairs to write 
definitions. 
	 Elicit some of their answers onto the board.
Possible answers
1	 It’s somebody who plays music on the radio or in a club.
2	 It’s somewhere where you can see paintings.
3	 It’s something which you use to take photos.
4	 It’s a kind of document which you need if you travel abroad / 
to another country.
5	 For example, you do this when you are on the beach.
6	 It’s the opposite of straight.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts only write five 
definitions – one for each letter from A to E.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs to write their definitions. If 
they can’t think of words, you could give them words to  
use, e.g.:
actor	
apple	
armchair	
abroad
bag	
builder	
breakfast	
bathroom
charger	
cold	
cook	
cousin
dictionary	
dangerous	
dirty	
drive
empty	
easy	
extrovert	
earrings
	 Monitor and help Sts, correcting any errors with relative 
clauses.
	 When Sts are ready, put them in groups of three or four. 
If Sts wrote their definitions in pairs, then put two pairs 
together.
	 Sts read their definitions for their teammates to guess.
	 When they have finished, you could get a few Sts to read 
their definitions to the class.
4	PRONUNCIATION  silent e 
Pronunciation notes
Learning how a final e after a vowel often changes the 
pronunciation of this vowel will help Sts to predict the 
pronunciation of new words. 
You may want to point out to Sts that a few common 
words are exceptions, e.g. have, give, and live, and that with 
two-syllable words the rule is usually true when the syllable 
with the silent e is stressed, e.g. decide and arrive, but not 
practise.
a	 Focus on the Silent e box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Now focus on the two definitions and elicit the words. 
1  hat    2  hate
	 Ask the class how the pronunciation of the first word 
changes when you add the e.
It changes from /æ/ to /eɪ/ (from short to a diphthong). With an 
e, it’s the same sound as the letter a.
3	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  paraphrasing
Vocabulary notes
Native speakers often paraphrase when they can’t think of 
the word they want. This is an essential skill for Sts at any 
level. Encourage Sts to get into the habit of paraphrasing 
whenever they need to. You can help them with this by 
giving definitions when they ask what a word means.
a	 Focus on the question and go through the possible 
answers a–c, making sure Sts understand them.
	 Elicit answers and try to get a mini discussion going about 
the relative merits of each one.
	 You may want to point out to Sts that the word to 
describe option c is paraphrasing (the subheading of this 
section).
b	 e 3.17   Tell Sts that they are going to learn some useful 
expressions to help them explain words they don’t know. 
In pairs, Sts complete the eight expressions with the 
words in the list.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  somebody    2  something    3  somewhere    4  kind
5  opposite    6  like    7  similar    8  example
e 3.17
1	 It’s somebody who shows you round a city or a museum.
2	 It’s something which we use to pay, instead of cash.
3	 It’s somewhere where people go when they want to send a parcel 
or a letter.
4	 It’s a kind of fruit. It’s long and yellow.
5	 It’s the opposite of expensive.
6	 It’s like a sweater, but it has buttons.
7	 It’s similar to a wallet, but it’s for a woman.
8	 It’s a verb. For example, you do this to the TV when you’ve 
finished watching something.
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence, and 
elicit the word being defined. You could point out that 
after somewhere, you can leave out the relative pronoun 
where.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time, in pairs, to read the 
expressions again and work out the word being defined.
1	 guide
2	 credit / debit / bank card
3	 post office
4	 banana
5	 cheap
6	 cardigan
7	 purse
8	 turn off
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 51@@
51
5	SPEAKING
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Split crossword, A on p.103, B on p.109.
	 Go through the instructions carefully and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. Before Sts start, check 
they understand the meaning of down and across when 
asking for the crossword clues.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Then put two 
Sts A and two Sts B together. Get them to look at the words 
in their crossword and make sure they know the meanings. 
Now put Sts back in their original pairs to do the activity.
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A asks B to define his / her 
missing words. Then B does the same, and they continue 
taking turns to ask for and give definitions.
	 When they have finished, get them to compare 
crosswords.
3C
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts know the meaning of 
the words. Model and drill pronunciation.
bit /bɪt/ – bite /baɪt/
not /nɒt/ – note /nəʊt/
plan /plæn/ – plane /pleɪn/
cut /kʌt/ – cute /kjuːt/
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the words and phonetics on the 
board to help Sts.
c	 e 3.18   Focus on the instructions, and then play the 
audio for Sts to listen to the definitions and write the pairs 
of words.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each definition, 
and elicit the words.
1	 a	 win	
b  wine
2	 a	 pet		
b  Pete
3	 a	 mad	
b  made
e 3.18
1	 a  It’s a verb. It’s the opposite of lose. 
	
b  It’s something you drink. It’s alcoholic and it can be red, white, 
or rosé.
2	 a  It’s an animal which people have in their house, for example 
a cat. 
	
b  It’s the short form of the name Peter.
3	 a  It’s an adjective similar to crazy. 
	
b  It’s the past tense of the verb make.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to say the words to each 
other.
e	 e 3.19   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
kite /kaɪt/    bin /bɪn/    stone /stəʊn/    
tap /tæp/    grapes /greɪps/    mug /mʌg/
e 3.19
See words in Student’s Book on p.27
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 52@@
52
PE2
e 3.20
J = Jenny, R = Rob, B = Barbara, H = Holly
J	 Well, I think that’s everything. What do you think of the office?
R	 It’s brilliant, and much bigger than our place in London.
J	 Oh, here’s Barbara. Rob, this is Barbara, the editor of the magazine.
B	 It’s good to finally meet you, Rob.
R	 It’s great to be here.
B	 Is this your first time in New York?
R	 No, I came here when I was eighteen. But only for a few days. 
B	 Well, I hope you get to know New York much better this time!
J	 Barbara, I’m going to take Rob out for lunch. Would you like to 
come with us?
B	 I’d love to, but unfortunately I have a meeting at one. So, I’ll see 
you later. We’re meeting at three, I think.
J	 That’s right.
B	 Have a nice lunch.
***
H	 Hey, are you Rob Walker?
R	 Yes.
H	 Hi, I’m Holly. Holly Tyler. 
R	 Hello, Holly.
H	 We’re going to be working together.
J	 Really?
H	 Didn’t Barbara tell you? I’m going to be Rob’s photographer!
J	 Oh, well…We’re just going for lunch.
H	 Cool! I can come with you. I mean, I had a sandwich earlier, so I 
don’t need to eat, but Rob and I can talk. Is that OK?
J	 Sure.
H	 So, let’s go.
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen a 
second time and correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 The New York office is much bigger.
3	 Rob has been to New York before.
4	 Holly is going to have lunch with Rob and Jenny.
6	 Holly wants to go to the restaurant because she wants to 
talk to Rob.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
Function  at the restaurant
Vocabulary  restaurants: menu, bill, etc.
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts practise ordering food and then explaining 
that there is a problem. The Rob and Jenny story develops. 
Jenny shows Rob around the New York office, and 
introduces him to Barbara, the boss. Jenny and Rob go out 
for lunch, and Holly, Jenny’s colleague, joins them and takes 
over the conversation!
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 2 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 2 
Can you remember...? 1–3
Online Practice  Practical English 2 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 2, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 1. Ask Who’s Rob? Where does he work / live? 
Who’s Jenny? Where is she from?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 1.
1	r IN THE NEW YORK OFFICE
a	 e 3.20   Books open. Focus on the photo and ask Sts to 
guess where Rob is and who the woman is.
	 Now focus on the instructions and on sentences 1–6. 
Go through them with Sts and make sure they 
understand them.
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through, 
and get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). 
Make it clear that they don’t need to correct the false 
sentences yet.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    2  T    3  F    4  F    5  T    6  F
	 2	
Practical English  Restaurant problems
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 53@@
53
PE2
b	 Focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who says 
the You hear phrases (the waitress) and who says the 
You say phrases (the customer, or here Jenny, Rob, and 
Holly). These phrases will be useful for Sts if they need to 
order food / a drink, and if they then have problems. You 
might want to point out the difference between madam 
in British English, which Sts will have seen if they did 
Elementary, and ma’am in American English.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and to 
think about what the missing words might be. Then play 
the video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  order    2  start    3  potato    4  medium    5  drink    6  Still    
7  sir    8  change    9  take
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. Make sure Sts understand that rare, medium, 
and well done refer to the different ways a steak can be 
cooked. Also remind Sts of the two kinds of mineral water, 
still and sparkling. 
c	 e 3.23   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Elicit / Explain the two ways of ordering, e.g. I’d like (I would 
like) the tuna with a green salad or I’ll have the steak, please. 
Elicit what Holly says (Nothing for me.) and ask Sts why she 
says that (she had a sandwich earlier).
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. Encourage them to copy the rhythm 
and intonation, but probably not to try to copy Jenny 
and Holly’s American accents. When Jenny pronounces 
water as /ˈwɔːdər/, Sts should use the British English 
pronunciation of water /ˈwɔːtə/.
e 3.23
Same as script 3.22 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is Jenny, Rob, and Holly, and B 
is the waiter / waitress. Get Sts to read the conversation 
aloud and then swap roles.
e	 Focus on the instructions. B (book open) is the waiter / 
waitress. A (book closed) should decide what to eat and 
then respond when B starts with Are you ready to order?.
	 Sts now role-play the conversation.
f	 When they have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
2	r VOCABULARY  restaurants
a	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer the questions in 
the restaurant quiz.
b	 e 3.21   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check.
	 Check answers.
What do you call…?
1	 the menu
2	 courses
3	 a waiter / waitress
4	 the bill
5	 the tip
What do you say…?
6	 A table for four, please.
7	 Can I have the pasta? Could I have the pasta? I’ll have the 
pasta. I’d like the pasta.
8	 Can I have the bill, please? Could I have the bill, please?
EXTRA IDEA   You could do the quiz as a competition. Set a 
time limit, and the pair with the most correct answers are 
the winners.
3	r AT THE RESTAURANT
a	 e 3.22   Focus on the photo and ask Sts Where are they? 
(at the restaurant) and Who are the three people? (Rob, the 
waitress, and Jenny).
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books, and write the 
questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the two 
questions and cover the conversation on p.29.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers. You might want to point out that the 
waitress has an Australian accent.
1	 Jenny orders tuna and a green salad. Rob orders steak and 
fries. Holly doesn’t order anything.
2	 The waitress gives Jenny fries instead of a salad and Rob’s 
steak is rare, not well done.
e 3.22 3.23
W = waitress, J = Jenny, R = Rob, H = Holly
W	 Are you ready to order? 
J	 Yes, please. (repeat)
W	 Can I get you something to start with? 
J	 No, thank you. (repeat) I’d like the tuna with a green salad. (repeat)
W	 And for you, sir?
R	 I’ll have the steak, please. (repeat)
W	 Would you like that with fries or a baked potato? 
R	 Fries, please. (repeat)
W	 How would you like your steak? Rare, medium, or well done?
R	 Well done. (repeat)
H	 Nothing for me. (repeat)
W	 OK. And to drink?
J	 Water, please. (repeat)
W	 Still or sparkling?
J	 Sparkling. (repeat)
***
W	 The tuna for you, ma’am, and the steak for you, sir.
J	 I’m sorry, but I asked for a green salad, not fries. (repeat)
W	 No problem. I’ll change it.
R	 Excuse me. (repeat)
W	 Yes, sir?
R	 Sorry, I asked for my steak well done, and this is rare. (repeat)
W	 I’m really sorry. I’ll take it back to the kitchen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 54@@
54
d	 e 3.25   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  So    2  start    3  suggestions    4  be    5  Could    6  mistake    
7  time
e 3.25
1	 So, tell me…
2	 Well, to start with…
3	 Do you have any suggestions?
4	 That would be great. 
5	 Could we have the check, please?
6	 Excuse me, I think there’s a mistake.
7	 OK, time to go. 
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase, for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  7    B  6    C  3    D  4    E  2    F  5    G  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
PE2
4	r HOLLY AND ROB MAKE FRIENDS
a	 e 3.24   Focus on the question.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer. 
Rob and Holly enjoy the lunch, but Jenny doesn’t.
e 3.24
H = Holly, R = Rob, J = Jenny, W = waitress
H	 So tell me, Rob, what are you going to write about?
R	 Well, to start with, my first impressions of New York. You know, the 
nightlife, the music, things like that.
H	 Are you planning to do any interviews?
R	 I’d like to. Do you have any suggestions?
H	 Well, I know some great musicians.
R	 Musicians?
H	 You know, guys in bands. And I also have some contacts in the 
theatre and dance.
R	 That would be great. 
H	 Maybe we could go to a show, and after you could talk to the 
actors.
R	 I really like that idea.
W	 Can I bring you anything else?
J	 Could we have the check, please?
W	 Yes, ma’am.
***
W	 Here’s your check.
J	 Thanks.
***
J	 Excuse me. I think there’s a mistake. We had two bottles of water, 
not three.
W	 You’re right. I’m really sorry. It’s not my day today! I’ll get you a 
new check.
J	 Thank you.
H	 We’re going to have a fun month, Rob.
R	 Yeah, I think it’s going to be fantastic.
J	 OK, time to go. You have your meeting…with Barbara at three.
R	 Oh yeah, right. 
b	 Focus on questions 1–6 and give Sts time to read them.
	 Before playing the video / audio again, focus on the 
British and American English box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or 
listen a second time and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 He’s going to write about his first impressions of New York, 
the nightlife, and music.
2	 Holly says she can introduce him to musicians, and she also 
knows people in the theatre and dance.
3	 She says they could go to a show.
4	 It says three bottles of water, but they only had two.
5	 Because Rob has a meeting with Barbara (and maybe because 
she is getting tired of Holly).
6	 No, she wanted to be alone with Rob.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 55@@
4A
55
 G 	 present perfect + yet, just, already
 V 	 housework, make or do?
 P 	 the letters y and j
Lesson plan
This lesson presents the present perfect to talk about the 
recent past, and Sts also learn to use it with yet, just, and 
already. Sts who completed English File Elementary will 
have seen the present perfect (though not yet, just, and 
already), but for other Sts this will be completely new. The 
context of the lesson is housework. Sts begin with two 
articles about housework to read and discuss. There is then 
a vocabulary focus on common verb phrases for housework, 
and collocations with make and do. In a speaking activity, 
Sts read a questionnaire and discuss who in their country 
does housework and whether they do any themselves. 
The grammar is then presented through three short 
conversations between family members about housework. 
The pronunciation focus is on the letters y and j, as in yet and 
just. The lesson ends with a listening which gives tips about 
how to clean quickly and efficiently.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect + yet, just, already p.181 
Vocabulary  Housework, make and do? p.262  
(instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Find the response p.226  
(instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  4A
Online Practice  4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write these countries on the board:  
CANADA    ITALY    NORWAY    SPAIN    UK
Ask Sts to rank them 1–5, with 1 = men do the most 
housework, and 5 = men do the least housework. 
Now tell them the real order according to a 2016 survey.
1	 Norway, where men do more housework than any other 
country in the world
2	 Canada 
3	 Spain
4	 UK
5	 Italy
Ask Sts if they’re surprised by the order.
1	READING & VOCABULARY  housework,  
	 make or do?
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and read the two 
headlines. Explain / Elicit the meaning of the expression as 
good as (= equally good). 
	 Elicit what the missing words might be.
b	 Tell Sts to read the two articles to check their answers to a. 
Then they should read the online comments after the 
articles and match comments A–F to either article 1 or 2. 
Point out that the first one (1A) has been done for them.
	 When Sts have completed the task, get them to compare 
with a partner.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the articles the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
a	 housework
b	 B  2    C  2    D  1    E  2    F  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss which 
comments they agree with.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
do (housework, sport, the cleaning, )
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Housework, make or 
do? on p.154. 
Vocabulary notes
Housework
You may want to point out that wash and wash up are 
used as normal verbs, (e.g. I’m going to wash my hair, etc.), 
but that when we refer to the housework activity of 
washing clothes or washing up plates, etc., it is more 
common to use the phrases do the washing and do the 
washing-up. 
This is similar to the difference between swimming and go 
swimming, focused on in 2A.
You might also want to tell Sts that in British English 
vacuuming and hoovering are synonyms. The word hoover 
comes from the American vacuum cleaner company.
make or do
You could suggest that when Sts aren’t sure whether 
to use make or do, to bear in mind that make often has 
the meaning of ‘creating’ something which wasn’t there 
before, e.g. make dinner, make a noise, make a cake, etc., 
whereas do has the meaning of fulfilling a task which 
already exists, e.g. do an exercise, do housework, do a course, 
etc. This rule of thumb is generally true, although there are 
a few exceptions, e.g. make the bed.
	 Focus on 1 Housework and get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs. 
	 e 4.1   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
	4A	 Who does what?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 56@@
4A
56
3	GRAMMAR  present perfect + yet, just, already
a	 Tell Sts to look at the pictures and read the conversations. 
Then they should complete them with the verbs from the 
list. Explain that these are past participles. Point out that 
the first one (finished) has been done for them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If your Sts haven’t seen the present perfect 
before, or they’ve seen it only very briefly, tell them that the 
past participles are of regular and irregular verbs, and elicit 
which verbs they are.
	 Give Sts time to complete the three conversations. 
b	 e 4.3   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers, and if you didn’t do this before, elicit the 
infinitive of each verb.
1	 finished (finish), started (start), broken (break)
2	 made (make), come (come), been (be)
3	 done (do), put (put)
e 4.3
1	 A  Have you finished the washing-up?
	
B  Not yet.
	
A  Have you started it?
	
B  Er…yes.
	
A  What’s that noise? Have you broken something?
	
B  Sorry. Only a glass.
2	 A  What’s for dinner?
	
B  I don’t know. I haven’t made anything. I’ve just come home.
	
A  Is there anything in the fridge?
	
B  Not much. I haven’t been to the supermarket yet.
	
A  Oh! 
	
B  Maybe you can go?
3	 A  Are you going to take the rubbish out?
	
B  I’ve already done it.
	
A  And have you put a new bag in the bin?
	
B  No, I couldn’t find the bags.
	 Ask the class the two questions and elicit some answers. 
You could also tell Sts if you have conversations like this, 
and who with.
c	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time to match 
sentences 1–4 to meanings A–D.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could elicit 
the translation of just, already, and yet. Elicit / Explain that 
the verbs are in the present perfect.
1  d    2  c    3  b    4  a
!   Just has other meanings in other contexts, e.g. only.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.132. 
Grammar notes
For some Sts the present perfect may be new. They may have 
something similar in their L1 or they may not, and the use is 
likely to be different. It takes time for Sts to learn and use the 
present perfect correctly, but this use (for things that have 
happened recently, with no time mentioned) is probably the 
simplest to understand, and Sts will probably already be used 
to you asking them, e.g. Have you finished?, etc. 
Yet / already may not have an exact equivalent in Sts’ L1, 
and the meaning is not that easy to explain, as they are 
words which simply add emphasis. There is not much 
difference between I haven’t finished and I haven’t finished 
yet, but adding yet implies that you are going to finish.
 
e 4.1
	
Housework, make or do? 1 Housework
7	 clean the floor
6	 do the ironing
3	 do the shopping
10	 do the vacuuming
2	 do the washing
8	 do the washing-up
13	 dust the furniture
1	 lay the table (opposite clear)
15	 load the dishwasher (opposite unload)
14	 make lunch
4	 make the bed
11	 pick up dirty clothes
5	 put away your clothes
12	 take out the rubbish
9	 tidy your room
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the verb phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any words and phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Finally, do c and get Sts to cover the phrases and look at 
the photos. They can test themselves or a partner.
	 Now focus on 2 make or do and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.2   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 4.2
	
2 make or do
1	 do a course
2	 make a mistake
3	 do an exam (an exercise, homework)
4	 make a noise
5	 make a phone call
6	 do housework
7	 make friends
8	 do sport (or exercise)
9	 make plans
10	 make an excuse
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Finally, do c and get Sts to cover the phrases and look at 
the photos. They can test themselves or a partner.
	 Focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs to test each 
other. A (book open) says a noun and B (book closed) says 
the verb. Make sure they swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the questionnaire and go through the questions, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. fair, typical, 
teenager, argue, etc.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 57@@
4A
57
b	 e 4.7  Before playing the audio, make sure Sts know the 
meaning of all the words, especially jaw (= the parts of 
your face that move when you talk or eat). 
	 Now play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 4.7
1	 a  yet     b  jet
2	 a  yes    b  Jess
3	 a  yours     b  jaws
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word or group of 
words for Sts to repeat.
	 Now ask Sts how the letters y and j are pronounced at the 
beginning of words.
At the beginning of a word, y = /j/ and j = /dʒ/. 
c	 e 4.8   Tell Sts they are going to hear three words from a. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each word to check the answer.
e 4.8
1  a  yet    2  b  Jess    3  a  yours 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
d	 e 4.9   Tell Sts they are going to hear five sentences and 
they must write them down.
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
e 4.9
1	 I’ve just bought some jeans and a jacket. 
2	 Have you used your new computer yet?
3	 Jane’s really enjoying her Japanese classes. 
4	 Do you usually argue about housework?
5	 Is John’s birthday in June or July?
	 Now play it again, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board. 
You may want to point out the hidden /j/ sound in new, 
computer, and argue.
See sentences in script 4.9 
	 Finally, get Sts to practise saying the sentences in pairs.
e	 e 4.10   Tell Sts they are going to hear six sound effects 
of things that have just happened. Point out the example. 
Put Sts in pairs and tell them first to listen only. Play the 
audio once the whole way through.
e 4.10
(Sound effects to illustrate the following sentences)
1	 She’s just broken a glass.
2	 They’ve just got married.
3	 He’s just taken a photo.
4	 She’s just seen a mouse.
5	 The film has just finished.
6	 A dog has just seen a cat.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sound effect 
for Sts to say a sentence with just and the present perfect. 
Accept all correct and possible sentences.
See sentences in script 4.10
just + present perfect: This use may be difficult for Sts to 
assimilate, as it may be expressed in a completely different 
way in Sts’ L1, i.e. with another verb followed by the infinitive. 
Sts may also have previously met just with the meaning only. 
Tell them that the meaning is usually clear from the context.
Lesson 4B focuses on the present perfect for past 
experience with ever / never, and contrasts it with the past 
simple. Later in the course (9B) Sts are introduced to the 
present perfect with for and since for unfinished actions, 
and this is again contrasted with the past simple in 9C.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 4.4 and e 4.5 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 If your Sts are new to the present perfect, when you go to 
the Irregular verbs list on p.164, get them to underline or 
highlight the verbs where the past participle is different 
from the past simple, e.g. be, become, etc.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to close their books, and test them on 
participles which are different from the past simple.
	 Focus on the exercises for 4A on p.133. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 1  She’s bought a new jacket.
	
2  He hasn’t found a job yet.
	
3  Have you spoken to Mr Jackson?
	
4  We’ve found a fantastic hotel.
	
5  They haven’t finished eating. 
	
6  Have you seen Peter recently?
	
7  Have you done your homework?
	
8  We haven’t replied to their email yet.
b	 1  I’ve just had breakfast.
	
2  Have you finished your dinner yet?
	
3  The film has already started.
	
4  I haven’t met his girlfriend yet.
	
5  They’ve just got married.
	
6  He’s already gone home.
	
7  We’ve just spoken to him.
	
8  I haven’t read his new book yet.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  the letters 	
	 y and j
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that:
•	 the letter y at the beginning of a word is always 
pronounced /j/.
•	 the letter j is always pronounced /dʒ/.
a	 e 4.6  Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the words 
and sounds: yacht /jɒt/ and jazz /dʒæz/.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat.
e 4.6
See words and sounds in Student’s Book on p.31
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 58@@
4A
58
You probably use this every day and it gets dirty quickly, believe me. 
But cleaning it is super easy. All you need to do is pour a little water 
into a microwave-safe bowl, slice a lemon in half and squeeze the 
juice into the water. Then, put the two halves of the lemon in the bowl 
and microwave on high for three minutes. Leave the door closed for 
another five minutes, and then clean the inside with a cloth. 
Tip four: Use your dishwasher to clean other things.
If you have a dishwasher, it’s probably already your best friend. But 
did you know that it can clean much more than just kitchen things? 
You can use it to clean all kinds of things made of plastic like toys, 
or even flip flops or other plastic shoes, and also for things made of 
metal like tools, or keys. 
Tip five: Tell people to take off their shoes when they come in.
If you hate vacuuming, but you also hate the floor because you don’t 
do the vacuuming, there’s an easy solution – tell your housemates 
and guests to take off their shoes at the front door. And if they forget 
or refuse, give them the vacuum cleaner.
Tip six: Use your socks to clean the floor.
If you have a hard floor, like wood or stone, for example, make 
your socks work for you. Take your shoes off, and slide across a 
different part of your floor each time you move across it. It’ll soon be 
completely clean. Then, just throw your socks in the washing machine.
And finally tip seven: Listen to music while you clean.
Sometimes you really need to do some housework that you hate, 
like ironing or cleaning the bathroom. Put on your favourite playlist 
and focus on the music, not the boring housework.
And one last word – many people say that lazy people are often 
the best employees because they find the most efficient way to 
complete a task. That’s the way you need to think when you’re 
cleaning. Good luck!
d	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen again and they need 
to answer questions 1–7. Tell them that each question is 
linked to a tip in b, so for questions 6 and 7, they must 
quickly look at the tip again.
	 Give Sts time to read the questions and make sure they 
understand all the lexis, e.g. flip-flops, tools, etc. 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each tip to give Sts 
time to answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 For ten minutes twice a day. Set an alarm on your phone to 
motivate yourself.
2	 Near the place where you need them. If you don’t know 
where the product is, you don’t want to look for it.
3	 Pour a little water into a microwave-safe bowl, slice a lemon 
in half and squeeze the juice into the water. Then, put the two 
halves of the lemon in the bowl and microwave on high for 
three minutes. Leave the door closed for another five minutes, 
and then clean the inside with a cloth.
4	 Because you can clean them in the dishwasher.
5	 Give them the vacuum cleaner.
6	 Hard floors, like wood or stone. Throw your socks in the 
washing machine when you finish.
7	 Ironing and cleaning the bathroom.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity and answer the questions 
yourself.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When Sts listen the first time, tell them to 
make notes only. Then play the audio again, pausing after 
each sound effect for Sts, in pairs, to write their sentences. 
f	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Has he done it yet? on 
p.104. Give them one minute to look at and remember the 
picture. 
	 Now tell Sts to go to p.106. Go through the instructions 
and point out the example. They should write their seven 
sentences with either already or yet.
	 When Sts have written their sentences, put them into 
pairs. They read their sentences aloud to each other to 
see if they have written the same. Monitor to check they 
are forming the present perfect correctly and are putting 
already and yet in the correct place.
	 Finally, Sts check with the picture to see how many of 
their sentences were correct. 
	 Get feedback.
Things Max has already done
1	 He’s already made the bed.
2	 He’s already had breakfast.
3	 He’s already had a shower.
Things Max hasn’t done yet
1	 He hasn’t tidied his desk yet.
2	 He hasn’t taken the dog for a walk yet. 
3	 He hasn’t turned off his computer yet.
4	 He hasn’t put away his clothes yet.
	 You could do c as a whole-class activity.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
5	LISTENING  checking hypotheses using 	
	 background knowledge
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis in the title of the video blog.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to guess what the 
missing words in tips 1–7 are.
c	 e 4.11   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  often    2  right    3  microwave    4  clean    5  their shoes    
6  floor    7  to music
e 4.11
I’m lazy, but I like living in a clean tidy home. Maybe you’re the same. 
It doesn’t matter if you live by yourself, with a partner, or with a 
group of friends. You’re always going to have to do some housework. 
Learn a few cleaning tricks and you can have a clean home – and still 
have plenty of time to relax and do nothing.
Tip one: Clean quickly, but often.
Clean for just ten minutes twice a day. This gives you time to, 
for example, load the dishwasher and do one other thing like 
vacuuming. Set an alarm on your phone to motivate yourself.
Tip two: Keep cleaning products in the right place.
Put cleaning products near the place where you need them. Keep 
bathroom cleaners in the bathroom, keep bin bags by the bin, and 
keep dishwasher tablets on top of the dishwasher. Sometimes you 
don’t clean if you can’t immediately see what you need, and you 
don’t want to look for it.
Tip three: Clean the microwave regularly.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 59@@
59
4B
	4B	 In your basket
Vocabulary notes
In a shop or store
Highlight:
•	 that store is American English for shop, but now in the 
UK people use both shop and store.
•	 the difference between fit and suit. If clothes don’t fit 
you, it means they’re the wrong size (e.g. too big, too 
small, too tight, too loose). If clothes don’t suit you, it 
means they don’t look good on you. 
Online
Some of this vocabulary will be more useful for Sts to 
understand than to actively use, e.g. proceed to checkout, but 
with the growth of online shopping worldwide, it is useful for 
them to learn the typical expressions they may see.
	 Focus on a and get Sts to do it individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.12   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 4.12
	
Shopping 1 In a shop or store
3	 basket
1	 changing rooms
10	 (self-service) checkout
5	 customer
11	 receipt
9	 shelves
7	 shop assistant
4	 shopping bag
2	 the sales
6	 till
8	 trolley
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Point out to Sts 
that the p in receipt is silent. Give further practice of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words and look at the 
photos. They can test themselves or each other.
	 Focus on c and get Sts to match the sentences.
	 e 4.13   Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. 
	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of suit  
/suːt/.
1  d    2  e    3  a    4  b    5  c    6  f
e 4.13
	
2 Shopping online 
1	 Can I help you? 
	
I’m just looking, thank you. 
2	 What size are you? 
	
I’m a medium. 
3	 Can I try on this shirt? 
	
Yes, the changing rooms are over there. 
4	 This shirt doesn’t fit me. 
	
It’s too big for me. 
5	 That jacket really suits you! 
	
You always look good in red. 
6	 I’m going to take these trousers back. They’re too short.
 G 	 present perfect or past simple? (1)
 V 	 shopping
 P 	 c and ch
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts look at the present perfect for past 
experience with ever / never, and contrast it with the past 
simple. The context of the lesson is shopping. Sts begin 
with a speaking activity about global chain stores, and 
a vocabulary focus on shopping. This is followed by a 
pronunciation focus on different ways of pronouncing the 
letters c and ch. Sts then listen to five people answering 
questions about shopping, and through this the grammar 
is presented. Then in speaking, Sts have a mingle activity 
where they ask other Sts some shopping-related Have you 
ever…? questions, which they then follow up with past 
simple questions. Finally, the lesson ends with an article 
explaining why we often find areas where there are a lot of 
the same kinds of shops.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect or past simple? (1) p.182 
Vocabulary  Shopping p.263 (instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Have you ever…? p.227  
(instructions p.210)
For students
Workbook  4B
Online Practice  4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Quickly revise vocabulary for clothes. Tell Sts to describe 
what other Sts are wearing or to test each other using the 
Vocabulary Bank on p.151.
1	SPEAKING & VOCABULARY  shopping
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
understand what a global chain store is.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss questions 1–7.
	 Check answers for questions 1 and 2, and get some 
feedback from various pairs for questions 3–7.
1	 Zara sells clothes and accessories (also Zara Home, which sells 
things for the house); Apple sells technology; Topshop sells 
clothes and accessories; The Body Shop sells products for skin 
and body (e.g. face cream); H&M sells clothes and accessories; 
Nike sells sportswear; IKEA sells things for the house; Uniqlo 
sells clothes and accessories.
2	 Zara is from Spain; Apple is from the USA; Topshop is from the 
UK; The Body Shop is from the UK; H&M is from Sweden; Nike 
is from the USA; IKEA is from Sweden; Uniqlo is from Japan.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Shopping on p.155 
and do 1 In a shop or store.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 60@@
60
4B
	 Check answers.
chemist’s and cash machine are pronounced differently.
In chemist’s the letters ch are pronounced /k/ and in machine 
they are pronounced /ʃ/.
e 4.16
See words in Student’s Book on p.32
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit some more words where ch is 
pronounced /k/ or /ʃ/. Sts should know, e.g. architect, 
mechanic, Christmas (ch = /k/), and chef, moustache  
(ch = /ʃ/). You may want to tell them that words where  
ch is pronounced /ʃ/ are mostly of French origin.
d	 Get Sts to practise saying all the words in a and c.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple? (1)
a	 e 4.17   Tell Sts that they’re going to listen to three 
people being interviewed about shopping. Tell them the 
first time they listen they just need to write down the 
names of shops in 1a that the people mention.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Kate:  H&M   
Rosie:  Top Shop and The Body Shop   
John:  Uniqlo
e 4.17
I = interviewer, K = Kate
I	 Have you been to a chain store recently?
K	 Yes, I have. I went to H&M three weeks ago.
I	 And what did you buy?
K	 I bought a skirt. It’s a long, black skirt.
I	 Are you happy with it?
K	 Yes, yes, and er...it was very cheap because it was in the sale. And 
it suits me.
I = interviewer, R = Rosie
I	 Have you been shopping for clothes recently?
R	 Yes, I went shopping at the weekend with my friends.
I	 Where did you go?
R	 We went to the city centre, to Princes Street – that’s where we 
always go.
I	 Did you buy anything?
R	 I tried on a few things in Topshop, but in the end there wasn’t 
anything I liked. But I did get something in The Body Shop. There’s 
a shopping centre just off Princes Street, and there’s a Body Shop 
there, and I bought some strawberry shower gel. I really like it.
I = interviewer, J = John
I	 Have you ever bought anything from Uniqlo?
J	 Not from the shop, because there isn’t one where I live, but I 
sometimes buy stuff on their website.
I	 What was the last thing you bought there?
J	 It was a few months ago. I got some T-shirts. I always get them 
there; they do really good, cheap T-shirts.
I	 How many did you get?
J	 Five, I think. Yes, five. 
I	 And are you happy with them?
J	 Yes. They were about five pounds each, and delivery was another 
five pounds, so that was thirty pounds for five T-shirts.
	 Now do 2 Online. Focus on a and get Sts to read the text 
and complete the gaps. 
	 e 4.14  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. Give further practice of any words your Sts 
find difficult to pronounce.
2	 account    3  item    4  basket    5  checkout    6  delivery
7	 next-day    8  debit    9  payment    10  auction
e 4.14
2 Shopping online
All major chain stores and many other shops sell online, and a lot of 
people prefer going to their website than the actual shop. The first 
time you use a site, you usually have to create an account, where 
you give your personal details. Then you choose what you want 
to buy, and click on each item. Everything you buy goes in your 
basket, usually at the top right of the page. When you are ready to 
pay, you click on ‘proceed to payment’. You then have to give the 
delivery address where you want them to send your things. You 
can usually pay extra for next-day delivery – standard delivery is 
sometimes free. Then you choose how you want to pay, for example 
with a credit or debit card or with PayPal, and give your payment 
details, for example your credit card number and expiry date. Finally, 
you confirm your payment and receive a reference number and a 
confirmation email. And then you wait! Many people also buy and 
sell things online at auction sites, like eBay.
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs to discuss the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  c and ch
a	 Write on the board CUT and CENT and elicit their 
pronunciations. Highlight that c can be pronounced /k/ 
or /s/.
	 Focus on the two sound pictures and elicit the words and 
sounds: key /kiː/ and snake /sneɪk/. Give Sts a few minutes 
to put the words in the correct row. Encourage them to 
say the words aloud as they do this.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 4.15   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.15
key /k/  account, auction, click, clothes, credit card, customer 
snake /s/  city, proceed, receipt, shopping centre
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word or group of 
words for Sts to repeat. 
	 Then focus on the question and check the answer.
c is usually /s/ before e and i, e.g. centre, city, etc.
c	 e 4.16   Focus on the first question and elicit the answer.
The letters ch are usually pronounced /tʃ/.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen to the words and circle 
the ones that are pronounced differently. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 61@@
61
4B
f	 Tell Sts they are now going to answer the same questions 
as the people in the interview in 3a.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions. Do question 1 with the whole 
class and elicit the missing past participles (bought and 
sold). Sts should complete questions 2–6 with the missing 
participles.
	 Check answers.
2  bought    3  got    4  lost    5  tried    6  had
b	 Focus on the follow-up question(s) after each present perfect 
question in a and point out that they are in the past simple.
	 Get Sts to interview you with the first two or three 
questions.
	 Finally, get Sts to stand up and move round the class. 
When somebody answers Yes, I have to the present perfect 
question, Sts should ask the follow-up questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
5	READING  understanding a theory
a	 Focus on the instructions. Then read the introduction as a 
class and elicit some answers.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Elicit some ideas from the class, but don’t tell them if they 
are correct.
c	 Tell Sts to read the article and check their answer to b. Tell 
them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Check the answer. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
The second situation because nobody needs to walk more than 
250 metres for an ice cream.
d	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and complete the 
gaps with phrases A–D.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  B    2  C    3  D    4  A
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
e	 Do the first question as a whole-class activity. Focus on 
the pronunciation of half /hɑːf/ and halves /hɑːvz/.
half
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to work out the plural 
of the nouns in the list.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know what all the 
words mean.
leaves, lives, knives, shelves, wives
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Before playing the audio again, get Sts, in pairs, to talk 
about what they can remember for the two questions.
	 Play the audio again. Pause it after each speaker to give 
Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Speaker 1 (Kate):  a skirt; yes
Speaker 2 (Rosie):  strawberry shower gel; yes
Speaker 3 (John):  five T-shirts; yes
c	 e 4.18   Tell Sts to look at the beginning of Kate’s 
interview and think what the missing verbs might be.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  Have…been    2  have    3  went    4  did…buy    5  bought
e 4.18
A	 Have you been to a chain store recently?
B	 Yes, I have. I went to H&M three weeks ago.
A	 And what did you buy?
B	 I bought a skirt. 
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
present perfect; past simple
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.132. 
Grammar notes
This use of the present perfect, to talk about past 
experiences when we don’t mention a time, is usually 
quite easy for Sts to understand. However, they may have 
problems with the switch to the past simple to talk about 
the specific experience / time, as in some Sts’ L1, they may 
be able to continue with the present perfect.
If this is your Sts’ first exposure to the contrast, don’t 
expect too much oral accuracy yet. The contrast between 
present perfect and past simple for unfinished and 
finished actions is also studied in 9C.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 4.19 and e 4.20 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the been and gone box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 4B on p.133. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 1  Have…bought    2  ’ve…wanted    3  haven’t read    ​
4  haven’t been    5  Has… lived    6  ’ve been    ​7  hasn’t flown ​
8  hasn’t met    9  Have…eaten    ​10  has…told
b	 1  went    2  was    3  Did…buy    4  got    5  Were    ​ 
6  Have…bought    7  gave
c	 1  gone    2  been    3  been    4  gone    5  been
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 62@@
62
4C
	4C	 #greatweekend
 G   something, anything, nothing, etc.
 V   adjectives ending -ed and -ing: bored, boring, etc.
 P   /e/, /əʊ/, and /ʌ/
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn how to use something, anything, 
nothing, etc. These words will be familiar to Sts by this 
stage, but here their grammar is focused on in detail. The 
context is the weekend. The lesson begins with Sts reading 
an article about the fact that many people on social media 
invent what they did at the weekend in order to make it 
sound more exciting. Then in Vocabulary, Sts focus on the 
difference between -ed and -ing adjectives. This is followed 
by the grammar focus, and then Sts focus on three vowel 
sounds in order to be able to pronounce the key grammar 
expressions correctly. Sts then answer questions about their 
own weekends, with one of their answers being invented. 
The lesson ends with a video listening about the history and 
possible future of the weekend.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  something, anything, nothing, etc. p.183 
Communicative  The same or different? p.228  
(instructions p.211)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The history of the weekend
For students
Workbook  4C
Online Practice  4C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts that you’re going to describe your last weekend, but 
that one detail will be false, and that they have to guess 
which detail it is. The detail can be as easy or hard to spot as 
you like. (Sts do this themselves later in the lesson, so don’t 
ask them to do it now.)
1	READING
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and make sure 
Sts understand the word tweet (= a message sent using 
Twitter).
	 Give Sts time to read the four tweets and then ask them 
the question as a whole class.
b	 Focus on the article and tell Sts to read it first, then read 
the tweets again, and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and elicit some 
opinions on which tweets probably aren’t true.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Go through 1–6 with the class, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. fake tan.
	 Get Sts to read the article again and correct the wrong 
information.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 One in five people sometimes lie about their lives on social 
media.
2	 When people read about what their friends are doing, they 
are jealous of them.
3	 People invent stories about their weekend because they 
want their colleagues or school friends to think they have 
exciting lives.
4	 Some people put on fake tan on Sundays so that people at 
work think they’ve had a weekend away in the sun. 
5	 Young men are the biggest liars.
6	 People’s online lives are different from their real lives.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the two questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	VOCABULARY  adjectives ending -ed and -ing
Vocabulary notes
Several common adjectives in English have two forms 
with different meanings, e.g. tired and tiring. The -ed form 
has a passive meaning, and describes a person who 
feels this way. The -ing form has an active meaning, and 
describes the person or thing that produces the feeling.
It is important to highlight that we use -ed adjectives 
mainly for people because they refer to feelings, e.g. I’m 
tired. We use -ing adjectives for things (and sometimes 
people) which produce the feeling, e.g. Driving at night 
is tiring.
It is also useful to point out that although the majority of 
adjectives that end in -ed also exist ending in -ing, there 
are some which don’t, e.g. I’m feeling stressed. My job is very 
stressful. NOT My job is very stressing.
a	 Focus on the two highlighted words in the article and 
elicit the answers to the questions. You could tell Sts that 
a person can also be boring, e.g. My neighbour is a very 
boring man.
1  bored    2  boring
b	 e 4.21   Get Sts to read questions 1–6 and circle the 
correct adjective. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, making sure that Sts understand the 
meaning of all the adjectives.
!   Be careful with excited / exciting. It is a false friend in some 
languages.
1	 a  boring    b  bored
2	 a  depressed    b  depressing
3	 a  relaxing    b  relaxed 
4	 a  interesting    b  interested
5	 a  excited    b  exciting
6	 a  frightened    b  frightening
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 63@@
63
4C
	 e 4.22   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the any, anything, etc. + positive verb 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 4C on p.133. Sts do the 
exercsies individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read full sentences in a and c.
a
1  anybody    2  Somebody    3  somewhere    4  nothing    
5  anybody    6  somewhere    7  something    8  nobody    
9  Anything    10  nowhere
b
1  Nothing    2  Nowhere    3  Nobody
c
1  I didn’t do anything.    2  I didn’t go anywhere.    
3  I didn’t see anybody.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION  /e/, /əʊ/, and /ʌ/
a	 Focus on the three sound pictures and elicit the words 
and sounds: egg /e/, phone /əʊ/, and up /ʌ/.
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and the pink letters. Give Sts, in 
pairs, a few minutes to say them out loud to each other 
and decide which sound they are (a, b, or c). You could do 
the first one as a class.
b	 e 4.23   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  b    2  c    3  a    4  c    5  a    6  b
e 4.23
1	 b	 Nobody knows where he goes.
2	 c	 Somebody’s coming to lunch.
3	 a	 I never said anything.
4	 c	 I’ve done nothing since Sunday.
5	 a	 Don’t tell anybody about the message.
6	 b	 There’s nowhere to go except home.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for Sts 
to listen and repeat.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences. 
	 Finally, get individual Sts to say them out loud.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 e 4.24   Tell Sts they are going to hear a question and 
they must answer it first with a one-word negative answer 
with No-, and then with a full sentence using a negative 
verb. Point out the example. You might want to stress that 
this is a drill, so Sts must always answer in the negative 
and not think about themselves.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question to give Sts 
time to respond.
e 4.21
1	 a	 Do you think Sundays are usually boring?
	
b	 Are you bored with your job or studies?
2	 a	 What kind of weather makes you feel depressed?
	
b	 Do you think the news is always depressing?
3	 a	 What activities do you find relaxing?
	
b	 Do you usually feel relaxed at the end of the weekend? 
4	 a	 Have you read any interesting articles or books recently?
	
b	 What sports are you interested in?
5	 a	 Are you excited about your next holiday?
	
b	 Are you doing anything exciting next weekend?
6	 a	 What were you frightened of when you were a child?
	
b	 Do you find storms frightening?
	 Drill the pronunciation of the adjectives. Remind Sts that 
the -ed is pronounced in the same way as regular past 
verbs, i.e. /t/, /d/, or /ɪd/.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could elicit / teach some more  
-ed / -ing adjectives, e.g. surprised / surprising, disappointed / 
disappointing, etc.
c	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions in b. They should give extra information when 
possible.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
3	GRAMMAR  something, anything, nothing, etc.
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what a 
hashtag is (= a word or phrase with the symbol # in front 
of it, included in some messages sent using Twitter so that 
you can search for all messages with the same subject). 
You might want to point out that in tweets, words like 
articles, prepositions, and subjects are often left out.
	 Give Sts time to complete the hashtags. 
	 Check answers.
1  badweekend    2  goodweekend    3  badweekend
b	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts a few moments to 
complete the rules. 
	 Check answers.
1  things    2  places    3  people
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4C on p.132. 
Grammar notes
Sts may have problems with the negative form. The typical 
mistakes are:
1	 using nobody / nothing / nowhere with a negative verb, 
e.g. I didn’t see nobody. Highlight that you cannot use a 
‘double negative’ in English.
2	 using anybody / anything / anywhere in one-word 
answers to convey a negative meaning, e.g. Who did 
you see? Anybody.
3	 using anybody / anything / anywhere as the subject of a 
negative verb, e.g. Anybody didn’t invite him.
To talk about people there are two alternative forms: -body 
and -one, e.g. somebody / someone. They are identical 
in meaning. You could point out that no one is usually 
written as two words.
Something (like some) is also used in questions to make 
an offer or request, e.g. Would you like something to drink? 
Could you ask somebody to help me? To avoid overloading 
Sts, it may be best to focus on this rule only if Sts ask.:
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 64@@
64
4C
The history of the weekend
Hi, I’m Karen. Welcome to my home town, Manchester.
Manchester is a city in the north west of England.
When you think of Manchester, you probably think of our football 
teams, but there is a lot more to the city.
This is the Manchester Museum of Science and Industry. I’ve come 
here today, because I’m going to find out about the city’s link to 
the British weekend. Like many good ideas, it started right here in 
Manchester.
To us, the weekend is part of our routine and we can’t imagine life 
without it. But, there was a time when working people didn’t really 
get a weekend.
In the nineteenth century, thousands of people left their homes in 
the country to find work in the city. Manchester became the first 
industrial city and it was the home of the cotton industry.
Until eighteen forty-three, people worked for six days – from 
Monday to Saturday – and had a day of rest on Sunday, when they 
went to church. The work – like here in a cotton mill – was hard and 
often dangerous. But in the eighteen forties, a group of men began 
to ask local factory owners to give people an extra half day off on 
Saturday afternoon.
One of these men, Robert Lowes, was the great, great grandfather 
of the British actor, Sir Ian McKellen. Lowes and his colleagues had 
three reasons for this change.
The first reason was commercial. When people worked from Monday 
to Saturday, they had no time to spend their money, because shops 
were shut on Sunday. The second reason was religious. People were 
tired from the working week, so they didn’t always go to church on 
Sundays. The last reason was economic. When people had more 
time off, they could rest more, be healthier and work harder during 
the week.
In eighteen forty-three, Lowes and his colleagues persuaded many 
of Manchester’s factory owners to close their factories at two o’clock 
on Saturday. By the eighteen seventies, all workers had the same 
one-and-a-half-day weekend.
The extra half day made a big difference to people and to society. 
With more free time, people could relax, shop and watch and play 
sports.
In fact, Manchester’s love of football began at this time; in eighteen 
seventy-eight Newton Heath football club began and two years 
later St Mark’s Football club was formed. Newton Heath became 
Manchester United. And St Mark’s became Manchester City.
The British weekend has continued to change and, by the nineteen 
sixties, we had a two-day weekend.
Today we enjoy a very different weekend to our ancestors. We 
now watch and play sports. We go to the cinema. We eat out in 
restaurants. Or we go to shopping centres like this one – the Arndale 
Centre – because in the nineteen nineties the law changed and 
shops started to open on Sundays.
But all these changes haven’t been good for everyone. Some people, 
shop assistants for example, have to work at the weekend and are 
not paid any extra.
Maybe our working week is going to change again to improve our 
quality of life. One suggestion is that we make the working week 
four days and increase the weekend to three days. In theory, this 
would be better for the economy, because more people would have 
a job, and we would also spend more time with our families.
Seventy-one percent of British workers think Britain would be a 
happier place with a three-day weekend.
Until that happens, have a good weekend – a two-day weekend!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
b	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to discuss 
the questions. Make sure they understand what a ‘four-day 
week’ is. Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback. You could tell the class what you 
think of the idea of a ‘four-day week’.
EXTRA IDEA   Do the last question as a whole-class activity.
e 4.24
1	 What did you buy? (pause) Nothing. I didn’t buy anything.
2	 Where did you go? (pause) Nowhere. I didn’t go anywhere.
3	 Who did you see? (pause) Nobody. I didn’t see anybody.
4	 What did you eat? (pause) Nothing. I didn’t eat anything.
5	 Who did you speak to? (pause) Nobody. I didn’t speak to anybody.
6	 Where did you walk? (pause) Nowhere. I didn’t walk anywhere.
7	 Who did you meet? (pause) Nobody. I didn’t meet anybody.
8	 What did you say? (pause) Nothing. I didn’t say anything.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write NOTHING, NOBODY, NOWHERE, and  
I DIDN’T…ANY- on the board to give Sts something to focus on 
and to help elicit the response.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Tell Sts to look at all the questions in Did you have a good 
weekend?. They must think about their answers, and they 
must tell the truth when answering all the questions 
except for one. This ‘lie’ must make their weekend sound 
very exciting.
b	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to interview each other. 
	 Monitor and help when necessary. Before Sts swap roles, 
the student asking the questions should try to guess 
the lie.
	 Get feedback from the class.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary The history 
of the weekend. 
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–10, making sure they 
understand all the lexis. 
	 Tell Sts they will watch twice. The first time they just need 
to mark each sentence T (true) or F (false).
	 Now play the video once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
video again for Sts to correct the false sentences.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch.
1	 T
2	 T
3	 F (They asked factory owners for half of Saturday off.)
4	 T
5	 F (They closed their factories at 2 o’clock on Saturdays)
6	 T
7	 F (St Mark’s football club became Manchester City.)
8	 F (By the 1960s most people had a two-day weekend.)
9	 T
10	 F (Most British workers think a three-day weekend 
would make people happier.)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 65@@
65
Revise and Check
	3&4	Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4 
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    2  c    3  a    4  b    5  c    6  a    7  b    8  a    9  a    10  c   
11  a    12  c    13  b    14  b    15  b
VOCABULARY
a
1  in    2  for    3  for    4  on    5  for
b
1  do    2  make    3  do    4  do    5  make
c
1  lay    2  washing    3  try on    4  receipt    5  fit    6  Gate 
7  trolley    8  check-in    9  Terminal    10  lifts
d
1  boring    2  relaxed    3  exciting    4  depressed    5  interested
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  trolley /ɒ/    2  guide /ɡ/    3  who /h/    
4  clothes /əʊ/    5  chain /eɪ/
d
1  departures    2  arrive    3  opposite    4  somebody
5  exciting
CAN YOU understand this text?
a
seven ways
b
1	 Every three months   
2	 It’s a combination of video and blog.   
3	 A noun   
4	 Italian   
5	 To describe new technology   
6	 Newspaper
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    2  c    3  c    4  a    5  c
e 4.25
1
I = interviewer, S = Sean
I	 When was the last time you were at an airport?
S	 Um, about a month ago.
I	 Were you going somewhere or meeting someone?
S	 I was meeting, um, my mother, who was, er, she arrived at 
midnight, coming back from Tenerife. 
2
I = interviewer, Su = Susie
I	 Do you have any plans for tonight? 
Su	Er, yes, I do have plans for tonight. I’m going to a party with some 
friends.
3
I = interviewer, C = Caroline
I	 What housework do you hate doing? 
C	 I hate cleaning the bathroom, that’s my least favourite job around 
the house.
I	 Is there anything you don’t mind doing?
C	 I don’t mind cleaning the kitchen, because there’s usually a lot of 
food to eat.
4
I = interviewer, A = Albert
I	 Have you ever bought something online and had a problem?
A	 I, I bought clothes online that didn’t fit, but that’s about it.
5
I = interviewer, M = Mick
I	 How organized are you?
M	 Er, not very. Um, I tend to be fairly disorganized, but still get 
things done.
I	 Have you ever missed a train or a flight?
M	 Yes, yes. I was flying to Poland and didn’t wake up in the morning, 
and got to the gate as the flight was leaving.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 66@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
5A
66
 G 	 comparative adjectives and adverbs, as…as
 V 	 types of numbers
 P 	 /ə/
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts revise comparative adjectives, and learn 
to use comparative adverbs and the structure (not) as…as 
to compare things. The context is some new information 
based on recent research which shows how fast the pace 
of life has become in recent years. Sts start by answering 
a questionnaire about how fast their life is and then read 
an article and infographic about the effect on us of the 
increase in the pace of life. This is followed by Vocabulary, 
which focuses on types of numbers, such as fractions, dates, 
percentages, etc., which Sts have just seen in the infographic. 
The grammar is then presented and practised, and there is a 
pronunciation focus on the /ə/ sound in unstressed syllables 
and words. Sts then listen to five people talking about one 
aspect of their lives that has changed over the last three 
years as they either spend more or less time on it. Sts then 
answer the same questions about their own lives.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  comparative adjectives and 
adverbs, as…as p.184 
Communicative  Which do you prefer? Why? p.229  
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  5A
Online Practice  5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board: 
WORKING / STUDYING    EATING    SLEEPING    RELAXING
In pairs, Sts say how long they spend doing these things in  
a typical day. 
Get feedback and ask Sts if they think they have enough  
free time.
1	READING & SPEAKING  scanning for data 
	 (facts and numbers)
a	 Books open. Focus on the questionnaire and make sure 
Sts understand the title. Then go through the questions. 
Check that Sts understand get impatient, feel frustrated, 
and get irritable.
	 Focus on the task. Tell Sts to answer with Yes, often / 
sometimes, or No, never, and then explain why, or give 
examples if they can. They should also make a note of 
their partner’s answers, as they will need them later.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer  
the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to interview you first, so you can 
model how you want them to answer.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Communication How fast is your life?  
on p.109.
	 Sts calculate their partner’s score and then tell him / her 
what it is.
	 Sts then read the meaning of their own result. While 
they read, go round monitoring and helping with any 
vocabulary problems, e.g. in the slow lane, pace of life, 
rushing, etc. 
	 When Sts have read their result, they tell their partner if 
they agree with it.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
	 Finally, with a show of hands, find out how many people 
belong to each category (slow, medium, and fast).
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
c	 Focus on the article and the task. Give Sts time to read the 
article, including all the information in the infographic, 
and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check  
the answer.
technology / the internet
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
d	 Focus on the instructions and stress that Sts have exactly 
two minutes to complete the task.
	 When the two minutes are up, get Sts to compare with a 
partner, and then check answers.
1	 Impatient
2	 Mobile phone apps like Tinder
3	 10%
4	 More than 125 million 
5	 Three out of five
6	 A ‘like’
7	 Six minutes
8	 Waiting for a replacement credit card
	 Deal with any new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Give Sts time to find six technology words in the article. 
Tell them there are more than six possible answers.
	 Check answers.
Possible answers
broadband, searches, downloads, apps, Google, web page, site,  
a ‘like’, posting
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they know any more words on 
the topic of technology, e.g. USB, a mouse, a laptop, etc. 
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
	5A	 I want it NOW!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 67@@
67
5A
EXTRA IDEA   As an alternative to just getting Sts to say the 
numbers in c, copy the following on the board and ask Sts to 
identify a typical mistake in each one: 
1	 A HUNDRED EIGHTY-FOUR (184) 
2	 THREE THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE (3,025)  
3	 TWO THOUSAND AND FIVE HUNDRED (2,500) 
4	 THE TWENTY-FIVE OF MAY (25TH MAY) 
5	 SIX MILLIONS DOLLARS ($6,000,000) 
6	 SEVENTY-FIVE POR CENT (75%) 
7	 TWO THIRD (
2
3) 
8	 NINE DOT TWO (9.2)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think your Sts need more practice, 
write some more numbers and dates on the board for  
them to say.
e	 e 5.3   Tell Sts they are going to hear six conversations in 
which some numbers are mentioned. They need to write 
the numbers only. Point out that the first one (213) has 
been done for them.
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play it again, pausing after each conversation to give 
Sts time to write their answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
2	 20th    3  120,000    4  $795,000    5  1 
3   6  60–70%
e 5.3
1	 A	 What’s your address? 
	
B	 Two hundred and thirteen Station Road.
2	 A	 When’s your birthday? 
	
B	 The twentieth of June.
3	 A	 So how many people live here? 
	
B	 About a hundred and twenty thousand, I think.
4	 A	 How much did the house cost?
	
B	 A lot. Seven hundred and ninety-five thousand. 
	
A	 Is that in pounds or dollars? 
	
B	 Dollars. 
5	 A	 How much of your salary do you spend on rent? 
	
B	 Er, at least a third, I think.
6	 A	 What percentage of your day do you spend working  
or studying? 
	
B	 I’m not sure. Between sixty and seventy per cent, maybe? 
f	 Focus on the Saying approximate numbers box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to answer 
questions 1–5.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
f	 Focus on the three questions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. statistics, time-wasting, and annoy. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to ask and answer  
the questions.
	 You might want to remind Sts to use fewer with countable 
nouns and less, with uncountable nouns e.g. fewer people, 
less time, etc.
	 Get feedback from various pairs. You could have a class 
discussion for question 3.
2	VOCABULARY  types of numbers
Vocabulary notes
You might want to highlight that:
•	 we can use the article a or the number one when 
saying numbers, e.g. one hundred / a hundred
•	 the same is true with fractions, e.g. you can say a third 
or one third. All fractions are expressed with ordinal 
numbers, except a half and a quarter (not a second or  
a fourth)
•	 we don’t add an -s to hundred, thousand, or million
•	 with decimals, e.g. 3.14, we use point, not dot (unlike 
with email addresses)
a	 Focus on the instructions and elicit / explain what an 
infographic is (= information or data that is shown in a 
chart, diagram, etc. so that it is easy to understand).
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other the green 
numbers in the top row only.
b	 e 5.1  Tell Sts they will now hear the whole sentence,  
not just the numbers. Play the audio for Sts to listen  
and check.
	 Check answers by eliciting the numbers. 
1	 a hundred and twenty-five million
2	 fifty per cent
3	 a third 
e 5.1
More than a hundred and twenty-five million Google searches are 
made every hour.
Fifty per cent of users leave a web page that doesn’t load in ten 
seconds. Three out of five people don’t return to that site.
A third of British people expect a ‘like’ on a Facebook picture in less 
than a minute after posting it.
c	 Focus on the numbers and dates, and get Sts, in pairs, to 
decide how they think you say them.
d	 e 5.2   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts also know how to say  
$ (dollar), % (per cent), and . (point).
e 5.2
a hundred and eighty-four
three thousand and twenty-five
two thousand five hundred
the twenty-fifth of May
six million dollars
seventy-five per cent
two thirds
nine point two
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 68@@
68
5A
b
1	 Jerry isn’t as short as Adam.
2	 My bag isn’t as nice as yours.
3	 London isn’t as big as Tokyo.
4	 Cricket isn’t as popular as tennis.
5	 Adults don’t learn languages as fast as children.
6	 You don’t work as hard as me.
7	 France didn’t play as well as England.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
Pronunciation notes
At this level it is important to focus on the weak forms of 
as and than more for comprehension than production. 
However, if you encourage Sts to get the stress correct 
both in words and sentences, then this will help them  
to produce the /ə/ sound in these words. 
With the -er ending, this is such a common feature  
of English that it is really worth making an effort to  
correct Sts and to encourage them to pronounce it as  
the /ə/ sound.
d	 e 5.6   Focus on the task. 
	 Play the audio the whole way though for Sts to listen and 
read the sentences in b. 
	 Check answers. Remind Sts that it is the most common 
sound in English.
Both a schwa /ə/
e 5.6
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.39
e	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to repeat and copy the rhythm. 
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, it will 
help to show them the mouth position. You could model 
this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	GRAMMAR & PRONUNCIATION  
	 comparative adjectives and adverbs, as…as; /ə/
a	 Tell Sts to look at the highlighted words in the sentences 
and decide if they are adjectives or adverbs.
	 Check answers.
1  busy, stressed = adjectives    2  quickly = adverb    
3  fast = adjective    4  fast = adverb, impatient = adjective    
5  bad = adjective    6  well = adverb
b	 Focus on the instructions. Give Sts a few minutes to read 
sentences 1–6 and circle the correct forms.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  faster    2  worse    3  busier    4  more stressed    5  more 
quickly    6  as patient as
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.134. 
Grammar notes
Although Pre-intermediate Sts will usually have studied 
comparative adjectives before, they will probably 
need reminding of the rules, especially for one-syllable 
adjectives and two-syllable adjectives ending in -y.  
Typical mistakes are: more big, more easy, etc.
Point out that the rules for adverbs are very similar. The 
only difference is that whereas two-syllable adjectives 
ending in y make the comparative with -ier, e.g. heavy 
– heavier, two-syllable adverbs ending in y form the 
comparative with more, e.g. more slowly NOT slowlier.
The structure as…as is more common in the negative, but 
can also be used in the affirmative, e.g. She’s as tall as I am. 
It is also very common with much and many, e.g. I don’t 
eat as much as you.
You may also want to teach the same as…, e.g. Your book is 
the same as mine.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
 e 5.4 and e 5.5 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the Comparatives with pronouns box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 5A on p.135. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 Modern computers are much faster than the early ones.
2	 My sister is shorter than me.
3	 This exercise is easier than the last one.
4	 Newcastle is further from London than Leeds.
5	 I thought the third Bridget Jones film was worse than the 
first two.
6	 Manchester United played better than Arsenal.
7	 I'm more stressed this year than I was last year.
8	 I'm working harder this year than last year.
9	 The new airport is bigger than the old one.
10	I’m not lazy – I just work more slowly than you!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 69@@
69
5A
e 5.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.121)
1	 I spend much less time shopping – that is, going to real shops – 
than in the past, because now I get so much online. I buy most of 
my food online – everything except fresh things like meat or fruit 
and vegetables. Er, I get books from Amazon. I buy a lot of clothes 
online. And it’s so quick. You don’t have to go there; you don’t 
spend as long looking for what you want. It’s just much, much 
quicker. I definitely prefer it.
2	 One of the things that has changed for me is getting to work. 
It takes me much longer now because I cycle. A few years ago, 
I drove – I took the car – but then I decided to cycle, not always 
because I enjoy it, but because I know it’s healthier. It takes 
me about half an hour to get to work now. Actually, when the 
weather’s good, I really enjoy it, but when it’s raining or just cold 
and horrible, I get up and I think oh no! 
3	 I definitely spend a lot more time cooking now than I did before, 
I think because, er, about a year ago, I started living with my 
boyfriend. When I lived alone, in the evening I was tired and I just 
got a takeaway, or made something really quickly, or just had 
some bread and cheese or whatever was in the fridge – whatever 
was easier. But when you have someone else in the house, you 
feel more like cooking. And also my boyfriend’s a vegetarian, so 
it’s a bit more complicated to do something very quick. So before, 
I spent about twenty minutes a day, and now I spend about an 
hour. But I’m quite happy with that – I enjoy it.
4	 I probably spend about the same amount of time working as I did 
three years ago. I’m a freelance writer now, and three years ago 
I had an office job, so I was doing, you know, thirty-five hours a 
week. Now, some weeks I probably work about fifty hours, and 
others twenty hours, but on average, I think it’s about the same.
5	 I definitely spend less time seeing friends, because two years ago 
we moved to the country from the city – and most of our friends 
are in the city and they’re quite a long way away from us now. 
Sometimes they come and spend the weekend with us, or we go 
and spend the weekend with them, but on average, I definitely 
spend less time with them.
	 Give Sts time to answer questions A–E. If necessary, play 
the audio again. 
	 Check answers.
a  Speaker 4    b  Speaker 1    c  Speaker 5    
d  Speaker 2    e  Speaker 3
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.121, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the task and the example. Put Sts in small groups 
and give them time to discuss the three questions in a.
	 When Sts have finished discussing all three questions, 
they should decide whose life has changed the most.
	 Get some feedback from each group.
 
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING
a	 e 5.7   Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to look at 
the title, question 1, and the ten activities. Make sure 
Sts understand that each speaker is speaking about a 
different activity. Tell Sts that they won’t hear the question, 
and when the speaker names the activity, they will hear a 
beep (see script 5. 7).
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to number the question the speaker answered.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again  
if necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 5.7
1	 I spend much less time (beep) – that is, going to real shops – than 
in the past, because now I get so much online. I buy most of my 
food online – everything except fresh things like meat or fruit 
and vegetables. Er, I get books from Amazon. I buy a lot of clothes 
online. And it’s so quick. You don’t have to go there; you don’t 
spend as long looking for what you want. It’s just much, much 
quicker. I definitely prefer it.
2	 One of the things that has changed for me is (beep). It takes me 
much longer now because I cycle. A few years ago, I drove – I took 
the car – but then I decided to cycle, not always because I enjoy it, 
but because I know it’s healthier. It takes me about half an hour to 
get to work now. Actually, when the weather’s good I really enjoy 
it, but when it’s raining or just cold and horrible, I get up and I 
think oh no! 
3	 I definitely spend a lot more time (beep) now than I did before, 
I think because, er, about a year ago, I started living with my 
boyfriend. When I lived alone, in the evening I was tired and I just 
got a takeaway, or made something really quickly, or just had 
some bread and cheese or whatever was in the fridge – whatever 
was easier. But when you have someone else in the house, you 
feel more like cooking. And also my boyfriend’s a vegetarian, so 
it’s a bit more complicated to do something very quick. So before, 
I spent about twenty minutes a day, and now I spend about an 
hour. But I’m quite happy with that – I enjoy it.
4	 I probably spend about the same amount of time (beep) as I did 
three years ago. I’m a freelance writer now, and three years ago 
I had an office job, so I was doing, you know, thirty-five hours a 
week. Now, some weeks I probably work about fifty hours, and 
others twenty hours, but on average, I think it’s about the same.
5	 I definitely spend less time (beep), because two years ago we 
moved to the country from the city – and most of our friends 
are in the city and they’re quite a long way away from us now. 
Sometimes they come and spend the weekend with us, or we go 
and spend the weekend with them, but on average, I definitely 
spend less time with them.
b	 e 5.8   Elicit answers, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct 
yet or not. 
	 Now play the audio (where the speakers now name the 
activities) for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  shopping    2  getting to work    3  cooking    4  working
5  seeing friends
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 70@@
70
5B
	5B	 Twelve lost wallets
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and give Sts time to think 
about their answers.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their answers. If 
your Sts live in the same town or city, do this as a whole-
class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Describing a town or 
city on p.156. 
	 Focus on 1 Where is it? How big is it? In a, tell Sts they 
are going to read about a city called York. They might 
remember Anya talking about it in Lesson 2B. Get Sts to 
circle the correct words or phrases.
	 e 5.9   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 5.9
Describing a town or city 1 Where is it? How big is it? 
York is a city in the north of England, on the River Ouse. It’s about 
twenty-five miles east of Leeds. It’s a medium-sized city and it has 
a population of about two hundred thousand. It’s famous for its 
cathedral, York Minster, and its historic city centre.
	 Now do 2 What’s it like?. Remind Sts what the question 
means and then focus on a, where Sts match the 
adjectives and sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Check Sts’ answers to a before they match 
the opposites in b.
3  crowded    6  dangerous    4  modern    1  noisy    2  polluted  
	 Now do b and get Sts to match the adjectives in the list to 
their opposites in a.
	 e 5.10   Then do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check answers to a and b. 
	 Check answers. 
e 5.10
	
2 What’s it like?
5	 boring, exciting, interesting
3	 crowded, empty
6	 dangerous, safe
4	 modern, historic
1	 noisy, quiet
2	 polluted, clean
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Finally, do d and get Sts to cover the words and look at 
sentences 1–6. They can test themselves or each other.
	 Now do 3 What is there to see? and tell Sts to look at the 
photos, and ask them what they can see. 
	 Tell Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Point out that each 
column already has one answer in it.
 G 	 superlatives (+ ever + present perfect)
 V 	 describing a town or city
 P 	 sentence stress
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts move from comparatives to superlatives. 
Sts who did not use English File Elementary may not 
have studied superlatives before, in which case you will 
probably need to spend more time on them. The context 
is a TripAdvisor survey of cities around the world, and an 
experiment carried out by the Reader’s Digest to find out how 
honest 16 cities around the world were. The present perfect 
is also recycled in expressions like the most beautiful place I’ve 
ever been to.  
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on language used 
to describe a city. Then the grammar presentation through 
the TripAdvisor survey is followed by a listening on the most 
honest cities in the world. In Pronunciation and Speaking, Sts 
look at sentence stress in superlative questions and then ask 
and answer some superlative questions. Finally, the lesson 
ends with Sts writing a description of where they live. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  superlatives (+ ever + present perfect) p.185 
Vocabulary  Describing a town or city p.264  
(instructions p.254) 
Communicative  Superlative questions p.230  
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  5B
Online Practice  5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts What are the biggest cities in your country? and write 
them on the board. 
Then get Sts to ask each other in pairs Have you been to ___? 
When did you go there? Did you like it? Why (not)?
1	VOCABULARY  describing a town or city
Vocabulary notes
Sts are sometimes confused about whether to describe 
the place where they live as a village, a town, or a city. A 
city is a large town (in the UK, historically, anywhere with a 
cathedral is a city); a town is medium-sized; and a village is 
a very small town located in a country area.  
Sts often use the word monument to describe any historic 
building. You may want to point out that a monument is 
only a building, statue, or column built to remind people 
of a famous person or event.
You may want to explain the difference between crowded 
and full (crowded = full of people), and polluted and dirty 
(polluted = dirty because of contamination).
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 71@@
71
5B
	 e 5.11   Then do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen  
and check. 
	 Check answers. 
e 5.11
3 What is there to see? 
Religious buildings: cathedral, church, mosque, synagogue, temple
Places where you can buy things: department store, market, 
shopping centre
Historic buildings and monuments: castle, city walls, museum, 
palace, ruins, statue, town hall, ruins
Others: bridge, canal, harbour, hill, lake
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit more words for each column, e.g. 
synagogue, (clock) tower, etc.
	 Finally, get Sts to do Activation in pairs.
	 Then get some feedback from individual Sts.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	GRAMMAR  superlatives (+ ever + present perfect)
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
Stockholm is in Sweden.    Rome is in Italy.    New York is in the 
USA.    Dubrovnik is in Croatia.    Vienna is in Austria.    Budapest 
is in Hungary.    Tokyo is in Japan.
	 Then ask Sts what they know about each city and if 
anyone has been there. You could then tell Sts what 
you know about these places, and if you’ve been to any 
of them.
b	 Focus on the text and the instructions, and make sure Sts 
understand the situation.
	 Before Sts read the text, ask them if they know the website 
TripAdvisor, and if so, what they think of it.
	 Read the text with the class and go through the seven 
different categories.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to guess which city was the 
winner in each category. Tell them the photos will help 
them answer.
	 Elicit opinions and then tell Sts the answers. If your Sts 
have been to any of these cities, ask them if they agree 
with the survey. You could ask if they found any of the 
answers surprising.
1  Tokyo    2  Vienna    3  Budapest    4  Dubrovnik    
5  New York City    6  Stockholm    7  Rome
c	 Tell Sts to look at the categories in b and think about their 
city. Would it do well in any of the categories? 
	 Get some feedback from the class, and tell them what  
you think.
d	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to work out  
the rules.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Add -est
2	 Change the y to i and add -est
3	 Put more before the adjective
4	 best
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.134. 
Grammar notes
Remind Sts that the rules for making superlatives are 
similar to comparatives, but adding -est instead of -er, 
or using most instead of more. Remind them to use the 
before superlatives.
Sts sometimes use comparatives where they should use 
superlatives. A typical mistake is: the more expensive city in 
Europe, etc.
Highlight that Sts must always think if they are comparing 
two things (comparative), or more than two (superlative) 
when deciding which form to use, e.g. The most beautiful 
city I’ve ever been to.
Some languages use never (not ever) in this structure.  
A typical mistake is: The most beautiful city I’ve never 
been to.
Adverbs can also be used in the superlative, e.g. He drives 
the fastest.
	 e 5.12   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 5B on p.135. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 The Polish are the most generous people I've ever met.
2	 Yesterday was the hottest day of the year.
3	 Early morning is the worst time to drive in the city centre.
4	 She's the friendliest girl at school.
5	 This is the most important part of the exam.
6	 The best time to visit New England is autumn.
7	 Delhi in India is one of the most polluted cities in the world.
8	 The furthest (or The farthest) I've ever flown is to Bali.
9	 It was the funniest film I've ever seen.
10	 Rob's daughters are all pretty, but I think Emily is 
the prettiest.
b
1	 It’s the windiest place I’ve ever been to.
2	 She’s the most unfriendly person I’ve ever met.
3	 It’s the easiest exam we’ve ever done.
4	 They’re the most expensive trousers I’ve ever bought.
5	 This is the longest book I’ve ever read.
6	 He’s the most attractive man I’ve ever seen.
7	 It’s the worst meal I’ve ever eaten.
8	 He’s the most interesting teacher we’ve ever had.
9	 It’s the most exciting job I’ve ever done.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 72@@
72
5B
e 5.13
(script in Student’s Book on pp.121–122)
I = interviewer, O= Oliver
I	 Today, we’re talking about a very interesting experiment to 
find the most and least honest cities in the world. It involved 
journalists travelling to sixteen cities and ‘losing’ twelve wallets in 
each city, then waiting to see how many people returned them 
in each place. Our presenter, Oliver, has got the results. So, Oliver, 
which was the most honest city?
O	 Well, in first place was Helsinki, in Finland. People returned eleven 
of the twelve wallets. A businessman who found the wallet in the 
city centre said that Finnish people were naturally honest. He said 
there was very little corruption in Finland, and that people didn’t 
even drive through red traffic lights!
I	 Really? And the least honest?
O	 Well, I was quite surprised by this, but the least honest city, in 
sixteenth place, was Lisbon, in Portugal. Only one person phoned 
to say they’d found the wallet. And he wasn’t Portuguese: he was 
a sixty-year-old tourist from Holland.
I	 Interesting! What other results surprised you?
O	 Well, I expected richer cities – cities with a higher standard of 
living – to be more honest than poorer ones, but this wasn’t 
necessarily true. The city that came second in the experiment was 
Mumbai, in India – people returned nine out of the twelve wallets. 
One of them was a young mother. She took it to a post office and 
she said, ‘I teach my children to be honest, just like my parents 
taught me.’
I	 And which city came next?
O	 In joint third place were New York and Budapest. People gave 
back eight wallets in both places.
I	 And then?
O	 Moscow and Amsterdam came joint fifth. In both places, seven 
out of twelve wallets were returned. And people gave lovely 
reasons for returning them. In Moscow, a woman said, ‘I think that 
people need to help each other, and if I can make someone a little 
happier, I want to do it.’ And in Amsterdam, a man said ‘My wife 
once lost her wallet. It was found and returned. So I wanted to do 
the same.’ 
I	 I notice my home city, London, is on the list. How did it do?
O	 London was somewhere in the middle: joint ninth with Warsaw. 
Just five of the wallets were returned in each place. Interestingly, 
one of the people who returned a wallet in London was a Polish 
woman. When she found the wallet, she gave it to her boss.  
He – her boss – said to her, ‘If you find money, you can’t be sure it 
belongs to a rich man – it might be the last bit of money a mother 
has to feed her family.’ 
I	 I think that’s fantastic advice. So were there any general 
conclusions? What did the experiment prove?
O	 Forty-seven per cent of the wallets were returned, so that’s nearly 
half. And when we looked through the results, we found that 
you couldn’t predict who was going to be honest or dishonest. 
There was no common factor. Young people and old people both 
kept or returned wallets; men and women both kept or returned 
wallets; and as I said before, it didn’t make any difference whether 
a city was rich or poor. So our conclusion was that there are 
honest and dishonest people everywhere.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again, but 
this time they need to answer questions 1 and 2. Point out 
situations a–e in question 1.
	 Play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play it again  
if necessary.
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts if they found anything 
surprising.
1	 a  Amsterdam    b  Helsinki    c  Moscow    d  Mumbai    
e  London
2	 47%; No, there was no common factor.
3	LISTENING  understanding ranking
a	 Focus on the title of the article and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of honest (= always telling the truth, and 
never stealing or cheating). 
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read about the 
experiment.
	 When Sts have finished reading, get them to cover the 
text or close their books. Elicit from the class how the 
experiment worked.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to explain how the experiment 
worked in pairs, and then get feedback.
b	 Focus on the task. You might first want to get Sts to name 
the countries where all these cities are (Amsterdam is 
in the Netherlands, Berlin is in Germany, Budapest is in 
Hungary, Bucharest is in Romania, Helsinki is in Finland, 
Lisbon is in Portugal, Ljubljana is in Slovenia, London is in 
England, Madrid is in Spain, Moscow is in Russia, Mumbai 
is in India, New York is in the USA, Prague is in the Czech 
Republic, Rio de Janeiro is in Brazil, Warsaw is in Poland, 
and Zurich is in Switzerland). 
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss their choices.
c	 e 5.13   Before playing the audio, focus on the Ranking 
things in order box and go through it with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to listen to a reporter talking 
about the results of the experiment. They must listen and 
rank nine of the cities in b in the correct order.
	 Play the audio the whole way through for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play it again and get Sts to complete the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts that the first time they listen, they 
should just tick the nine cities that are mentioned.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  Helsinki    2  Mumbai    3  Budapest, New York    
5  Moscow, Amsterdam    9  London, Warsaw    16  Lisbon
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 73@@
73
5B
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the questions on the board. Play the 
audio, pausing after each question, and elicit which words 
are stressed.
1	 What’s the most beautiful city you’ve ever been to?
2	 What’s the most relaxing holiday you’ve ever had?
3	 What’s the most frightening film you’ve ever seen?
4	 What’s the most exciting sporting event you’ve ever watched?
5	 What’s the most expensive thing you’ve ever bought?
6	 Who’s the most generous person you’ve ever met?
7	 What’s the most dangerous sport you’ve ever done?
8	 What’s the most difficult subject you’ve ever studied?
c	 Focus on the instructions and speech bubbles. Do 1 
yourself with Sts as an example, and elicit follow-up 
questions. Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell A to answer 1 with 
a full sentence, and B to ask extra questions. Then they 
swap roles before moving on to 2.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
5	WRITING  describing where you live
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing where you live  
on p.116.
a	 Tell Sts to read the description and complete the gaps 
with the words in the list. Point out that the first one (city) 
has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
2  population    3  area    4  historic    5  modern    6  weather    
7  food    8  nature    9  rivers
b	 Now tell Sts to match the questions to paragraphs 1–5.
	 Check answers.
1	 Where do you live? Where is it? How big is it?
2	 What’s your town like? What is there to see there?
3	 What’s the weather like?
4	 What’s it famous for?
5	 What’s the best thing about it? Do you like living there?
c	 Tell Sts they are now going to plan a description of where 
they live. They should look at the questions in b and make 
notes of their answers. 
d	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. Make sure they write five 
paragraphs by answering the questions in b in the  
correct order. 
e	 Sts should check for mistakes, and if they can, attach a 
photo or photos.
EXTRA IDEA   If Sts are from different places, they could 
exchange their pieces of writing and decide which places 
they would like to visit. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.121–122, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
explain any new words or phrases.
e	 If your Sts are all from the same town or city, do this as a 
whole-class activity and elicit opinions.
	 If they are from different places, get them to answer in 
pairs, and then get some feedback.
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
	 sentence stress
Pronunciation notes
Remind Sts that information words are the ones which 
are usually stressed in a sentence. These are the words 
which you hear more clearly when somebody speaks to 
you. The unstressed words are heard much less clearly, or 
sometimes hardly at all.
You may want to tell Sts that when native speakers use 
superlatives with most, they often link the two words 
together and don’t pronounce the final t in most.
a	 e 5.14   Focus on the task and give Sts time to look at 
questions 1–8. Point out that the first one (most beautiful) 
has been done for them.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
2  most relaxing    3  most frightening    4  most exciting    
5  most expensive    6  most generous    7  most dangerous   
8  most difficult
e 5.14
1	 What’s the most beautiful city you’ve ever been to?
2	 What’s the most relaxing holiday you’ve ever had?
3	 What’s the most frightening film you’ve ever seen?
4	 What’s the most exciting sporting event you’ve ever watched?
5	 What’s the most expensive thing you’ve ever bought?
6	 Who’s the most generous person you’ve ever met?
7	 What’s the most dangerous sport you’ve ever done?
8	 What’s the most difficult subject you’ve ever studied?
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to guess what the missing 
superlatives are before playing the audio. Tell them that all 
the adjectives are three syllables or more.
b	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen to the questions 
and hear which words are stressed. You might want to 
highlight that the preposition to, which is not normally 
stressed, is stressed here because it comes at the end of 
the question.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each question for 
Sts to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 74@@
74
5C
	5C	 How much is enough?
1	SPEAKING & LISTENING
a	 Books open. Focus on the questionnaire and its title. Make 
sure Sts know what a can is. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to answer the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to interview you first.
b	 e 5.15   Focus on the drawing of the jug. Go through the 
instructions, making sure Sts know the meaning of  
a nutritionist, a liquid, a jug, alcohol, and low-fat. Model and 
drill pronunciation.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the task.
	 Play it again if necessary. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts, in pairs, to predict which liquid 
goes where before they listen.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  water    2  tea and coffee    3  low-fat milk    4  alcohol    
5  diet coke    6  fruit juice
We should never drink sweet, fizzy drinks.
e 5.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
At least half of your daily liquids should come from water. About one 
third – or three to four cups – can come from coffee or tea – but with 
no sugar. Low-fat milk can make up another twenty per cent. If you 
drink less milk, just try to get your calcium from another type of food 
or drink, for example green vegetables. You can have one small glass 
of fruit juice a day, and no more than one to two alcoholic drinks 
for men, or one for women. However, some doctors now think that 
it’s a good idea to have several alcohol-free days a week. Diet drinks 
which use artificial sweeteners are not good for you, but up to one 
to two glasses a day is OK. But try not to have any drinks with a lot of 
sugar, for example, sweet fizzy drinks.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to listen for the recommended 
quantities of each drink. 
1  water (half of daily liquids)
2  tea and coffee (3 to 4 cups)
3  low-fat milk (20% of daily liquids)
4  alcohol (1 or 2 drinks for men, 1 for women)
5  diet coke (1 or 2 glasses)
6  fruit juice (1 small glass)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
 G 	 quantifiers, too, (not) enough
 V 	 health and the body
 P 	 /ʌ/
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts revise quantifiers and learn to use too  
much / many, and (not) enough. The context is a magazine 
article about the latest medical research into drinks. The 
lesson begins with a questionnaire focusing on drinks, and 
what Sts drink when. Sts then go on to listen to a nutritionist 
talking about what kind of liquids we should drink. In 
Reading, the topic of the article is about confusing health 
advice regarding drinks. There is also a vocabulary focus 
on health and the body. Sts then work on the grammar, 
followed by a pronunciation focus on the /ʌ/ sound. The 
lesson ends with a speaking activity where Sts discuss more 
general lifestyle habits using the new quantifiers. Depending 
on the level of your class, you may want to do more or less 
revision of countability and basic quantifiers (see Optional 
lead-in).
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  quantifiers, too, (not) enough p.186 
Communicative  How much / How many…? p.231  
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  5C
Online Practice  5C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise countability. Write on the board in two columns:
1
2
WATER
VEGETABLES
BREAD
BISCUITS
CHOCOLATE
SWEETS
Ask Sts What’s the difference between the words in columns 
1 and 2? and elicit that the words in column 1 are 
uncountable, and normally used in the singular, but the 
words in column 2 are countable and can be used in 
singular and plural. Elicit a few more words for each column, 
e.g. wine, rice, apples, etc. 
Ask Sts When do we use a, some, and any? and elicit that you 
use a with singular countable nouns and some / any with 
plural countable nouns and uncountable nouns – some in 
positive sentences and any in negatives and questions, e.g.  
I ate a biscuit and some bread. I didn’t eat any vegetables or  
any fruit.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 75@@
75
5C
1	 many (You can’t use much with plural countable nouns.)
2	 much (You can’t use many with uncountable nouns.)
3	 a lot of (You can’t use many with uncountable nouns.)
4	 a little (You can’t use a few with uncountable nouns.)
5	 a few (You can’t use a little with countable nouns.)
6	 a lot (You can’t use a lot of without a noun.)
c	 Here the new language of the lesson is introduced. Tell Sts 
to look at the paragraphs about water in the article, and to 
focus on words or phrases which mean the right amount 
and more than you need. 
	 Check answers. 
1  enough    2  too much 
d	 Now tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5C on p.134. 	
Grammar notes
too much, too many, too
Some Sts often use too much + adjective. A typical 
mistake is: It’s too much big.
It is also important to highlight the difference between too 
and very:
It’s very big. (= a statement of fact, neither good nor bad)
It’s too big. (= more than it should be / more than you want)
(not) enough
The main problem here is the pronunciation of enough 
/ɪˈnʌf/ and the different positions: before nouns, but 
after adjectives. Some Sts may confuse quite and enough 
because of L1 interference.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio 
e 5.17 and e 5.18 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 5C on p.135. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 I eat too much chocolate.
2	 I eat too many crisps.
3	 Do you drink enough water?
4	 I'm too busy.
5	 This suitcase isn't big enough.
6 	 I worry too much.
7	 You don't go out enough.
8	 I don't eat enough vegetables.
b
1	 I don't do enough exercsie.
2	 It's too far.
3	 There are too many cars on the roads today.
4	 I spend too much time on the computer…
5	 I don't read enough…
6	 I didn't buy the coat because it was too expensive.
7	 There were too many people at the hospital…
8	 I don't like watching films on my phone because the 
screen isn't big enough.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	READING & VOCABULARY  
	 health and the body
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
the article is about. Pre-teach the verbs increase, improve, 
reduce, and cause.
	 Now get Sts to read the article and match the highlighted 
words to pictures 1–6.
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Apart from the highlighted words, this 
article contains other medical vocabulary. Before Sts read it, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any other items, e.g. 
heart attack, cancer, arthritis, etc., or whether you think Sts 
will be able to guess their meaning. In many languages they 
are similar words, but pronounced differently.
c	 e 5.16   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
answers to b. 
	 Check answers.
e 5.16
1	 liver    2  heart    3  teeth    4  muscles    5  bones    6  blood
	 Then play it again, pausing after each word for Sts to listen 
and repeat. 
	 Now get Sts to practise saying the words.
	 Finally, ask Sts what they think heart attack /ˈhɑːt ətæk/ 
and blood  pressure /ˈblʌd preʃə/ mean. Model and drill 
pronunciation.
heart attack = a sudden, serious medical condition in which the 
 heart stops working normally, sometimes causing death
blood pressure = the pressure of blood as it travels around  
 the body
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs. Tell them 
to read about each drink again and answer the two 
questions.
	 Get some feedback. Sts might have a different opinion, 
but if so, ask them to justify it.
a  tea, water    b  alcohol, coffee, juice, milk
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. 
3	GRAMMAR  quantifiers, too, (not) enough
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, you 
could do it here.
a	 This exercise revises what Sts should already know. Focus 
on the instructions and give Sts time to decide if the 
words are countable or uncountable. 
	 Check answers.
(C = countable, U = uncountable)
juice U    bottle C    can C    milk U    carton C    water U    
wine U    cup C    glass C
b	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts, in pairs, to circle 
the correct word or phrase and say why the other one is 
wrong.
	 Check answers. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 76@@
76
5C
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  /ʌ/
a	 e 5.19   This exercise helps Sts with the pronunciation of 
some of the words from the lesson.
	 Focus on the sound picture and elicit the word, and 
sound: up /ʌ/.
	 Give Sts time to read the Typical spelling chart. Make 
sure they know the meaning of rare (= not seen very 
often).
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just  
to listen.
e 5.19
See words in Student’s Book on p.43
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each word for Sts 
to repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If this sound is difficult for your Sts, or you 
want to contrast it with the /æ/ sound, it will help to show 
them the mouth position. You could model this yourself or 
use the the Sound Bank videos on the Teacher’s Resource 
Centre.
b	 e 5.20   Tell Sts they are going to hear 12 sentences and 
they must write the last word in each one.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each item to give Sts time  
to write.
	 Check answers by playing the audio again and pausing 
after each item to elicit the word onto the board.
1  butter    2  study    3  worry    4  young    5  money    
6  rubbish    7  sunny    8  lovely    9  double   
10  lunch    11  country    12  funny
e 5.20
1	 Can you pass me the butter?
2	 Do you work or study?
3	 Everything’s going to be fine – don’t worry!
4	 Your sister’s very young!
5	 I don’t have any money.
6	 Please can you take out the rubbish?
7	 Is today going to be sunny?
8	 The weather’s going to be lovely.
9	 Two single rooms, please, and one double.
10	 What do you want for lunch?
11	 What’s the biggest city in your country?
12	 She’s usually serious, but she can be very funny.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Elicit the whole sentences / questions, not 
just the last word, and write them on the board.
EXTRA IDEA   Some Sts have a problem pronouncing money 
and tend to say /mʌneɪ/. To help them, you could tell them 
that money rhymes with funny and sunny.
c	 Play the audio again, pausing after each item for Sts 
to listen and repeat. Make sure they repeat the whole 
sentence and not just the last word.
d	 Focus on the speech bubbles, and then demonstrate the 
activity yourself by answering a couple of questions and 
explaining your reasons. 
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the 
questions, giving their reasons, too.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 77@@
77
PE3
e 5.21
H = Holly, R = Rob
H	 Hey, Rob, come on. Keep up.
R	 Sorry. I’m a bit tired this morning.
H	 You aren’t exactly in good shape, are you?
R	 I know, I know. I think I’m eating too much.
H	 Then eat less!
R	 It isn’t easy. I eat out all the time. And the portions in American 
restaurants are enormous. 
H	 You don’t do enough exercise. 
R	 I walk a lot.
H	 Walking isn’t enough, Rob. Do you do anything to keep fit?
R	 I cycle when I’m in London... 
H	 So why don’t you get a bike here?
R	 I’m only here for another three weeks. Anyway, my hotel’s near 
the office. I don’t need a bike.
H	 You know, Jennifer goes running all the time. Before and after 
work. But I just think that running is so boring. I mean, where’s the 
fun?
R	 Yeah, I’m not very keen on running.
H	 So why don’t you play basketball with me and my friends?
R	 OK. That’s a great idea! But I don’t have any trainers. 
H	 Trainers? Sneakers! You can buy some.
R	 Is there a sports shop near here?
H	 Sure, there’s one across the street.
	 Now focus on the British and American English box and 
go through it with the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
b	 e 5.22   Focus on the Making suggestions with Why 
don’t you…? box and go through it with the class.
	 Now play the video / audio and get Sts just to watch 
or listen. 
e 5.22
See the phrases in Student’s Book on p.44
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing after each phrase, 
and get Sts to repeat it.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and focus on the instructions. 
Make sure Sts understand the situation.
	 Tell Sts A to start.
	 When Sts have finished, ask a few Sts A what suggestions 
Sts B made and if they thought the suggestions were 
good or not.
d	 Sts stay in their pairs and focus on the new situation. 
	 Tell Sts B to start.
	 When Sts have finished, ask a few Sts B what suggestions 
Sts A made and if they thought the suggestions were 
good or not.
EXTRA IDEA   As a round-up, ask Sts for good suggestions for 
both situations and write them on the board.
Function  taking something back to a shop
Vocabulary  shopping
Lesson plan
In this third Practical English lesson Sts revise some basic 
shopping vocabulary, and learn some key phrases for taking 
things back to a shop. The story develops: Rob decides that 
he is unfit and needs to do some exercise. Holly invites him 
to join her and some friends in a game of basketball. Rob 
accepts, but first needs to buy some trainers. He buys a pair, 
without trying them on, and then realizes they are too small. 
He takes them back to the shop and manages to exchange 
them. Later, he accepts an invitation to go running with 
Jenny very early in the morning in Central Park.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 3 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 3 
                     Can you remember...? 1–5
Online Practice  Practical English 3 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Before starting Episode 3, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 2. Ask Who’s Holly? Where does she work / live? 
Who’s Barbara?, etc. 
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 2.
1	r ROB HAS A PROBLEM
a	 e 5.21   Focus on questions 1–8 and give Sts time to read 
them. Sts may not know the expression to be in shape (= in 
a good physical condition) and to keep fit (= stay healthy).
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1	 He says he’s eating too much.
2	 Because he eats out all the time in New York and the portions 
are very big.
3	 He cycles in London.
4	 Because he doesn’t have a bike (he lives near the office and is 
only going to stay for another three weeks).
5	 She goes running before and after work.
6	 Holly thinks running is very boring.
7	 He could play basketball with Holly and her friends.
8	 He needs to buy some trainers (sneakers in American English).
	 3	
Practical English  The wrong shoes
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 78@@
78
PE3
	 You might want to check Sts know what Mastercard is 
(same as Visa card) and that erm is a sound we use to 
give ourselves time to think. Also check they understand 
a refund. Model and drill the pronunciation /ˈriːfʌnd/.
b	 Focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who says the 
You hear phrases (the shop assistant) and who says the 
You say phrases (the customer, here Rob). These phrases 
will be useful for Sts if they need to buy something and 
then take it back if they have a problem.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again and get Sts to complete the gaps. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  minute    2  try    3  15    4  problem    5  size    6  sorry    
7  same    8  receipt
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. You may want to highlight the meaning of 
the phrasal verb try on. You could also remind Sts that we 
often use a pair to talk about plural clothes.
c	 e 5.25  Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. 
e 5.25
Same as script 5.24 with repeat pauses
d	 Now put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is the shop assistant. Get 
Sts to read the conversation aloud, and then swap roles.
e	 Focus on the instructions. A is the customer and B the 
shop assistant. Make sure Sts understand the situation.  
B keeps his / her book open and starts with Can I help you, 
sir / madam?.
	 Sts now role-play the conversation. Monitor and help.
f	 Now focus on the new situation and make sure Sts know 
what boots are. A is now the shop assistant.
	 Sts role-play the conversation. Monitor and help.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
4	r ROB DECIDES TO DO SOME EXERCISE
a	 e 5.26  Focus on sentences 1–7 and go through them 
with Sts. 
	 Then play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for Sts to just watch or listen.
	 Now play it again for Sts to circle the correct answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Brooklyn    2  shows    3  morning    4  6.45    5  early 
6  7.15    7  has
2	r VOCABULARY  shopping
a	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer the questions in 
the shopping quiz.
b	 e 5.23   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check.
	 Check answers. For 1, you could also elicit XS and XXL.
e 5.23
1	 S, M, L, and XL.
2	 S is small, M is medium, L is large, XL is extra large
3	 a changing room
4	 a receipt
5	 £25.99 = twenty-five pounds ninety-nine 
	
75p = seventy-five p / pence
	
$45 = forty-five dollars
	
15c = fifteen cents
	
€12.50 = twelve euros fifty
3	r TAKING SOMETHING BACK TO A 	
	 SHOP
a	 e 5.24   Focus on the photo and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. Where is Rob? Who is he talking to?, etc.
	 Now either tell Sts to close their books and write the 
two questions on the board, or get Sts to focus on the 
questions and cover the conversation on p.45.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check answers.
1	 They are too small.
2	 He changes them for another pair.
e 5.24 e 5.25
S = shop assistant, R = Rob
S	 Can I help you, sir?
R	 Yes. Do you have these in an eight? (repeat)
S	 Just a minute. I’ll go and check. 
***
S	 Here you are, these are an eight. Do you want to try them on?
R	 No, thanks. I’m sure they’ll be fine. (repeat) How much are  
they? (repeat)
S	 They’re $83.94.
R	 Oh, it says $72.99. (repeat)
S	 Yes, but there’s an added sales tax of fifteen per cent. 
R	 Oh, OK. Do you take Mastercard? (repeat)
S	 Sure.
***
S	 Can I help you?
R	 Yes, I bought these about half an hour ago. (repeat)
S	 Yes, I remember. Is there a problem?
R	 Yes, I’m afraid they’re too small. (repeat)
S	 What size are they?
R	 They’re an eight. (repeat) But I take a UK eight. (repeat)
S	 Oh, right. Yes, a UK eight is a US nine.
R	 Do you have a pair? (repeat)
S	 I’ll go and check. Just a minute.
***
S	 I’m sorry, but we don’t have these in a nine. But we do have these, 
and they’re the same price. Or you can have a refund. 
R	 Erm…I’ll take this pair, then, please. (repeat)
S	 No problem. Do you have the receipt?
R	 Yes, here you are. (repeat)
S	 Brilliant.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 79@@
79
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
PE3
e 5.26
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Oh, hi.
R	 Have you had a good day?
J	 Oh, you know. Meetings! What about you?
R	 It was great. I went to Brooklyn and met some really  
interesting people. 
J	 And you had time to go shopping, too.
R	 What? Oh yeah. I’ve just bought these.
J	 What are they?
R	 A pair of trainers – er, sneakers.
J	 Nice. Why did you buy sneakers?
R	 I think I need to get a bit fitter. 
J	 Oh, I’m impressed. You know, I go running every morning in 
Central Park. 
R	 Do you?
J	 It’s so beautiful early in the morning. Why don’t you come  
with me? 
R	 Er…sure. Why not?
J	 Great! I’ll come by your hotel tomorrow morning. 
R	 OK. What time?
J	 Six forty-five?
R	 Six…?
J	 Forty-five.
R	 Can we make it a bit later? Say, seven forty-five?
J	 That’s too late, Rob. Let’s make it seven fifteen.
R	 OK.
J	 Excellent. See you later.
R	 Great.
H	 Basketball and running, Rob? You must have a lot of energy.
R	 Er…yeah.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
b	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
c	 e 5.27   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  had    2  know    3  don’t    4  make    5  Let’s
e 5.27
1  Have you had a good day?
2  Oh, you know. Meetings!
3  Why don’t you come with me? 
4  Can we make it a bit later? 
5  Let’s make it seven fifteen.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
d	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  4    C  1    D  5    E  2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 80@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
80
6A
 G   will / won’t (predictions) 
 V   opposite verbs: pass – fail, etc.
 P   ’ll, won’t
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts are introduced to the future forms will and 
won’t for the first time. They learn a specific use of these 
forms, which is to make predictions about the future, here 
particularly in response to what somebody says to you. 
The context of the lesson is pessimists and optimists. 
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on common 
opposite verbs, e.g. pass – fail, buy – sell. The grammar is then 
presented through eight situations, looking at the typical 
predictions an optimist or pessimist might make, e.g. You 
won’t like it, That’ll be interesting, etc. In Pronunciation, Sts 
practise the contracted forms of will / won’t. Sts then listen to 
a radio programme about positive thinking. They then read 
an article which states that negative thinking can be good 
for you, and they discuss the findings. Finally, Sts answer 
a questionnaire to find out whether they are a positive or 
negative thinker.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  will / won’t (predictions) p.187 
Vocabulary  Opposite verbs p.265 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  Positive or negative? p.232  
(instructions p.211)
For students
Workbook  6A
Online Practice  6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Draw a big glass which is exactly half full of water on the 
board. Underneath, write THE GLASS IS HALF ______. Tell Sts to 
complete the sentence with one word, but they mustn’t tell 
anybody which word they have written.
Now elicit from the class how to finish the sentence  
(full / empty). 
Ask Sts who have written empty to put up their hands. 
Tell them that they are pessimists (explain / translate if 
necessary). 
Now ask who wrote full and tell these Sts that they are 
optimists.
1	VOCABULARY  opposite verbs
a	 e 6.1   Books open. Tell Sts they are going to hear five 
sentences or questions, and they have to write down the 
main verb from each sentence.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers.
1  find    ​2  send    ​3  remember    ​4  start    ​5  turn on
e 6.1
1	 Did you find your keys?
2	 Did you send the email?
3	 I never remember people’s names.
4	 What time does the film start?
5	 Please turn on the air conditioning.
	 Elicit from the class the opposite verbs.
1  lose    ​2  get / receive    ​3  forget    ​4  finish / end    ​5  turn off
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Opposite verbs on 
p.157. 
Vocabulary notes
You may want to highlight:
•	 the difference between lend and borrow, i.e. I lend 
money to you / you borrow money from me
•	 that the opposite of start is finish or end when referring 
to, e.g. a film or a book, but stop when referring to, e.g. 
an activity, a car, etc.
•	 the other meaning of miss, e.g. miss your family  
(= feel sad because you are not with them)
	 Focus on a and get Sts to match the verbs and photos. 
	 Check answers, but don’t drill pronunciation yet.
10  arrive    6  break    ​4  buy    15  download    3  find    
7  forget    2  lend    ​16  love    ​14  miss    8  pass    
17  pick up    1  push    ​12  send    ​5  start    11  teach    
9  turn on    13  win
	 Then get Sts to do b by writing the verbs in the Opposite 
column in a. The first one (leave) has been done for them.
	 e 6.2   Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to check answers 
to b and to drill the pronunciation of the verbs in a and b. 
e 6.2
Opposite verbs 
10	 arrive	
	
leave
6	 break	
	
mend / repair
4	 buy	
	
sell
15	 download	
	
upload
3	 find	
	
lose
7	 forget	
	
remember
2	 lend	
	
borrow
16	 love	
	
hate
14	 miss	
	
catch
8	 pass	
	
fail
17	 pick up	
	
drop off
1	 push	
	
pull
12	 send	
	
get / receive
5	 start	
	
finish
11	 teach	
	
learn
9	 turn on	
	
turn off
13	 win	
	
lose
	 Now either use the audio, pausing after each pair of 
opposite verbs, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any verbs your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	6A	 Think positive – or negative?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 81@@
81
6A
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at the eight 
situations in a and decide which response they would 
probably give. 
	 If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, get Sts to say 
whether they are an optimist or a pessimist.
	 Get some feedback about various situations. With a show 
of hands, you could also see if there are more optimists or 
pessimists in the class. 
d	 Focus on the You say responses in a and elicit the answer 
to the question.
the future
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.136. 
Grammar notes
In English File Elementary Sts learned that be going to can 
be used to make predictions, e.g. You’re going to be very 
happy. This use was revised in 3A.
In this lesson Sts learn the future form will / won’t + 
infinitive, and that it can also be used to make predictions. 
Sometimes both forms are possible, e.g. I think the 
government will lose the election. / I think the government is 
going to lose the election.
However, there is often a difference in usage: will / won’t 
tends to be used more than be going to to make instant, 
on-the-spot predictions in reaction to what another 
person says, e.g.:
A	I’m going to try that new restaurant tonight.
B	 You won’t like it.
At this level you may prefer to simplify things by telling Sts 
that both be going to and will / won’t can be used to make 
predictions.
Sts will learn other uses of the future (will / won’t) in 
6B (promises, offers, and decisions) and will study the use 
of will / won’t in conditional sentences with if in 8B. 
	 e 6.4   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the be going to for predictions box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 6A on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 I think they’ll lose the match.
2	 Will the meeting be long?
3	 She won’t get the job.
4	 Will you see him at work later?
5	 It’ll be impossible to park.
6	 You won’t like that book. 
7	 I'm sure she’ll love the present I bought her.
8	 There won’t be a lot of traffic in the morning.
9	 You’ll find a good job, I’m sure.
10	 Everything will be OK, so there’s no need to worry.
b	
1	 will be   
2	 will like   
3	 will snow   
4	 will get   
5	 will pass
	 Focus on Activation. In pairs, Sts try to remember the 
verbs and their opposites. A (book open) says a verb 
and B (book closed) says the opposite. Make sure they 
swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   If you think Sts need more practice, 
you may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	GRAMMAR  will / won’t (predictions)
a	 Tell Sts to look at the cartoon and if you didn’t do the 
Optional lead-in, check Sts know what an optimist and  
a pessimist are. 
	 Now focus on the eight conversations and go through the 
Your friend says phrases with the class.
	 Then focus on the You say responses and point out that 
each one has two options, a and b. Tell Sts to label each 
response with O for optimist and P for pessimist. 
b	 e 6.3   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  a  O    b  P    ​2 a  P    b  O    3 a  O    b  P    ​4 a  O    b  P    
​5 a  O    b  P    6 a  P    b  O    ​7 a  O    b  P    ​8 a  P    b  O
e 6.3
1	 This check-in queue is really slow!
	
optimist
	
Don't worry. It’ll start moving soon. 
	
pessimist
	
I know. We’ll miss the flight. 
2	 Let’s drive to the restaurant.
	
pessimist
	
We’ll never find anywhere to park. 
	
optimist
	
Yes, it’ll be quicker. 
3	 I’ve lent my brother some money.
	
optimist
	
I’m sure he’ll pay you back. 
	
pessimist
	
You won’t see it again. 
4	 I’m taking my driving test tomorrow.
	
optimist
	
It’ll go well, you’ll see. 
	
pessimist
	
You won’t pass. 
5	 I’m selling my old laptop on eBay.
	
optimist
	
You’ll sell it easily. 
	
pessimist
	
Nobody will buy it. 
6	 Hooray! We’re in the final!
	
pessimist
	
Yes! But we’ll lose. 
	
optimist
	
Yes! I’m sure we’ll win! 
7	 I’m having Japanese classes next week.
	
optimist
	
That’ll be interesting! 
	
pessimist
	
You’ll never learn it. 
8	 We’re going to see the film in English.
	
pessimist
	
You won’t understand a word. 
	
optimist
	
You’ll love it. And it’ll be good practice. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 82@@
82
6A
c	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do. 
	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell Sts A to start by reading the first line of 
conversation 1 in 2a. Sts B should respond as an optimist. 
When Sts A have read all eight conversations, they 
swap roles, and this time Sts A respond to the situations 
as pessimists. Encourage them to use optimistic or 
pessimistic intonation.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any errors with ’ll or won’t.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication You’re a pessimist!, A on p.104,  
B on p.109.
	 Go through the instructions carefully. Now make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get a student to read you his / her first 
sentence, and give an example of a pessimistic response. 
	 Sit A and B face-to-face. A says his / her first sentence and 
B responds in a pessimistic way. Then they swap roles.
	 When they have finished, you could get a few Sts to read a 
sentence and get others to respond.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
4	LISTENING  using existing knowledge to predict 	
	 content
a	 e 6.7   Focus on the instructions and question. Tell Sts 
that the radio programme is a chat show where one of 
the guests is an expert on positive thinking.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
It helps you enjoy life more. Positive people are healthier and live 
longer.
e 6.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
Presenter
Today’s topic is ‘positive thinking’. We all know that people who 
are positive enjoy life more than people who are negative and 
pessimistic. But scientific studies show that positive people are 
also healthier. They get better more quickly when they are ill, and 
they live longer. A recent study has shown that people who are 
optimistic and think positively live, on average, nine years longer 
than pessimistic people. So, let’s hear what you, the listeners, think. 
Do you have any ideas to help us be more positive in our lives?
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before playing the audio, elicit some 
ideas from the class why positive thinking is good for you.
b	 Now explain that five people have called the radio 
programme to give some tips (useful suggestions) to help 
people be more positive.
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to try and guess what the missing words 
in the sentences could be. Tell them not to write them in 
the sentences, but on a separate piece of paper. 
	 You could elicit some ideas, but don’t check answers yet.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  ’ll, won’t
Pronunciation notes
An important aspect of will / won’t is the pronunciation 
of the contractions and Sts get some intensive practice 
here. Remind Sts that contractions are very common 
in conversation, but that it is not wrong to use the full 
uncontracted form.
Sts often confuse the pronunciation of the contracted 
form of will not (won’t /wəʊnt/) with the verb want /wɒnt/ 
when speaking and listening, so there is also a special 
focus on this.
a	 e 6.5   Focus on a and play the audio for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Sts often find 
the contracted form of it will (it’ll) difficult to say.
e 6.5
See words and phrases in Student’s Book on p.46
b	 e 6.6   Tell Sts that they are going to hear six sentences 
and that they have to write them down. Explain that they 
all include either won’t or want to. Tell Sts that they will 
hear each sentence twice.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write down what they hear.
	 Then elicit answers and write them on the board. Get 
them to spell want or won’t to make sure they have 
written the correct word.
e 6.6
1	 I want to go with you.
2	 They won’t come tonight.
3	 You won’t find a job.
4	 We want to learn Russian.
5	 They want to sell their house.
6	 I'm sure she won’t win.
	 Now ask Sts what sound the pink letters have. Highlight 
that want is always followed by to before another verb, 
which will always help them to be sure which form they 
have heard.
won’t = /wəʊnt/   
want = /wɒnt/
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying 
the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 83@@
83
6A
5	READING
a	 Focus on the cartoon of the girl studying and, with a show 
of hands, find out if Sts think the girl is an optimist or a 
pessimist.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article and check their answer to 
a. They should also answer the question What is 'defensive 
pessimism'?.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
She is a pessimist.
It’s a strategy which we use to control anxiety, fear, and worry.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c	 Now tell Sts to complete the two sentences from the 
article with the same word.
	 Check the answer.
wrong
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
1	 The printer isn’t working.
2	 You’ve got the incorrect number.
3	 There were no problems on our journey.
e	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. 
	 When Sts have finished reading the article again, either 
put them in pairs or do it as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback.
Possible answers
He can leave home early / check what time the bus leaves.
He can check which terminal the flight leaves from in 
advance.
He can pack carefully / weigh the luggage before they 
leave home.
He can take a jumper or jacket to wear on the plane.
He can take some food of his own or buy food at the airport.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit answers 
from Sts.
6	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the activity and on the seven questions. 
	 Then go through the expressions in the Responding to 
predictions box with the class. Drill the pronunciation, 
making sure Sts do not over-stress the word so and are 
clear about the meaning. Point out that the word so in  
I hope so, etc. means yes, and that maybe and perhaps have 
the same meaning.
	 In pairs, Sts take it in turns to ask and answer each 
question, giving reasons for their predictions. They should 
then decide who is more optimistic. 
	 Finally, get some feedback, e.g. ask how many people in 
the class think they will pass their next English exam.
c	 e 6.8   Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check 
their guesses and complete the gaps. 
	 Check answers.
1	 Live in the present, not in the past.
2	 Think positive thoughts, not negative ones.
3	 Don’t spend a lot of time following the news online or on TV.
4	 Every week, make a list of all the good things that happened 
to you.
5	 Try to use positive language when you speak to other people.
e 6.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
P = presenter, C = caller
P	 Our first caller this evening is Andy. Hi, Andy. What’s your tip for 
being positive?
C1	 Hello. Well, I think it’s very important to live in the present and 
not in the past. Don’t think about mistakes you made in the past 
– you can’t change things now. The important thing is to think 
about how you can do things better now and in the future.
P	 Thank you, Andy. And now we have another caller. What’s your 
name, please?
C2	 Hi, my name’s Julie. My tip is think positive thoughts, not negative 
ones. We all have negative thoughts sometimes, but when we 
start having them, we need to stop and try to change them into 
positive ones. Like, if you have an exam tomorrow and you start 
thinking, ‘I’m sure I’ll fail,’ then you’ll fail the exam. So you need to 
change that negative thought to a positive thought. Just think to 
yourself, ‘I’ll pass. that exam’ I do this and it usually works.
P	 Thank you, Julie. And our next caller is Martin. Hi, Martin.
C3	 Hi. My tip is don’t spend a lot of time following the news online or 
on TV. It’s always bad news and it just makes you feel depressed. 
Read a book or listen to your favourite music instead, and you 
won’t feel so bad.
P	 Thanks, Martin. Good tip! And our next caller is Miriam. Miriam?
C4	 Hi.
P	 Hi, Miriam. What’s your tip?
C4	 Every week, make a list of all the good things that happened to 
you, on your phone or on a piece of paper. Then if you’re feeling a 
bit sad or depressed, read the list and it’ll make you feel better.
P	 Thanks, Miriam. And our last call is from Michael. Hi, Michael. 
We’re listening.
C5	 Hi. I think it’s good to try to use positive language when you 
speak to other people. You know, if your friend has a problem, 
don’t say, ‘I’m sorry’ or ‘Oh, poor you.’ Say something positive, like 
‘Don’t worry! Everything’ll be OK.’ That way, you’ll make the other 
person think more positively about their problem.
P	 Thank you, Michael. Well that’s all we’ve got time for. A big thank 
you to all our callers. 
d	 Play the audio again for Sts to write down extra 
information, e.g. a reason or an example. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again. 
	 Check answers (see script 6. 8).
	 Finally, in pairs, small groups, or as a whole class, answer 
the two questions. For the question Which tips do you think 
are the most useful?, you could get Sts to vote for the best 
tip with a show of hands.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 84@@
84
6B
	6B	 I’ll always love you
c	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and answer 
questions 1–3.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Carmen was studying English and Steve was living there.
2	 Because Carmen moved to France, and the long-distance 
relationship didn’t work.
3	 Because Carmen’s mother didn’t send it to her.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
d	 e 6.9   Focus on the task and tell Sts they are now going 
to find out what happened to Steve and Carmen between 
the two photos. Tell Sts to look at questions 1–5.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and answer the questions. 
Then play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could also check here the answer to a, i.e. 
that in the first photo they are both 25, and in the second 
they are 42.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Some builders found it and gave it to Carmen’s sister.
2	 She phoned Steve.
3	 They arranged to meet in Paris a few days later.
4	 They kissed at the airport and fell in love again.
5	 They got married.
e 6.9
P = presenter, S = Steve, C = Carmen
P	 Earlier this year, ten years after Steve sent the letter, some builders 
were renovating the living room in Carmen’s mother’s house 
in Spain. When they were working on the fireplace, they found 
Steve’s letter. They gave it to Carmen’s sister, and she sent the 
letter to Carmen in Paris. Carmen was now forty-two, and she was 
still single.
C	 When I got the letter, I didn’t call Steve immediately, because I 
was so nervous. I kept picking up the phone and putting it down 
again. I nearly didn’t phone him at all. But I knew that I had to 
make the call.
P	 Carmen finally made the call and Steve answered the phone. He 
was also now forty-two and he was also single.
S	 I couldn’t believe it when she phoned. I’ve just moved house, but 
luckily I kept my old phone number.
P	 Steve and Carmen arranged to meet in Paris a few days later.
S	 When we met, it was like a film. We ran across the airport and 
into each other’s arms. Within thirty seconds of seeing each other 
again, we were kissing. We fell in love all over again.
P	 Last week the couple got married, seventeen years after they first 
met.
C	 I never got married in all those years, but now I have married the 
man I’ve always loved.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again, so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
 G   will / won’t / shall (other uses) 
 V   verb + back: come back, call back, etc.
 P   word stress: two-syllable verbs
Lesson plan
Sts continue their work on the uses of will. In this lesson they 
learn that as well as making predictions, will can be used 
for making promises, offers, and decisions. The presentation 
context is an article and a listening about the true story of 
a couple whose promise to love each other was only kept 
after a chain of strange circumstances. This is followed by the 
grammar, presented through some humorous typical offers, 
promises, and decisions, and a pronunciation focus on stress 
in two-syllable verbs, e.g. promise, decide. Next, in Vocabulary, 
Sts focus on the use of certain verbs with back (come back, 
take back, etc.), which they then put into practice with a final 
speaking activity.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  will / won’t / shall (other uses) p.188 
Communicative  Guess my sentence p.233 
(instructions p.212)
For students
Workbook  6B
Online Practice  6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Write the word PROMISES on the board and elicit its meaning. 
Teach / Elicit that you can make a promise and then keep or 
break a promise.
Ask Sts What promises do people in love often make?. Try to 
elicit some promises and write them on the board, e.g.  
I’ll always love you / I’ll never leave you / I’ll marry you, etc.  
Then ask Sts if they think people keep or break these 
promises.
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding the 	
	 order of events
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and the two photos. Elicit 
answers for the two questions from the class. They will 
find out if they were right later in the lesson.
b	 Tell Sts to read the article and complete it with the four 
time expressions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  17 years ago    ​2  a year after    ​3  a few years later    
4  for ten years
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 85@@
85
6B
a	 1  C    ​2  H    ​3  D    ​4  B    ​5  I    ​6  A    ​7  F    ​8  E 
b
1	 Shall I help you?
2	 I won’t tell anyone, I promise.
3	 I’ll call you tonight.
4	 When will you pay me back?
5	 Don't worry. I won’t forget.
6	 Shall I take you home?
7	 I’ll get a bigger pair for you, madam.
8	 Yes, I know. I won’t buy it again.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to write their 
sentences. Monitor and help. Correct any errors with will, 
won’t, and shall.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences 
to each other.
	 Find out if anyone wrote exactly the same as their partner.
3	PRONUNCIATION  word stress: two-syllable 
verbs
a	 Focus on the activity and give Sts, in pairs, time to put the 
two-syllable verbs in the correct columns.
b	 e 6.11   Tell Sts they are going to hear the verbs being 
used in sentences. First, they will hear all the verbs that are 
stressed on the first syllable.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You might want to point out that most 
two-syllable verbs are stressed on the second syllable.
1st syllable: offer, promise, borrow, happen, practise
2nd syllable: decide, agree, arrive, complain, depend, forget, 
invite, prefer, receive, repair
e 6.11
First syllable
We’ll offer him the job.
I promise to come.
Can I borrow your car?
It’ll never happen.
Please practise the sentences.
Second syllable
We’ll decide later.
I don’t agree.
When do you arrive?
They complain about everything.
It’ll depend on the weather.
Don’t forget your keys.
Let’s invite her.
Which do you prefer?
You’ll receive it in a week.
Can you repair this, please?
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
 EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to retell the story from Steve or 
Carmen’s point of view.
2	GRAMMAR  will / won’t / shall (other uses)
a	 Focus on the sentences and the photos on p.49. Elicit / 
Explain any new words or phrases, e.g. hurt. Now tell Sts to 
match the sentences to the people who are saying them. 
	 Check answers. Ask Sts if they have had experience of 
people saying these things to them, and if they were true 
or not.
A	 This won’t hurt.
B	 I’ll tidy my room now.
C	 Shall I drive?
D	 I won’t have any more. 
E	 I’ll come back tomorrow and finish it. 
F	 I’ll have what she’s having.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
offer and promise. Highlight that they should write the 
letter of the people. Point out that the first one (B) has 
been done for them.
	 Check answers.
offering to do something: C
deciding to do something: D, F
promising to do something: A, E
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.136. 
Grammar notes
Sts shouldn’t worry about being able to distinguish 
between an offer, a promise, or a decision. Depending on 
the context, I’ll help you tomorrow could be an offer,  
a promise, or a decision.
In some languages the present tense is used for offers 
and decisions. Highlight that in English you say I’ll help you 
NOT I help you.
Shall I…? is only used when an offer to do something is 
asked as a question, e.g. Shall I make you a cup of coffee? 
NOT Will I make you a cup of coffee?
In other future contexts Will I…? is used, e.g. Will I need my 
passport? NOT Shall I need my passport?
In the past, shall was always used instead of will in the first 
person singular and plural. Today, will is commonly used 
for all persons, and shall is mainly used in offers (Shall I turn 
on the heating?) and suggestions (Shall we get a taxi?).
	 e 6.10   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 6B on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts, in pairs, to read the full 
sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 86@@
86
6B
e 6.13
1	 A	 Are you feeling better?
	
B	 Yes, I think I’ll go back to work tomorrow.
2	 A	 The shirt you bought me is too small.
	
B	 Don’t worry. I’ll take it back to the shop and change it. I still 
have the receipt.
3	 A	 Hi, Jack. It’s me, Karen.
	
B	 I can’t talk now, I’m driving. I’ll call you back in fifteen minutes.
4	 A	 That’s my pen you’re using!
	
B	 Is it? Sorry. I’ll give it back in a minute.
5	 A	 Can you lend me twenty pounds? I’ll pay you back next week.
	
B	 OK – here you are.
6	 A	 Where did you buy those shoes?
	
B	 I got them online, but they’re too big. I think I’ll send them 
back.
	 Get Sts to practise the conversations in pairs.
d	 Focus on the Giving examples and reasons box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and make sure that Sts understand 
the questions. 
	 Put Sts into groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss 1–6.
	 Monitor and help while Sts are talking.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering a 
couple of questions yourself.
c	 e 6.12   Tell Sts that this time they will only hear the verbs 
and they must listen and repeat them. Either tell Sts to 
look at the list of verbs in a, or get them to close their 
books.
	 Play the audio for Sts to practise saying the verbs, making 
sure they stress them clearly.
e 6.12
decide, offer, promise, agree, arrive, borrow, complain, depend, 
forget, happen, invite, practise, prefer, receive, repair
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Divide the class into small groups. Tell 
Sts you are going to give them a verb from a, and in their 
groups they must write a sentence as quickly as possible, 
using the verb. The sentence must have a minimum of 
five words in it. When they are ready, they should read 
the sentence out loud. If the sentence is correct and their 
pronunciation is good, they get a point.
d	 Give Sts time to complete sentences 1–5 in their own 
words.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences 
to each other.
	 Find out if anyone wrote exactly the same as their partner.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  verb + back
a	 Here Sts learn / revise some common verbs with back,  
e.g. go back, pay (somebody) back. Focus on the question 
and elicit the answer.
come back = to return to a place
Vocabulary notes
The key thing for Sts to understand is that by adding back 
to a verb, they are adding the sense of ‘returning’  
an action.
You may want to point out that the object pronoun  
(it, them, etc.) goes between the verb and back, e.g. give it 
back, send them back. Word order with these kinds of verbs 
+ prepositions / adverbs (phrasal verbs) is dealt with in 
detail in 10B.
Other verbs + back that you could also teach are get back 
(get to somewhere = arrive; get back somewhere = return to 
where you started from), write back, walk back, etc.
b	 Focus on the phrases in the list. Demonstrate give back 
by giving something to a student and then saying Give it 
back, please.
	 Give Sts a couple of minutes to read 1–6 and complete 
them with a phrase from the list. 
c	 e 6.13   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  go back    ​2  take it back    ​3  call you back    ​4  give it back    ​
5  pay you back    ​6  send them back
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 87@@
87
6C
	6C	 The meaning of dreaming
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  party    ​2  champagne    ​3  flowers    ​4  violin player    ​5  owl    ​
6  feet
e 6.14
Dr = Dr Melloni, P = patient
Dr	 So, tell me, what did you dream about?
P	 I was at a party. The room was full of people.
Dr	 What were they doing?
P	 They were drinking and talking.
Dr	 Were you drinking?
P	 Yes, I was drinking champagne.
Dr	 And then what happened?
P	 Then suddenly I was in a garden. There were a lot of flowers.
Dr	 Flowers, yes…What kind of flowers?
P	 I couldn’t see – it was a bit dark. And I could hear music – 
somebody was playing the violin.
Dr	 The violin? Go on.
P	 And then I saw an owl, a really big owl in a tree…
Dr	 How did you feel? Were you frightened of it?
P	 No, not frightened, really, no – but I remember I felt incredibly 
cold. Especially my feet – they were freezing. And then I woke up.
Dr	 Your feet? Mmm, very interesting, very interesting. Were you 
wearing any shoes?
P	 No. No, I wasn’t.
Dr	 Tell me, have you ever had this dream before?
P	 No, never. So what does it mean, Doctor?
c	 Focus on the conversation and give Sts a few minutes to 
read it. 
	 Play the audio again for Sts to complete the gaps. You 
may need to pause the audio to give Sts time to write the 
missing words.
	 Check answers.
1  doing    ​2  talking    ​3  drinking    ​4  were    ​5  couldn’t    ​
6  playing    ​7  saw    ​8  feel    ​9  remember    ​10  woke up    ​
11  wearing    ​12  had    ​13  mean
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to try to complete the missing 
words before they listen. Don’t tell them whether their 
guesses are right or wrong.
d	 Tell Sts that they are going to try to understand the man’s 
dream. In pairs, they must match the things in his dream 
in the You dream… column to interpretations 1–5 in  
This means….
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
 G   review of verb forms: present, past, and future 
 V   modifiers
 P   the letters ea
Lesson plan
The final lesson in File 6 provides a consolidation of the verb 
forms studied in the first half of the book. Present, past, and 
future forms are revised through the context of interpreting 
dreams. Although the lesson provides a light-hearted look 
at dreams, the symbols and their interpretations have 
been taken from serious sources. Sts begin by listening 
to a psychoanalyst interpreting a patient’s dream. After 
focusing on and revising different forms which are used 
in the conversation, Sts get the chance to ask and answer 
questions using all the verb forms they have studied. Then 
there is a vocabulary focus on modifiers like quite, really, 
and incredibly. In Pronunciation Sts look at the possible 
pronunciations of the letters ea, and the lesson ends with a 
video listening about the meaning of dreams.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  review of verb forms: present, past, and 
future p.189 
Communicative  Talk about it p.234 (instructions p.212)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  What do our dreams really mean?
For students
Workbook  6C
Online Practice  6C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)  
Ask Sts if they had any dreams last night. If they say Yes, elicit 
from three or four Sts what they dreamed about (just the 
subject, not the details), e.g. I dreamed I was falling / about 
my exams. Write the dreams on the board and quickly ask 
the class if they know what the dreams mean. Accept any 
reasonable explanations, and tell them they are going to find 
out more about the meaning of dreams in the lesson.
1	LISTENING
a	 Books open. Focus on the four questions. Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could answer a 
couple of questions too.
b	 e 6.14   Focus on the instructions. Check Sts know the 
meaning of psychoanalyst and patient. Model and drill 
their pronunciation /ˌsaɪkəʊˈænəlɪst/ and /ˈpeɪʃnt/. 
	 Focus on the pictures and ask Sts what they can see. Elicit 
that the pictures show an owl, champagne, a woman 
playing the violin, feet, people at a party, and flowers.
	 Play the audio and get Sts to number the pictures 1–6 in 
the correct order.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 88@@
88
6C
e 6.16
P	 Well, yes, what I really want to know is: does this person, this 
woman…love me?
Dr	 You remember the end of your dream? You were feeling cold?
P	 Yes, my feet were very cold.
Dr	 Well…I think perhaps you already know the answer to your 
question.
P	 You mean she doesn’t love me.
Dr	 No, I don’t think so. I think you will need to find another woman. 
I’m sorry. Perhaps you can find someone…
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to both parts with the scripts on p.123, so they can see 
exactly what they understood / didn’t understand.  
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	GRAMMAR  review of verb forms
a	 Look at the sentences and explain that they come from 
the listening, and are examples of the different tenses and 
forms Sts have studied so far.
	 Elicit which one is in the present perfect (3). Then give 
Sts, in pairs, a few minutes to decide what time the other 
sentences refer to.
	 Check answers.
1  P    ​2  P    ​3  PP    ​4  F    ​5  PR    ​6  F    ​7  PR    ​8  F
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6C on p.136. 
Grammar notes
Sts should by now be reasonably confident with the 
present simple and continuous, the past simple, and be 
going to. With the new forms and tenses, how quickly they 
assimilate them will depend to a large extent on whether 
they have a similar form in their L1. Don’t over-correct 
mistakes, but encourage Sts to use these tenses where 
appropriate and to get the form correct.
	 e 6.17   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 6C on p.137. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 1	 Do you often remember your dreams?
	
2	 Did you watch the match last night?
	
3	 Who do you think will win the election next year?
	
4	 Have you been to the supermarket?
	
5	 Does your brother like rock music?
	
6	 What are you going to watch on TV tonight?
	
7	 Was it snowing when you left?
	
8	 Were you at the party last night?
	
9	 Has the film finished yet?
b	 1	 We’re having dinner with Jack and Mary.
	
2	 But we had dinner with them last week!
	
3	 Yes, but they want to tell us some good news.
	
4	 Shall I buy some champagne?
	
5	 Where have you been?
	
6	 When I was walking home…
	
7	 I decided to buy…
	
8	 And then I saw Mark in the shop…
	
9	 We’re going to be / are late!
	 10	 I’ve already booked a taxi…
	 11	 I’ll be ready in five minutes.
e	 e 6.15   Focus on the task and play the audio for Sts to 
listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
that you are at a party 2
that you are drinking champagne 5
about flowers 1
that somebody is playing the violin 3
about an owl 4
e 6.15
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
Dr = Dr Melloni, P = patient
P	 So what does it mean, Doctor?
Dr	 Well, first the party. A party is a group of people. This means that 
you’re going to meet a lot of people. I think you’re going to be 
very busy.
P	 At work?
Dr	 Yes, at work…You work in an office, I think?
P	 Yes, that’s right.
Dr	 I think the party means you're going to have a lot of meetings.
P	 What about the champagne?
Dr	 Let me look at my notes again. Ah yes, you were drinking 
champagne. Champagne means a celebration. It’s a symbol 
of success. So we have a meeting or meetings, and then a 
celebration. Maybe in the future, you’ll have a meeting with your 
boss, about a possible promotion?
P	 Well, it’s possible. I hope so…What about the garden and the 
flowers? Do they mean anything?
Dr	 Yes. Flowers are a positive symbol. So, the flowers mean that you 
are feeling positive about the future. So perhaps you already 
knew about this possible promotion?
P	 No, I didn’t. But it’s true – I am very happy at work and I feel very 
positive about my future. That’s not where my problems are. My 
problems are with my love life. Does my dream tell you anything 
about that?
Dr	 Mmm, yes, it does. You’re single, aren’t you?
P	 Yes – well, divorced.
Dr	 Because the violin music tells me you want some romance in your 
life – you’re looking for a partner, perhaps?
P	 Yes, yes, I am. In fact, I met a woman last month – I really like  
her…I think I’m in love with her. I’m meeting her tonight.
Dr	 In your dream you saw an owl in a tree?
P	 Yes, an owl…a big owl.
Dr	 The owl represents an older person. I think you’ll need to ask this 
older person for help. Maybe this ‘older person’ is me? Maybe you 
need my help?
P	 Well, yes, what I really want to know is: does this person, this 
woman…love me?
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each bit 
of interpretation, and elicit as much information as possible 
from the class.
f	 e 6.16   Elicit a few ideas from Sts about the meaning of 
picture 6 (the feet). You could write some of the ideas on 
the board. 
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen.
	 Check the answer.
The woman doesn’t love him.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 89@@
89
6C
5	PRONUNCIATION  the letters ea
Pronunciation notes
The combination of vowels ea has several possible 
pronunciations.
The most common is /iː/, e.g. speak. /e/ is less common, 
e.g. breakfast. /eɪ/ is very rare, and the only common ea 
words with this sound are great, break, and steak.
a	 Focus on the activity and the chart. Elicit the six sound 
picture words and the sounds: tree /iː/, egg /e/, train /eɪ/, 
chair /eə/, ear /ɪə/, and bird /ɜː/.
	 Now tell Sts to put the words in the list in the correct 
column. Remind Sts that this kind of exercise is easier to 
do if they say the words aloud.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 6.19   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.19
tree /iː/	
dream, mean, beach, clean, easy, jeans, meat, speak
egg /e/	
already, breakfast, sweater, weather
train /eɪ/	
break, great
chair/eə/	
wear
ear /ɪə/	
really, clear, dear, hear, idea, near, theatre
bird /ɜː/	
earn, learn
	 Then play it again, pausing after each word or group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now ask Sts what the most common pronunciation of the 
letters ea is.
/iː/
	 Finally, ask them what the most common pronunciation 
of the letters ear is.
/ɪə/
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 e 6.20   Tell Sts they are going to hear four sentences and 
they must write them down.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
e 6.20
1	 What does my dream about the beach mean?
2	 We've already had breakfast.
3	 Great – it's time for a break!
4	 Oh dear! I hear nobody likes your idea.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs and get them to write 
three more sentences with the words in a. They should then 
practise saying the sentences. You could then get pairs to 
swap sentences and practise saying the new sentences.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6C. 
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	SPEAKING
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts to go to Communication 
Revision questionnaire, A on p.104, B on p.111.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully and make 
sure Sts know what they have to do. You could tell Sts that 
the questions practise all the tenses they have studied so 
far, and that each student has one question for each tense.
	 Give Sts time to interview each other, making sure they 
ask for more information.
	 Monitor and help while Sts are talking.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6C.
4	VOCABULARY  modifiers
a	 In this activity Sts revise / learn some useful modifiers. 
Focus on the two examples in the chart.
	 Now make sure Sts understand that they have to 
complete the chart with the words in the list in order. Elicit 
the first one (incredibly) from the whole class. 
b	 e 6.18   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
incredibly
really
The room was
very
dark.
quite
a bit
not very
e 6.18
1	 The room was incredibly dark.
2	 The room was really dark.
3	 The room was very dark.
4	 The room was quite dark.
5	 The room was a bit dark.
6	 The room was not very dark.
	 Focus on the a bit information box and go through it with 
the class.
Vocabulary notes
You may want to highlight that:
•	 incredibly /ɪnˈkredəbli/ has the stress on the second 
syllable
•	 really is a little stronger than very. Compare She’s very 
well and She’s really well
•	 quite means an intermediate amount – neither a lot nor 
a little
c	 Give Sts time to complete the sentences so that they 
are true for them, and then get them to compare their 
answers with a partner. 
	 Get some feedback from the class.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 90@@
90
6C
Dream eight: You're late for a meeting or appointment.
Dreaming that you're late for a meeting represents your worry 
about taking a different direction in your life. Perhaps you’re not one 
hundred per cent confident about making a change. This dream 
can also mean that you feel like you don’t have enough time to get 
something done.
Sometimes, dreams come true, but more often, they don't. 
Sweet dreams!
b	 Give Sts time to read the sentences, making sure they 
understand them.
	 Then play the video again for Sts to complete the 
sentences. You could pause after each dream to check 
answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First put Sts in pairs and ask them to try 
to complete the meanings of the dreams from memory. 
Then play the video again. Ask students to check there 
answers and make a note of any extra information about 
each dream.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
Dream 1 decision, friend
Dream 2 journey, talk
Dream 3 confidence, ability
Dream 4 successful, future
Dream 5 strong, love
Dream 6 life, help
Dream 7 exciting, possibilities
Dream 8 direction, time
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Ask Sts to discuss the questions in groups or as a class.
	 Get some feedback from various Sts.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts that they're going to watch a film about common 
dreams and what they mean. 
	 Play the video once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare their ideas with a partner, and then 
check the answers.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch.
The dreams with a good meaning are:
- Dream 4, your life is successful (this dream can also have a bad 
meaning).
- Dream 5, you’re in love.
- Dream 7, you’re having an exciting time in your life.
What do our dreams really mean?
Meet Tom. Like everyone, Tom likes to get a good night’s sleep. And 
like us all, Tom has about five separate dreams every night. These 
dreams can last between fifteen and forty minutes. According to 
experts, our dreams tell us who we are, what we need, and what we 
believe in, so, for Tom and for everyone else, here is a guide to the 
most common dreams and their meanings.
Dream one: someone is running after you.
If you have this dream, it means something is worrying you in real 
life. Something like a difficult decision or a difficult situation with 
a friend or a colleague. People often have this dream again and 
again until they make the decision or deal with the situation that is 
worrying them.
Dream two: you can't find something you need.
Dreaming about losing something and trying to find it again is 
surprisingly common. It usually means that you’re worried about 
something stressful that you need to do soon, like going on a 
long journey or giving a talk in public. In these situations, people 
sometimes dream about losing their passport or tickets, or losing 
their notes or memory stick.
Dream three: you're unprepared for an exam.
This one is common for young adults or children who are under 
stress, and it can feel very real – sometimes you can wake up sure 
that you’ve just failed an important exam or test. If you’re not doing 
any exams in real life, this dream could mean that you don’t have 
enough confidence in your ability to do something.
Dream four: you're flying or falling.
Another very common dream is the flying dream. Sometimes people 
dream that they are in control. If you feel in control, it means that 
your life is successful – perhaps you’ve just passed an important 
exam, or your boss has given you a promotion.
But usually, people dream that they're out of control, and falling. This 
means the opposite – your life isn’t going well, and you’re worried 
about what’s going to happen in the future.
Dream five: you're underwater.
If you dream that you’re underwater, but you’re feeling happy and 
comfortable and you can still breathe, it could mean you have very 
strong feelings for someone. You’re probably in love!
Dream six: you're in an out of control vehicle.
A dream about cars is a dream about your direction in life. If you 
dream that you’re driving, and you lose control of your car, you 
probably feel that your life is out of control.
If somebody you know is driving, then perhaps you feel that they 
have problems in their life, and need your help. 
Dream seven: you find a new room in your house.
This dream means that you’re having an exciting time in your life, 
and you’re discovering new possibilities. If the room is white, it 
means you want to make a new beginning in your life.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 91@@
91
Revise and Check
	5&6	Revise and Check
CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  a
e 6.21
1
I = interviewer, K = Katelyn
I	 Do you have more free time than three years ago?
K	 I actually definitely do have more free time than I did a couple 
of years ago, so I actually just graduated from college. This is my 
first year working full time, so working nine to five frees up your 
evenings, so definitely more free time than before.
2
I = interviewer, S = Susie
I	 What’s the most beautiful city you've ever been to? 
S	 That’s such a good question. Um, I think probably Athens.
I	 Why?
S	 It’s, it's just, it’s absolutely gorgeous – the Acropolis, the 
Parthenon, the sights are beautiful. Yeah, it’s the best place to go.
3
I = interviewer, A = Anna
I	 What do you drink in a typical day? 
A	 In a typical day I usually just drink, er, a lot of coffee and water, 
sometimes juice.
I	 Is there anything you drink too much of?
A	 I probably drink too much coffee.
I	 Is there anything you don’t drink enough of?
A	 I don’t drink enough water most days, but I’m trying to get better.
4
I = interviewer, L = Laura
I	 Are you an optimist or a pessimist?
C	 I am a realist. Um, yeah, more pessimistic than optimistic.
5
I = interviewer, P = Paula
I	 Do you often dream about the same thing?  
P	 Yes, I do. I had a really, really awful teacher at high school for 
history, and she was always really mean. And when I finished high 
school, I always dreamed that she would say, ‘You will never pass 
your A levels’. And now I always dream of the same teacher from 
high school telling me, ‘You will never finish your degree,’ so that’s 
kind of weird, yeah.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 5&6 
Quick Test 6 
File 6 Test 
Progress Test Files 1–6
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    2  c    3  a    4  b    5  c    6  c    7  b    8  a    9  b    10  b    
11  a    12  c    13  a    14  b    15  b
VOCABULARY
a	
1  Two thirds    ​2  five hundred and fifty    ​3  lend    
​4  coming back    ​5  teaching
b	
1  sell    ​2  pull    ​3  forget    ​4  fail    ​5  lose
c	
1  crowded    ​2  safe    ​3  noisy    ​4  south    ​5  museum    ​
6  palace    ​7  harbour    ​8  bones    ​9  heart    ​10  disease
d	
1  Very    ​2  incredibly    ​3  bit    ​4  really    ​5  quite
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  better /ə/     ​2  many /e/    ​3  enough /f/    ​4  why /w/    ​ 
5  wear /eə/
d	
1  impatient    ​2  easiest    ​3  optimist    ​4  depend    ​5  forget
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	
She shouted ‘Tell them about the dream’ when he was speaking 
in Washington.
b	
1  E    ​2  A    ​3  C    ​4  F    ​5  B    ​6  D
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 92@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
92
7A
 G   uses of the infinitive with to
 V   verbs + infinitive: try to, forget to, etc.
 P   weak form of to, linking
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is advice on how to ‘survive’ 
stressful situations such as the first day in a new job. The 
material is based on information on a website called lifehack 
which gives ‘tips for life’. The lesson begins with Sts reading 
some useful advice on what to do and say (and not do and 
say) when you start a new office job. They then listen to two 
people describing their first day at work and see how they 
got on. In Vocabulary, the focus is on some high frequency 
verbs which are followed by the infinitive form, and in 
Grammar, Sts learn when to use the infinitive form with to 
(after certain verbs, after adjectives, etc.). Sts also read and 
re-tell two more How to… texts (surviving meeting your 
partner’s parents for the first time and surviving a first date). 
In Pronunciation and Speaking, Sts practise the weak form of 
to in phrases using an infinitive and linking. Finally, in Writing 
they write some tips of their own on a different subject.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  uses of the infinitive with to p.190 
Communicative  I’m going to tell you about… p.235  
(instructions p.212)
For students
Workbook  7A
Online Practice  7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED) 
Write HOW TO SURVIVE… on the board in big letters. Tell Sts 
that there are websites giving people advice about how to 
survive stressful situations in daily life. Then elicit from Sts 
stressful situations that they would like to read advice for, 
and write them on the board. 
You may want to give them a few ideas to start them off,  
e.g. a week of exams, a first date, etc. 
Continue until you have five or six situations. Then ask Sts 
What advice would you give? and elicit ideas. 
1	READING  text coherence / understanding 	
	 content words
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and the two sentence 
beginnings. Give Sts time to think, then either put Sts in 
pairs or do this as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback and write it on 
the board in two columns.
b	 If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, focus on the title of 
the article and make sure Sts know the meaning of survive 
(= to continue to live in or after a difficult time). 
	 Now tell Sts to read the article from a newspaper to see 
if their advice is included in the article. Tell them not to 
worry about the gaps.
	 Elicit from the class which tips on the board are 
mentioned in the article. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Get Sts to read the article again and this time to complete 
gaps 1–7 with tips A–G. You could quickly go through the 
tips to make sure Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  D    ​2  B    ​3  A    ​4  C    ​5  G    ​6  F    ​7  E
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to underline the important content 
words in A–G, i.e. nouns and verbs. Then quickly read the 
article again and match the tips to the correct section.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
2	LISTENING
 !    Track 7.1 is a long listening with two stories. You could do 
each story separately if you prefer. 
a	 e 7.1   Tell Sts they are now going to listen to two people, 
Simon and Claire, describing their first day at a new job. 
They must listen to see what problems they had.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen. 
Simon was wearing the wrong clothes (a suit).
Claire had to teach three-year-olds and couldn’t control them.
	7A	 First day nerves
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 93@@
7A
93
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell Sts about 
your own experience if you have ever had a problem on 
your first day.
3	VOCABULARY & GRAMMAR  
	 verbs + infinitive; uses of the infinitive with to
Vocabulary notes
Although Sts are learning these verbs partly in a grammar 
context, it’s important to make sure that they’re clear 
about what they all mean, e.g. pretend, try, decide, etc., and 
are also clear about the difference in meaning between 
would like and like.
a	 Here Sts focus on the verbs before the infinitives. Tell Sts 
not to look at the article and to complete the gaps in 1–4.
	 Check answers.
1  Plan    ​2  Offer    ​3  want    ​4  Try
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Verb forms on p.158. 
Focus on 1 Verbs + infinitive.
	 Focus on a and get Sts to complete the to + verb column 
with the verbs from the list.
	 e 7.2   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 7.2
	
Verb forms 1 Verbs + infinitive
1	 We’ve decided to go to France for our holiday.
2	 Don’t forget to turn off all the lights.
3	 We hope to see you again soon.
4	 I’m learning to drive. My test is next month.
5	 I need to go to the supermarket. We don’t have any milk. 6	
He offered to help me with my case.
7	 They’re planning to get married soon.
8	 He pretended to be ill, but he wasn’t really.
9	 He’s promised to pay me back when he gets a job.
 10	 Remember to bring your dictionaries to class tomorrow.
 11	 It was very cloudy and it started to rain.
 12	 I’m trying to find a job, but it’s very hard.
 13	 I want to catch the six o’clock train.
 14	 I’d like to buy a new car next month.
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any verbs your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts, in pairs, to cover the 
to + verb column. They must try to remember and say the 
full sentences.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
e 7.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
Simon
When I was about thirty, I got a job as an editor in a publishing 
company. It was my first office job, and um I didn’t really know what 
to wear, but um for the interview I wore a suit, in fact I bought the 
suit specially for the interview. I got the job, so I thought that must 
be OK, so um on the first day I went to work wearing a suit and a 
tie. I got to work early, um, I wanted to make a good impression, 
and I was the first person in the office, so I went in, I found my desk, 
with my name on it, and I sat down and there were a few papers 
and documents for me to read, so I started reading those. I turned 
on my computer, and after about ten, fifteen minutes the other 
people in the office started to arrive and I noticed that nobody else 
was wearing a suit, and I thought, ‘OK it’s not a big problem’. So I 
introduced myself to the other people, I said, ‘Hello, how are you? 
Hello, pleased to meet you’ and the next thing someone said to me 
was ‘My computer’s really slow, do you think you know what the 
problem is?’ and I said, ‘No, no, not really.’ So then I introduced myself 
to somebody else and said, ‘Hello, nice to meet you’ and she replied, 
‘Hello, nice to meet you’ and then she said, ‘Do you know how I can 
connect my computer to the printer?’ and I said, ‘No, I have no idea 
how to do that.’ Anyway I went back to work and about half an hour 
later I had a meeting with my boss, and she said, ‘How’s it going?’ 
and I said, ‘Yeah, it’s all good, everybody seems really nice. Just one 
thing, why does everybody think I can fix their computer?’ and she 
looked at me and what I was wearing and she said, ‘It’s your suit. 
Nobody in this office ever wears a suit, so they think you’re from the 
IT department and you’ve come to help with a computer problem. 
They’re the only ones who wear suits!' So I never wore it again.  
To this day. 
Claire
It was my first day at work as a teacher at a language school, and 
they asked me to come the first week of term to observe some 
teachers, to watch their lessons, and then I was going to start 
teaching the following week. But when I arrived there they told 
me that one of the teachers was ill and they asked me to take the 
class, and it was three-year-old kids! So I was in a class with about 
ten three-year-olds, who were running around – my boss gave me a 
story book to read to them, but the kids couldn’t speak any English. 
I’d never taught – never been trained to teach children that small. I 
tried to read the book to two of them, but the others were running 
around shouting and hitting each other, and at the worst possible 
moment, just when all of them were being really noisy and not 
doing anything I was telling them to, my boss – the director of the 
school – opened the door and just looked at me. I felt terrible, but 
then she said, ‘These children are too young for you, aren’t they?’ and 
I said, ‘Yes’ – I was nearly crying. Luckily after that she never gave me 
any classes with really young children, but it was the most stressful 
class I’ve ever tried to teach.
	 Now ask Sts which tip from the article in 1 they would 
give Simon and Claire.
Simon   Wear smart work clothes, but not too smart.
Claire   Be prepared to have problems. Don’t be afraid to ask for 
help.
b	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and this time they 
must answer questions 1–6. Go through the questions, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis.
	 Play the audio, pausing after Simon’s story. Then play 
Claire’s story.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  C    ​2  C    ​3  S    ​4  S    ​5  C    ​6  B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 94@@
7A
94
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts to go to Communication 
How to survive…, A on p.104, B on p.110.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully, and 
make sure Sts know what they have to do. 
	 A and B read their How to survive… articles. Give them 
time to try to memorize the information and deal with any 
vocabulary problems. 
	 A then tells B the five tips. Then A and B decide together 
which they think is the most important tip.
	 B now tells A the five tips in his / her article and they 
again decide together which is the most important one.
	 When Sts have finished, get feedback from some pairs 
about which tip they thought was the most important.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts that they can look at the headings, 
but encourage them to give as much of the extra 
information as they can from memory.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
f	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know the meaning 
of appropriate (= suitable, acceptable, or correct for the 
particular circumstances). Model and drill pronunciation. 
Then give Sts time to think about the tips they read or 
heard about in Communication.
	 Now ask the class if they think the tips they have read are 
appropriate in their country. If not, why not?
4	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  
	 weak form of to, linking
Pronunciation notes
Weak form of to
The word to is usually unstressed in a sentence (unless it 
comes at the end of a question, e.g. Who are you talking 
to?) and is pronounced as a weak form /tə/, e.g. I never 
speak to /tə/ Jane.
Linking
It’s important for Sts to be aware of the way two 
consonant sounds are linked (see information box in 
the Student’s Book) as this will help them to understand 
spoken language when this linking occurs. 
a	 e 7.4   Tell Sts to listen to the three sentences and 
especially to how the word to is pronounced.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
 	 Check answers. 
to isn’t stressed and is pronounced /tə/
e 7.4 
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.55
!   The photocopiable vocabulary activity revises both 
verbs + infinitive and verbs + gerund, so wait until after the 
Vocabulary Bank in 7B before using it. 
c	 Tell Sts to focus on sentences A–C from the article and 
rules 1–3. They must match a sentence with a rule.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
a  2    b  3    c  1
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.138. 
Grammar notes
The infinitive has two forms in English:
1	 work is the form which is given in a dictionary. Sts 
have seen this used in present simple questions and 
negatives, e.g. Do you work?, I didn’t work, and after the 
modal verb can.
2	 to work Sts should already be familiar with the infinitive 
with to used after some verbs such as want and would 
like, e.g. I want to come with you.
 !   The infinitive of purpose is only used to express a 
positive reason. To express a negative reason we use in 
order not to or so as not to, e.g. We took a taxi so as not to 
be late NOT We took a taxi not to be late. At this level it is 
better not to point this out unless it comes up.
	 e 7.3   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the Infinitive without to box and go 
through it with the class.	
	 Then focus on the exercises in 7A on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  F    ​2  D    ​3  E    ​4  A    ​5  C
b
1	 Nice to meet you
2	 What do you want to do tonight?
3	 I promise not to be late.
4	 Try not to make a noise.
5	 I'd really like to learn a new language.
6	 Be careful not to drive too fast – the roads are icy.
7	 My brother has decided to look for a new job.
8	 You don't need to pay to go in. 
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts into small groups. Get them to try to 
think of at least two answers to each of the questions below, 
using to + infinitive.  
Why do people...? 
– go to parties	 – go on holidays	 – go to a gym 
– get married	
– learn English
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 95@@
7A
95
5	WRITING
In pairs, Sts now write their own How to survive… article.  
First, they must choose one of the three titles and then they 
must write at least four tips.
When Sts have finished, make sure they check their work for 
mistakes. 
Then they could swap articles with another pair.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Brainstorm suitable headings with the class 
for each title before Sts choose which article to write.
Possible headings:
A job interview
Don’t be late
Wear the right clothes
Be prepared
Ask questions
A party where you don’t know anyone
Arrive early
Introduce yourself to people
Ask people about themselves
Don’t eat or drink too much
A family holiday
Try not to argue with people
Spend some time on your own
Help with housework if you’re in a rented flat
Take turns to choose where to go and what to eat
b	 e 7.5   Focus on the Linking words with the same 
consonant sound box and go through it with the class.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to hear ten questions and they 
must complete each gap with three or four words.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question to give Sts 
time to write. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, making sure Sts understand the questions.
1  tried to learn
2	 how to drive
3	 what to wear 
4	 forgotten to turn off 
5	 hoping to go 
6	 planning to go anywhere
7	 to work or study
8	 pretended to be ill
9	 to learn to cook
10	 to stay friends
e 7.5
1	 Have you ever tried to learn something new and failed?
2	 How important is it to know how to drive? 
3	 How long do you usually spend deciding what to wear in the 
morning?
4	 Have you ever forgotten to turn off your phone during a class or 
concert?
5	 Where are you hoping to go for your next holiday? 
6	 Are you planning to go anywhere next weekend?
7	 Would you like to work or study in another country?
8	 Have you ever pretended to be ill (when you weren’t)?
9	 Do you think it’s important to learn to cook at school?
 10	 Do you think it’s possible to stay friends with an ex-boyfriend or 
girlfriend?
c	 This speaking activity reinforces the pronunciation 
presented in a, as well as the grammar. 
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A asks the first five questions to 
B, who answers giving as much information as possible. 
Then B asks the next five questions to A. 
	 Get feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to choose questions to ask you 
first. Encourage them to ask follow-up questions for more 
information. You could write a few question words, e.g. WHY? 
WHEN?, etc. on the board to remind them.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 96@@
96
7B
	7B	 Happiness is…
1	VOCABULARY & GRAMMAR  verbs + gerund; 
uses of the gerund
Vocabulary notes
Although Sts are learning these verbs partly in a grammar 
context, it’s important to make sure that they’re clear 
about what they all mean, e.g. go on (= continue), feel like 
(want to have or do sth), etc.
a	 Books open. Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the 
questions. You could answer the questions yourself first.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the text and Instagram posts. You may want to 
pre-teach some vocabulary, e.g. a hot tub, to illustrate sth, 
draw – drew, etc. or you may prefer to deal with these in 
context after Sts have read the text. Tell Sts to read the text 
once and then tick the cartoons they agree with most. 
	 Get some feedback. You could tell Sts which ones you 
agree with most.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
We use the -ing form after finish.
	 Elicit any other verbs Sts know which take the -ing form, 
e.g. like, love, hate, mind, etc.
d	 Here Sts learn some other common verbs which take the 
gerund. Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Verb forms 
on p.158 and look at 2 Verbs + gerund (verb + -ing).
	 Focus on a and get Sts to complete the gerund column 
with the verbs from the list.
	 e 7.6   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 7.6 
Verbs + gerund
1	 I enjoy reading in bed.
2	 Have you finished tidying your room?
3	 I want to go on working until I’m seventy.
4	 I hate being late when I’m meeting someone.
5	 I like having breakfast in a café.
6	 I love waking up on a sunny morning.
7	 I don’t mind doing the ironing. It’s quite relaxing. 
8	 She spends hours talking on the phone.
9	 It started raining at five thirty in the morning.
 10	 Please stop making such a noise. I can’t think.
 11	 I don’t feel like cooking today. Let’s go out for lunch.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any verbs your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Remind Sts that I don’t mind (doing something) = although 
I don’t enjoy it, it isn’t a problem for me. Point out the 
asterisk by start and tell Sts that it can be used with a 
gerund or infinitive with no difference in meaning, e.g. It 
started raining or It started to rain.
 G   uses of the gerund (verb + -ing)
 V   verbs + gerund: like, can’t stand, etc. 
 P   -ing, the letter o 
Lesson plan
Cartoons about happiness posted on Instagram by two 
well-known illustrators provide the context for Sts to learn 
three common uses of the verb + -ing form (often called the 
gerund).
The lesson begins with the cartoons which lead Sts into 
Vocabulary and Grammar by focusing on common verbs 
which are followed by the gerund and other uses of the 
gerund. This is followed by a Listening and Speaking activity 
about the Bank of Happiness in Tallinn, Estonia, and Sts 
listen to an interview with the founder of the bank, Airi Kivi. 
In Pronunciation, Sts look at the six pronunciations of the 
letter o and the /ŋ/ sound. The lesson ends with a speaking 
activity, in which Sts talk about things they love / like / don’t 
mind, etc., doing.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  infinitives with to or verb + -ing? p.191 
Communicative  Questions with gerunds p.236  
(instructions p.212) 
Vocabulary  Verbs + infinitive to and verbs + -ing p.266 
(instructions p.255)
For students
Workbook  7B
Online Practice  7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following words on the board: 
HAPPY    SAD    DARK    WEAK
Ask Sts what part of speech these are, and elicit that they are 
adjectives. Then tell Sts that by adding four letters to the end 
of these adjectives, you make them into nouns, and see if 
anyone comes up with -ness. Write the nouns on the board 
(happiness, sadness, etc.), and model and drill pronunciation.
You could also teach a few more -ness nouns from other 
adjectives Sts know, e.g. kindness, laziness, tidiness, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 97@@
97
7B
g	 Tell Sts they are going to write a sentence similar to the 
ones in 1b. Write HAPINESS IS… on the board and tell Sts 
they should write between five and ten words about their 
idea of happiness.
EXTRA IDEA   If your Sts like drawing, you could ask them to 
illustrate their text.
h	 When Sts have finished writing, put them in small groups 
(of three or four). Tell Sts to read their sentences to the 
rest of their group. When they have finished reading all of 
them, they should give their opinion.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. If Sts have 
illustrated their work, you could put it up on the wall.
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING 
a	 Focus on the task and elicit ideas from the class.
b	 e 7.8   Tell Sts they are going to listen to a radio interview 
with Airi Kivi, the woman who started the bank. They must 
listen and choose which description 1–3 best explains 
how the bank works.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. 
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
3  You help somebody, and then somebody else helps you.
 
e 7.8 
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
P = presenter, A = Airi
P	 The capital city of Estonia, Tallinn, is one of the most beautiful 
cities on the Baltic coast. It's one of the world’s ‘smart cities’, which 
means that technology plays an important role in people’s lives 
and in business. But some people in Tallinn are using the internet 
for something very unusual. It’s called the Bank of Happiness, but 
it’s a very different kind of bank. Nobody pays money into the 
bank, and the bank doesn’t lend money to anybody. Instead, the 
Bank of Happiness is a forum where thousands of people from 
Estonia, and other countries too, connect with each other, and 
they offer or receive services completely free of charge.  
Here’s how it works: you register and then you post what you're 
offering or what you need – it’s really easy. For example, people 
offer to do the shopping for somebody, or walk their dog.  
Other people post things like ‘I need someone who can fix my car’ 
or ‘Can anybody translate an email into French for me?’  
But the most important thing is that nobody pays any money. 
Everything is free. 
The bank was started over five years ago by a thirty-nine-year-old 
Estonian woman called Airi Kivi. She's a psychologist and a family 
therapist, and her goal was to make people think and act with 
their hearts. 
A	 I thought, we need something like this Bank of Happiness, where 
people can meet each other and help each other – do something 
cool. The Estonian economy was also having problems at the 
time. A little bit later, I thought, wow, the Bank of Happiness is 
perfect for this economic crisis. A lot of people are unemployed 
and they can use our bank.
	
In the Bank of Happiness people don’t need to pay each other 
back. For example, a teenager will do the shopping for his old 
neighbour, and maybe the neighbour can’t do anything for him 
in return. But then perhaps the neighbour will post a comment 
on the site and tell people about what the teenager did, and then 
another person, who sees this, will probably do something to 
help the teenager. The principle of the bank is that it’s not money 
and things that make people happy. What really makes them 
happy is doing things for other people.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts, in pairs, to cover the 
gerund column. They must try and remember the full 
sentences.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the task. Either put Sts in pairs or do this as a 
whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, check answers.
1  without asking    ​2  parking, fitting, finding, sitting, landing, 
reading    3  not having to
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.138. 
Grammar notes
It is very likely that in your Sts’ L1 an infinitive form will be 
used in places where English uses an -ing form. 
 !   In British English it is much more common to use a 
gerund after like, love, and hate especially when you are 
speaking about general likes and dislikes. However, an 
infinitive can often be used without any real difference in 
meaning, and US English uses the infinitive. 
Spelling rules
You may want to point out that two-syllable verbs which 
are stressed on the last syllable also double the final 
consonant, e.g. begin – beginning, prefer – preferring.
 !   travel – travelling is an exception: it is stressed on the 
first syllable, but doubles the final consonant.
Gerund or infinitive?
Sts are asked to discriminate between the gerund and 
infinitive in the second exercise in the Grammar Bank. 
Before doing it you could get Sts to quickly look again at 
the rules for both (see Grammar Bank 7A p.138).
 !   Remind Sts that like is usually followed by the gerund, 
e.g. I like travelling, but would like is followed by the 
infinitive, e.g. I would like to travel around the world.
	 e 7.7   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the 
class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 7B on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 
1  swimming    2  practising    3  remembering    4  Teaching    
5  messaging    6  not knowing    7  Travelling    8  studying
b	 
1  Doing    2  to pay    3  to park    4  giving    5  to get    
6  raining    7  cooking, doing    8  getting up
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 98@@
98
7B
c	 e 7.10   Focus on the pairs of words in 1–4 and make sure 
Sts know what they mean.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear all the words and they 
should try to notice the difference between them.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen. 
e 7.10 
See words in Student’s Book on p.57
d	 e 7.11  Tell Sts they are going to hear one of the words 
in each group in c used in a sentence. They just have to 
decide if it is a or b.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through, pausing after 
each sentence. Play it again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  b  bank    ​2  a  thing    ​3  b  sink    ​4  a  ping
e 7.11 
1	 The news about the bank really surprised me.
2	 One thing I hate about supermarkets is queuing.
3	 Please could you put the dirty dishes in the sink?
4	 I think you have a message. I just heard your phone ping.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write some words on the board for each 
sentence to help Sts, e.g. 1 NEWS, BANK, SURPRISED; 2 HATE, 
SUPERMARKETS. QUEUING, etc. Then play the audio again, 
pausing after each sentence for Sts to listen and repeat. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Here Sts get some oral practice of the new vocabulary 
and grammar. Focus on the task. Highlight that Sts only 
have to choose five things they want to talk about from 
the ten possibilities. Give them a minute to choose their 
five things.
!   Highlight that dream of is used for daydreaming, i.e. 
something we would love to do; dream about is used for 
dreaming while actually asleep, e.g. I dreamed about you last 
night.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts could write down their answers to help 
prepare them for the speaking.
b	 Demonstrate the activity by choosing a few things from 
the list in a and talking about them yourself. Encourage 
the class to ask you for more information, e.g. Why (not)?.
	 In pairs, A tells B his / her five things and B asks for more 
information. 
	 When you think Sts A have finished, get them to swap 
roles.
	 Monitor and help while Sts are talking. Correct Sts if they 
use an infinitive instead of an -ing form.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA IDEA   Get fast finishers to choose more topics to talk 
about.
c	 Give Sts time to read the six multiple-choice questions 
and make sure they understand all the lexis. 
	 Then play the audio again for Sts to listen and choose the 
correct answer. Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  b    ​6  c
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Focus on the three questions and give Sts time to think of 
their answers.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
3	PRONUNCIATION  -ing, the letter o
Pronunciation notes
-ing
-ing at the end of a word, as in the gerund, is always 
pronounced /ɪŋ/. Sts often need practice making this 
sound as they may not have it in their language. 
the letter o
Sts often have problems with the different pronunciations 
of going and doing. This exercise focuses on the two most 
common pronunciations of the letter o, /ɒ/ (e.g. clock) 
and /əʊ/ (e.g. phone), and two less common ones, /ʌ/ (e.g. 
mother) and /uː/ (e.g. boot).
Highlight that clock and mother are short sounds, boot is a 
long sound, and phone is a diphthong. 
a	 e 7.9  Focus on the sound picture and elicit the word 
and sound (singer /ŋ/). 
	 Now focus on the example words next to the sound 
picture, e.g. shopping, etc.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen.
e 7.9 
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.57
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each word for 
Sts to listen and repeat. Correct pronunciation and give 
further practice if necessary.
b	 Focus on the sound pictures and elicit the six words and 
sounds, e.g. phone /əʊ/, horse /ɔː/, etc. 
	 Focus on the question and play the audio again, pausing 
after each word for Sts to match it to a sound.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to do the matching exercise 
before they listen again.
	 Check answers.
shopping 4    nothing 6    boring 2    
ironing 3    going 1    doing 5
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. Give more 
practice if these sounds are a problem for your Sts. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 99@@
99
7C
	7C	 Could you pass the test?
1	SPEAKING
	 Books open. Here Sts do a short speaking activity based 
on their experience of using English. Quickly run through 
the questions before Sts start.
	 Put Sts in small groups and get them to discuss the 
questions. Encourage them to use What about you? after 
they have answered.
	 Get some feedback from various groups about their 
experiences. You could also tell them a little about your 
experience of language learning.
2	READING  using topic sentences
a	 Focus on the questions and elicit some opinions from the 
class. Try to get a short discussion going if Sts seem to be 
interested in the topic.
b	 Tell Sts that they are going to read an article about a 
language learning experiment. Make sure Sts understand 
what an experiment means (= a test that you do to find 
out what will happen or if sth is true). 
	 First, focus on the Topic sentences box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on topic sentences A–F and go through them, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. a Brit. 
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the gaps 
with the topic sentences. Point out that the first (E) has 
been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
2  D    ​3  F    ​4  B    ​5  C    ​6  A
c	 Go through questions 1–6 with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again.
	 Get Sts to answer the questions with a partner, and then 
check answers.
1	 Tourists sometimes try to say a few phrases in a foreign 
language, but stop as soon as they discover that the waiter 
speaks English; Many British people who live abroad never 
learn the language at all.
2	 They think they don’t need to learn a language because 
everyone speaks English.
3	 It’s too difficult.
4	 By sending one of their journalists on an intensive language 
course.
5	 Because he’d like to go to Spain and Latin America. He did a 
one-month intensive course.
6	 He went to Madrid with a teacher to do some tests to see if 
he could survive. 
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
 G   have to, don’t have to, must, mustn’t
 V   adjectives + prepositions: afraid of, etc.
 P   stress on prepositions
Lesson plan
The title and main context of this lesson were inspired by an 
article in the British press, where an experiment was done to 
see how well someone could learn a foreign language in just 
a month. When the month was up, the person travelled to 
the country itself and carried out a series of tasks to see how 
much he had learned. 
The lesson begins with Sts speaking about whether they use 
English outside the classroom. Then Sts read an article about 
British people’s problems learning foreign languages, and 
an experiment to see how much Spanish a British student, 
Max, could learn in a month. Next is a grammatical focus 
on verbs expressing obligation: have to / don’t have to and 
must. Then Sts listen to hear how Max got on in Spain when 
his course finished and do the challenges themselves. The 
Vocabulary and Pronunciation focus is on common verb + 
preposition combinations, e.g. bad at, afraid of, etc. as well as 
stress on prepositions. In Writing, Sts write a formal email to 
a language school asking for information.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  have to, don’t have to, must, mustn’t p.192 
Communicative  In the UK p.237  
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  7C
Online Practice  7C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts what rules there are in their class, and elicit their 
ideas onto the board, writing them up in imperatives, e.g.  
DO HOMEWORK EVERY DAY.  
DON’T MISS CLASSES.  
TURN OFF YOUR PHONE.  
DON’T SPEAK IN (Sts’ L1), etc.
You could leave these up on the board to be referred to later.
Then ask Sts which two they think are the most important.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 100@@
100
7C
a
1	 Janice has to study very hard – she has exams soon.
2	 You have to buy a ticket before you get on the bus.
3	 Does your sister have to go to London for her job interview?
4	 Mike has to wear wear a really ugly uniform at his new school.
5	 We have to get up early tomorrow.
6	 Harry doesn't have to work today – he has a day off.
7	 I have to make a phone call.
8	 Do we have to go to bed?
b
1	 mustn't
2	 f
3	 don't have to 
4	 f
5	 musn't 
6	 f
7	 f
8	 don't have to 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts to go to Communication 
What are the rules?, A on p.105, B on p.110.
	 Go through the instructions with Sts carefully, and make 
sure they know what they have to do. 
	 Sts A look at photos 1–6 and complete the rules. Sts B do 
the same with photos 7–12. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could put two Sts A and two Sts B 
together first to complete the rules. Then put them in A / B 
pairs.
	 A then reads his / her rules in a different order to B, who 
looks at his / her photos and says which photo the rules 
apply to. 
	 They then swap roles and do the same with photos 7–12.
	 Finally, check the rules for photos 1–12.
1	 You have to / must turn off your phone.
2	 Children don't have to pay.
3	 You have to / must wear a jacket.
4	 You mustn't touch the door.
5	 You have to / must be over 18 to see this film.
6	 You mustn't take photos here.
7	 You don't have to pay anything now.
8	 You mustn't play football here at night.
9	 You mustn't put your feet on the seats.
 10	 You don't have to come to class on Mondays.
 11	 You have to / must drive in one direction.
 12	 You have to / must wear sports shoes here.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7C.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts what rules there are in their school and 
if they think, they are good rules. You could then also ask 
Sts to invent some new rules that they would like to see 
incorporated.
3	GRAMMAR  have to, don’t have to, must, mustn’t
a	 e 7.12  Focus on the tests and rules, and give Sts time to 
read them. 
	 Now play the audio of Max talking about the tests. Sts 
listen and complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  sandwich    ​2  follow    ​3  taxi    ​4  dictionary    
5  speak Spanish    ​6  hands
e 7.12
Max
There were four tests for me to complete in Madrid. I had to order a 
drink and a sandwich in a bar, ask the price, and understand it. Then 
I had to ask for directions in the street, and follow them, then get 
a taxi to a famous place, and finally phone somebody and leave a 
message on their voicemail.
There were just three rules. You mustn’t use a dictionary or phrase 
book app, you must only speak Spanish and you mustn’t use your 
hands or mime or write anything down.
b	 Focus on the highlighted phrases in a and questions  
1 and 2. 
	 Give Sts a few moments to answer the questions, and 
then check answers. 
1  You have to, you must    ​2  you mustn’t
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
1  I don’t need to do this
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7C on p.138. 
Grammar notes
must and have to 
At Pre-intermediate level have to and must can be treated 
as synonyms as a way of expressing obligation. We tend 
to use have to more often than must when there is an 
external obligation, i.e. a law or a rule, e.g. You have to wear 
a seat belt in a car in the UK.
Watch out for the typical mistake of using to with must: 
e.g. I must to go to the bank.
Highlight the impersonal use of You when we talk about 
rules and laws, e.g. You have to drive on the left.
mustn’t and don’t have to 
The typical mistake here is when Sts use don’t have to 
instead of mustn’t, e.g. You don’t have to use your phone in 
class. (You mustn’t use your phone…)
	 Focus on the example sentences and play both audio  
e 7.13 and e 7.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the information box about must and have 
to, mustn’t and don’t have to, and Impersonal you, and 
go through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 7C on p.139. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 101@@
101
7C
M	 Er. Buenas noches. Soy Max. Max. M-A-X. Er…Por favor…llámame 
esta noche…Oh yes…a las 8.30 er, Gracias. Well, my grammar 
wasn’t right, but I left the message. Half an hour later, at half past 
eight Lola phoned me. Success! Paula gave me eight points. That 
was the end of my four tests. Paula was pleased with me. My final 
score was seven. I was quite happy with that. So, how much can 
you learn in a month? Well, of course you can’t learn Spanish in a 
month, but you can learn enough to survive if you are on holiday 
or on a trip. Now I want to go back to England and try and learn 
some more. ¡Adiós!
b	 Focus on the task and quickly go through sentences 1–7 
before playing the audio. 
	 Play the audio again, pausing to give Sts time to mark 
them T (true) or F (false). Play all or part of the audio again 
if necessary. Remind Sts to correct the F ones.
	 Check answers.
1  F (The waiter understood Max.)    
2  T   
3  F (It was the second street on the right.)   
4  F (The driver didn’t understand the name.)   
5  T   
6  F (He got seven.)   
7  F (You can’t learn a language (Spanish) in a month, but you 
can learn enough to do some simple everyday things.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to think of their answers.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss their answers to 1–4.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs for each test.
Possible answers
1	 (Can / Could I have) a coffee and a cheese sandwich, please? 
How much is that?
2	 Excuse me, where's the nearest chemist's?
3	 Could you take me to…, please?
4	 Hi, it's Anna. Could you please call me back? My number is…
4	LISTENING
a	 e 7.15   Tell Sts to look at the tests again in 3a and ask Sts 
the two questions. Get some feedback from the class.
	 Then play the audio of Max doing the tests in Madrid. Sts 
just listen to hear which test was the easiest and which 
was the most difficult.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
	 Check answers.
The easiest test was ordering the beer and sandwich. The most 
difficult was getting a taxi.
e 7.15 
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
M = Max, P = Paula, W = waiter, Pb = passer-by, T = taxi driver, L = Lola
M	 I arrived at Madrid airport where I met Paula. Hola, Soy Max.
P	 Encantada. Soy Paula.
M	 Paula took me to my hotel, and that evening we went to the 
centre of Madrid and it was time for my first test. I had to order a 
sandwich and a drink in a bar, then ask for the bill. I sat down at 
the bar and I tried to order a beer and a ham sandwich. Por favor, 
una cerveza y un bocadillo de jamón.
W	 En seguida.
M	 Fantastic! The waiter understood me first time. My pronunciation 
wasn’t perfect, but I got my beer and my sandwich. I really 
enjoyed it. But then the more difficult bit. Asking for the bill… 
¿Cuánto es?
W	 Seis noventa.
M	 ¿Cómo?
W	 Seis noventa.
M	 Six ninety. I understood! Paula gave me eight points for the test. 
I was very happy with that. Next we went out into the street. 
Test number two was asking for directions and – very important! 
– understanding them. We were in a narrow street, and I had 
to stop someone and ask them for the nearest chemist, una 
farmacia. I stopped a woman. At first I didn’t understand anything 
she said!
Pb	Siga todo recto y tome la segunda por la derecha. Hay una farmacia 
en esa calle.
M	 I asked the woman to speak more slowly.
Pb	Todo recto y tome la segunda calle por la derecha DERECHA.
M	 I got it this time, I think. The second street on the right. I followed 
the directions and guess what. There was a chemist there! Seven 
points from Paula. 
	
Test number three. I wasn’t looking forward to this one. I had 
to get a taxi to a famous place in Madrid. Paula wrote down the 
name of the place on a piece of paper. It was the name of the 
football stadium where Real Madrid play. We stopped a taxi. 
El Bernabéu, por favor.
T	 ¿Qué? ¿Adónde?
M	 He didn’t understand me. I tried again, but he still didn’t 
understand. I was desperate, so I said, ‘Real Madrid, Stadium, 
football’.
T	 ¡Ah! El Santiago Bernabéu.
M	 Finally! Paula only gave me five because I ended up using English. 
Still, at least I made the taxi driver understand where I wanted to 
go. And so to the final test. I had to leave a message in Spanish on 
somebody’s voicemail. I had to give my name, spell it, and ask the 
person to call me back. Paula gave me the number – it was one of 
her friends called Lola – and I dialled. I was feeling a bit nervous at 
this point, because speaking on the phone in a foreign language 
is never easy. 
L	 Deje su mensaje después de la señal.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 102@@
102
7C
e 7.17
1	 Do you think you’re good at learning languages?
2	 Is there anything about learning English that you’re bad at?
3	 Do you think listening to pop music is good for your English?
7	 What tourist attractions is your country famous for?
	 Finally, ask Sts What do you think is the rule for stress on 
prepositions? to elicit that prepositions are stressed when 
they are the last word in a sentence or question.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer questions 
1–10 in a. You could demonstrate the activity by getting 
Sts to ask you some of the questions first.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6	WRITING  a formal email
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A formal email on p.117.
a	 Tell Sts to read the email and tick the questions that Marek 
asks the school.
	 Check answers.
Sts should tick
How much do the courses cost?
When do the courses start and finish?
Can I combine two kinds of classes?
Can my wife stay with me?
b	 Now tell Sts to look at the highlighted phrases. They are 
all for a formal email. Sts need to write the equivalent 
expressions for an informal email.
	 Check answers.
Formal
Informal
Dear Sir / Madam,
Dear / Hi [first name]
I am writing
I’m writing
I would like
I’d like
however
but
I look forward to hearing 
from you.
Looking forward to hearing 
from you.
Yours faithfully,
Best wishes / All the best / 
Love
c	 Get Sts to read the advertisement for a language school. 
They must plan a formal email to the school. They should 
decide how long they want to study for, what kind of 
course they want to do and where they want to stay. They 
should also ask two or three questions. 
d	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class or you 
could set it as homework. Get them to write the email, 
making sure they write two paragraphs according to the 
model. 
e	 Sts should check their emails for mistakes before handing 
them in.
5	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
	 adjectives + prepositions; stress on prepositions
Vocabulary notes
Certain adjectives are often followed by a particular 
preposition, which may well be different in Sts’ L1. 
Sts should make a note of adjective + preposition 
combinations when they meet them.
a	 Focus on the Adjectives + prepositions box and go 
through it with the class. 
	 Then focus on questions 1–10, and get Sts to complete 
the gaps with a preposition from the list.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
b	 e 7.16   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  at    ​2  at    ​3  for    ​4  of    ​5  in    ​6  of    ​7  for    ​8  to    ​9  with    ​
10  from
e 7.16
Languages
1	 Do you think you’re good at learning languages?
2	 Is there anything about learning English that you’re bad at?
3	 Do you think listening to pop music is good for your English?
4	 Are you afraid of going to places where you don’t speak the 
language?
5	 What English-speaking countries are you most interested in?
Tourism
6	 Which towns or cities in your country are full of tourists in the 
summer?
7	 What tourist attractions is your country famous for?
8	 Are people in your country usually nice to tourists?
9	 Do you get angry with tourists who don’t to try to speak your 
language?
 10	 Are people in the capital city very different from people in the rest 
of the country?
Pronunciation notes
Sts are normally encouraged not to stress prepositions in 
sentences and questions. However, there is one situation 
in which prepositions are stressed, which is when they 
are the last word in a sentence or question, and pointing 
this out and getting Sts to practise it will improve their 
sentence rhythm.
c	 e 7.17  Focus on the task and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen. 
	 Then play it again pausing after the first pair of questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then repeat with 
the second pair of questions.
	 Check answers.
at is unstressed in 1 and stressed in 2.
for is unstressed in 3 and stressed in 7.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 103@@
103
PE4
J	 It’s the restaurants you go to! Why don’t you come over to my 
place after work? I could make you something a little healthier.
R	 I’d really like that. Thanks.
J	 So, how do you feel now? Are you ready to go again?
R	 Oh, yes! I’m ready for anything.
J	 Are you sure you’re OK?
R	 Absolutely.
J	 OK. We’ll only go around two more times.
R	 Two? Excellent!
b	 Focus on questions 1–6 and give Sts time to read them.
	 Play the video / audio again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play again if 
necessary. 
	 Check answers.
1	 Never better.
2	 It is beautiful and her favourite place in New York.
3	 Yes
4	 He is tired of eating out.
5	 She invites him to have dinner at her place.
6	 Twice / Two more times
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r VOCABULARY  feeling ill
a	 Focus on the title and elicit / teach the meaning of ill. 
	 Now focus on the question What’s the matter? and make 
sure Sts understand it.
	 Tell Sts to match the phrases and photos. 
	 Focus on the pronunciation of the words.
	 Now get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 7.19   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.19
What’s the matter?
2	 I have a headache.
4	 I have a cough.
1	 I have flu.
5	 I have a temperature.
6	 I have a bad stomach.
3	 I have a cold. 
	 Model and drill the sentences. You might want to contrast 
I have a cold (= I am ill) and I am cold (= I am feeling cold, 
but not ill).
	 Play the video / audio again, pausing after each phrase for 
Sts to repeat. Give further practice of any words your Sts 
find difficult to pronounce. 
	 Tell Sts to cover the phrases and look at the photos, and 
practise saying the phrases with a partner.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to give some advice.
Function  going to a pharmacy
Vocabulary  feeling ill: a headache, a cough, etc.
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts get practice with describing symptoms 
and buying medicine. Early in the morning, Rob and Jenny 
go running in Central Park, and Jenny invites Rob for dinner. 
However, Rob isn’t feeling too well, and in the afternoon he 
goes to a pharmacy. Later, in the evening, he has dinner at 
Jenny’s apartment.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 4 
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 4 
Can you remember...? 1–7
Online Practice  Practical English 4 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Before starting Episode 4, elicit what Sts can remember 
about Episode 3, e.g. ask them What does Rob buy? Why? 
What happens when he buys them? What does Rob agree to do 
with Jenny?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 3.
1	r RUNNING IN CENTRAL PARK
a	 e 7.18   Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit what 
Sts think is happening. Don’t tell them if they are correct 
or not yet.
	 Now focus on the question and play the video / audio 
once the whole way through for Sts to check their ideas.
	 Check answers.
Jenny is enjoying the run. Rob says he is, but he is very tired.
e 7.18 
J = Jenny, R = Rob
J	 Are you OK?
R	 Me? Never better.
J	 It’s beautiful here, isn’t it? I think this is my favourite place in  
New York.
R	 Yeah, it’s great.
J	 So how’s it all going? Are you happy you came?
R	 To Central Park? At seven fifteen in the morning?
J	 To New York, Rob.
R	 Yeah. Of course I’m happy. It’s fantastic.
J	 Really? You aren’t just saying that.
R	 No, I mean it.
J	 You need to get in shape, Rob.
R	 I know. I am a bit tired of eating out all the time. It isn’t good for 
my figure.
	 4	
Practical English  At the pharmacy
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 104@@
104
PE4
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is Rob and B is the pharmacist. 
Get Sts to read the conversation aloud, and then swap 
roles.
e	 In pairs, Sts do another role-play. Go through the 
instructions with them. A (book closed) should choose 
another illness from 2a. B (book open) starts with Can I 
help you?.
	 Monitor and help. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by getting a 
confident student to play the pharmacist and you pretend 
to feel ill.
f	 When they have finished, Sts should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
4	r DINNER AT JENNY’S APARTMENT
a	 e 7.22   Focus on the photo and ask Sts Where are Rob 
and Jenny?.
	 Focus on sentences 1–5 and go through them with Sts. 
	 Then play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Make it 
clear that they don’t need to correct the false sentences 
yet. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  F    ​5  F
e 7.22
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 That was a lovely meal. Thanks, Jenny. 
J	 That’s OK. 
R	 It’s been great being in New York. You know, your offer to work 
here came at a very good time for me.
J	 Really?
R	 Yeah, I was looking for something new. Something different. You 
see, I broke up with my girlfriend a few months before I met you. 
J	 Oh…right…
R	 What about you?
J	 What about me?
R	 You know…relationships?
J	 Oh, I’ve been too busy recently to think about relationships. 
Getting this job at the magazine was a really big thing for me. I 
guess that’s taken up all my time and energy.
R	 But that isn’t very good for you. Only thinking about work, I mean.
J	 Why didn’t you tell me you weren’t feeling well this morning? We 
didn’t have to go for a run. 
R	 I wanted to go. It was nice. 
J	 Well, I’m glad you’re feeling better. Would you like another coffee?
R	 No, thanks. I think I should get back to the hotel now, I’ve got a 
really busy day tomorrow. Do you have a telephone number for  
a taxi?
J	 Yeah…but it’s much easier to get a cab on the street. 
R	 Oh, OK, then. 
J	 I’ll see you in the morning, if you’re feeling OK.
R	 Oh, I’m sure I’ll be fine! Thanks again for a great evening.
J	 Any time.
R	 Goodnight.
J	 Night, Rob.
b	 Play the video / audio again, so Sts can watch or listen 
again and correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
3	r GOING TO A PHARMACY
a	 e 7.20   Focus on the title and the British and American 
English box on p.61 and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions and sentences 1–4. 
	 Tell Sts to cover the converation in b.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  flu    ​2  ibuprofen    ​3  four hours    ​4  $6.99
e 7.20  7.21
P = pharmacist, R = Rob
P	 Good morning. Can I help you?
R	 I’m not feeling very well. (repeat) I think I have flu. (repeat)
P	 What are your symptoms?
R	 I have a headache and a cough. (repeat)
P	 Do you have a temperature?
R	 No, I don’t think so. (repeat)
P	 Are you allergic to any drugs?
R	 I’m allergic to penicillin. (repeat)
P	 No problem. This is ibuprofen. It’ll make you feel better.
R	 How many do I have to take? (repeat)
P	 Two every four hours.
R	 Sorry? How often? (repeat)
P	 Two every four hours. If you don’t feel better in forty-eight hours, 
you should see a doctor.
R	 OK, thanks. How much is that? (repeat)
P	 That’s six dollars ninety-nine, please.
R	 Thank you. (repeat)
P	 You’re welcome.
	 You might want to tell Sts that ibuprofen is like aspirin, it 
reduces pain. You could also elicit / teach that penicillin is 
an antibiotic.
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit who 
says the You hear phrases (the pharmacist) and who 
says the You say phrases (the customer, here Rob). These 
phrases will be useful for Sts if they need to go to a 
pharmacy / chemist.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  temperature    ​2  problem    ​3  better    ​4  Two
5  Two    ​6  48    ​7  welcome
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. Elicit / Explain the meaning of symptoms.  
You might also want to highlight the phrase to be allergic 
to sth. Model and drill allergic /əˈlɜːdʒɪk/. Ask a few Sts Are 
you allergic to anything?.
c	 e 7.21   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases.
e 7.21
Same as script 7.20 with repeat pauses
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 105@@
105
PE4
1	 Rob broke up with his girlfriend a few months before he met 
Jenny.
3	 Jenny didn't know that Rob wasn't feeling well in the 
morning.
4	 Rob wants to go back to his hotel because he wants to go to 
bed early, as he has a busy day the next day.
5	 Jenny doesn’t call a taxi.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 e 7.23   Focus on the have got box and go through it 
with the class. 
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen.
e 7.23
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.61
	 Now play it again, pausing after each phrase, for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
	 In English File Sts have been taught to use Do you have…?, 
I don’t have…, I have… to talk about possession as we 
believe it is the easiest form for Sts to acquire and the 
most international. However, it is important that they are 
aware of, and can recognize, the have got form of have, 
which is especially common in spoken English among 
UK native speakers of English (although the have / do you 
have form is also common). We normally contract have 
got, e.g. I’ve got a headache. Point out that you cannot use 
have got when you are using have with another meaning, 
e.g. have dinner, have a shower. If you want to go into the 
grammar of have got in more detail with your Sts, tell 
them to go to p.165. 
	 e 7.24   Go through the rules (audio e 7.24), and get Sts 
to do the exercises in pairs. 
Answer key for the have got appendix
a	
1	 She hasn’t got any brothers.
2	 Have you got a big flat?
3	 We haven’t got a lot of work today.
4	 Has your sister got a boyfriend?
5	 Roger and Val have got a beautiful garden.
6	 I have got a really good teacher.
7	 My brother hasn’t got a job at the moment.
8	 They’ve got the same colour eyes.
9	 Have we got a meeting today?
10	 He hasn’t got many friends at work.
b	
1	 I haven’t got my umbrella today.
2	 Has your phone got a good camera?
3	 I’ve got a new iPad.
4	 Sorry kids, I haven’t got enough money to buy sweets.
5	 Jane has got 50 pairs of shoes – can you believe it?
6	 I can’t call him now – I haven’t got a signal on my phone.
7	 Have you got your keys?
8	 ’Maria’s so lucky – she's got lovely curly hair.
9	 Have you got any qualifications?
10	 We might have problems getting there because we  
haven’t got satnav in our car.
e 7.24
I've got a brother and two sisters. 
I haven't got any pets. 
She's got a beautiful house. 
He hasn't got many friends. 
Have they got any children? 
No they haven't. 
Has the hotel got a swimming pool?
Yes, it has. 
d	 Focus on the instructions and the example. Put Sts in 
pairs. 
	 Monitor and help, making sure Sts use have got correctly.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts to add two more possessions to ask 
their partner about.
e	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
f	 e 7.25  Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  meal    ​2  good    ​3  glad    ​4  should    ​5  sure    ​6  great
e 7.25
1	 That was a lovely meal.
2	 That isn’t very good for you. 
3	 I’m glad you’re feeling better. 
4	 I think I should get back to the hotel now.
5	 I’m sure I’ll be fine. 
6	 Thanks again for a great evening.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase, for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
g	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    ​B  1    ​C  4    ​D  5    ​E  2    ​F  6
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 106@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
8A
106
 G 	 should
 V 	 get: get angry, get lost, etc.
 P 	 /ʊ/ and /uː/
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn to use should / shouldn’t for giving 
advice. The lesson begins with Sts reading a problem 
which was sent to a newspaper ‘problem page’  by a young 
woman wanting advice, and listening to the advice given. 
This leads into the grammar presentation, which is followed 
by a pronunciation focus on the /ʊ/ and /uː/ sounds. Then 
there is a speaking and listening activity where Sts listen to 
a radio phone-in programme and discuss the advice that 
is given to three callers. Finally, Vocabulary and Speaking 
focuses on different meanings of get, which are recycled in a 
questionnaire. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  should / shouldn't p.193 
Vocabulary  get p.267 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  I need some advice p.238  
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  8A
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board I NEED SOME ADVICE. Ask Sts what they 
think advice means, and also elicit that it is a noun, and that 
the verb is advise. Point out that the verb is /ədˈvaɪz/ and 
the noun is /ədˈvaɪs/. Tell Sts that advice is uncountable in 
English – it can’t be used with an or in the plural, e.g.  
My sister usually gives me good advice. NOT a good advice or 
good advices.
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding 	
	 opinions
a	 Books open. Focus on the question and give Sts a couple 
of minutes to discuss it in pairs or small groups.
	 Get feedback from the class. Elicit also the idea of 
contacting a radio programme or a magazine / online 
problem page. Find out from the class what they think of 
these more impersonal options, and ask if Sts think this is 
better than asking a family member or friend.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what an advice column is. 
	 Get Sts to read the problem and then, with a partner, 
discuss which they think is the best advice.
	 Elicit some opinions. You could write the majority class 
opinion on the board before they listen. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the problem and advice, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts discuss the advice, ask a few 
questions to make sure they have understood the problem, 
e.g. How big is the age difference? How long have they been 
together? Does she get on with his children?, etc.
c	 e 8.1  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to Tracey 
reading Graham Norton’s advice and they must see which 
piece of advice in b he suggests.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer and elicit why.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
b: She should think hard about what kind of man she 
really wants to be with before making a decision.
e 8.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
Hi, Tracey. You know the answer to your last question, and it's ‘yes’. 
You're making your life more difficult. But it’s also true that having 
a long-term relationship with anyone is difficult, and in your case, 
you can at least see what some of the problems are. I’m sure this 
man loves you and will support you in all your goals in life, but it’s 
true that he's already done all the things you want to do. It’s not his 
fault, but it means that he'll never get as excited as you about, for 
example, a wedding or having another child. And everything you 
experience together he'll probably compare to the last time he did 
it. You should think carefully about what kind of partner you really 
want: someone who can support you and show you the way in life, 
or someone who will discover life with you. You shouldn’t make a 
decision in a hurry. When you're clearer about what you want, then 
you can decide if you're going to stay with this man or not. Good 
luck!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
	8A	 Should I stay or should I go?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 107@@
8A
107
3	PRONUNCIATION  /ʊ/ and /uː/
Pronunciation notes
should (like would and could) is often mispronounced, 
partly because of the silent l, but also because ou is not 
normally pronounced /ʊ/. 
The focus on /ʊ/ and /uː/ will give Sts further practice of 
/ʊ/ and contrast it with the long /uː/. It is worth pointing 
out to Sts that one of the main problems with these two 
sounds is words with oo, which can be pronounced either 
way, e.g. good /ɡʊd/ and food /fuːd/. There is no rule, so 
Sts need to learn each word as it comes up.
a	 e 8.3  Focus on the instructions and questions.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the sounds 
and words. 
e 8.3
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.62
	 Ask the class the first question.
/ʊ/ is short; /uː/ is long.
	 Now ask the second question.
The l isn’t pronounced in should and would.
	 Finally, play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 8.4   Tell Sts to put the words in the correct row. 
Remind them that this kind of exercise is easier to do if 
they say the words aloud.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.4
bull /ʊ/  book, could, look, pull, push
boot /uː/  cool, flew, food, lose, shoes, school
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before putting Sts in pairs, read each 
sentence aloud and get Sts to listen and repeat.
2	GRAMMAR  should
a	 Tell Sts to look at the three sentences and answer 
questions 1–3.
	 Check answers.
1	 b
2	 No
3	 Add not / n’t for negatives; Should + subject + infinitive for 
questions.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.140. 
Grammar notes
should does not usually cause problems, as it has a clearly 
defined use and the form is simple. Remind Sts to use the 
infinitive without to after should.
The main problem with should is the pronunciation,  
i.e. the silent l (see Pronunciation notes in 3).
	 e 8.2   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the ought to box and go through it with 
the class. 
	 Then focus on the exercises for 8A on p.141. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 You shouldn’t work really long hours every day.
2	 You should stop smoking.
3	 You should eat more fruit and vegetables.
4	 You shouldn’t put so much sugar in your coffee.​
5	 You should start doing some exercise.
6	 You should drink less alcohol.
7	 You should drink more water.
8	 You shouldn’t go to bed so late.
b	
1	 You should wear a scarf.
2	 I should study this afternoon.
3	 You should book a holiday.
4	 You shouldn’t be at work.
5	 She should relax more.
6	 You shouldn’t drive so fast – this road’s very dangerous.
7	 Parents should spend more time with their children.
8	 You shouldn’t buy him an iPad – he’s only seven years old.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the instructions and quickly go through the 
WhatsApp messages to make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis, e.g. it’s driving me mad, etc.
	 Give Sts time to write a short answer to each message. Tell 
them to write between 10 and 20 words for each answer.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary while Sts are writing.
	 Put Sts in small groups and get them to read their advice 
for each problem. They should then choose the best piece 
of advice.
	 Get feedback from each group by eliciting the best piece 
of advice they chose for each problem.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 108@@
8A
108
e 8.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
A = Annabel, P = Peter, E = expert
E	 You know, to be honest, I think you’re being a bit hard on him. 
I mean, he’s only twenty-five. It’s good that he has a job, and 
everybody needs a holiday. My advice is that you should let him 
go to Mexico, but when he comes back, you should sit down 
with him and talk to him about starting to pay rent. That way he’ll 
understand that he needs to start planning for the future and 
to start thinking about renting a flat. But I know from talking to 
other parents that there are a lot of young people still living at 
home in their twenties and thirties, and some of them don’t even 
have jobs. So in many ways, I think you’re lucky.
A	 You see? That’s just what I think…
e	 e 8.7  8.8  Tell Sts they are going to hear another caller, 
Nick. They should follow the same steps as for Annabel 
and Peter, i.e. predict the problem, then listen and check 
and make notes, decide which advice they think is best, 
and then listen to the advice and see what they think of it.
Nick’s girlfriend wants to move to London to get a better job, 
but he has a good job and doesn’t know if he should follow her 
or not.
e 8.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
N = Nick, E = expert
N	 Hi there. I’m Nick.
E	 Hi, Nick. So what’s your problem?
N	 Well, I’ve been with my girlfriend for three years. We have a really 
great relationship although we’re quite different. She’s clever and 
popular, and I’m, er, quiet and hard-working. Anyway, now she 
wants to move to London because she thinks she can get a better 
job there, and she wants me to go to London, too – you know, 
London’s much more exciting than Bolton, where we live now. 
But I have a good job in Bolton and I get a good salary. I mean, 
the idea of moving and having a new life is like a dream, but for 
me that’s what it is – I mean, it’s a dream; it isn’t real. What should 
I do? Should I follow my heart and move to London with her? Or 
should I stay here, where I know I have a good job, but possibly 
lose my girlfriend?
a – The expert’s advice is for Nick and his girlfriend to sit down 
and discuss their future. If they want the same thing, then Nick’s 
girlfriend should move to London and he can visit.
e 8.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
E	 I think you should sit down together and talk about your dreams 
for the future, and see if they are the same dreams. If they are, and 
you can see a future together, then the first thing is for her to look 
for a job in London. If she finds one, then maybe she can move 
there first, and you can go at weekends and see how you feel 
about life there. 
N	 Thanks a lot for that. I think that’s really good advice.
f	 e 8.9  8.10  Tell Sts they are going to hear a final caller, 
Jane. They follow the same steps as for Annabel and Peter, 
and Nick.
Jane has planned a holiday with her friend Susan and is really 
looking forward to it. However, Susan has now invited another 
friend, Angie. Jane doesn’t know Angie and doesn’t want to go 
on holiday with her.
4	SPEAKING & LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts that a–c are three different pieces of advice for a 
problem. They should read them and then, with a partner, 
decide what the problem is.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are right.
b	 e 8.5   Focus on the task and tell Sts they are going to 
listen to Annabel and Peter phoning a radio programme 
with their problem. They must listen and make notes 
about the problem. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Then play it 
again if necessary.
	 Check the answer and ask a few comprehension 
questions to make sure Sts understood the details of the 
problem. Find out how many Sts guessed correctly in a.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Their son, Jamie, wants to go on holiday to Mexico with some 
friends. Annabel and Peter, his parents, don’t think he should 
go. They think he should save his money, so he can get his own 
place to live.
e 8.5
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
A = Annabel, P = Peter, E = expert
A	 Hello. I’m Annabel.
P	 And I’m Peter.
E	 Hi there, Annabel and Peter. What’s your problem?
A	 We’ve got a son, Jamie, and he’s twenty-five. He’s a chef.
P	 But he still lives with us because he says it’s too expensive to rent 
a flat and he doesn’t earn enough money.
A	 He gives us some money every month for bills – not much, but a 
bit – and, you know, it’s nice to have him at home, but we think he 
needs to be more independent.
P	 Yes, absolutely.
A	 But last week he told us that he’s planning a two-week holiday to 
Mexico with his friends. I mean, it’s true that he works full-time 
and we know he needs a break, but we really think...
P	 Yes, we don’t think he should go on an expensive holiday when 
he doesn’t give us much money. We think he should save his 
money so that he can get his own place to live. Should we tell him 
that he can’t go to Mexico? 
c	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss which advice in a 
they think is the best.
	 Elicit some feedback and ask Sts to explain why they 
chose their advice.
d	 e 8.6  Now tell Sts they are going to listen to the expert’s 
advice. They must see if the expert gives the same advice 
that they chose in c and decide whether it is good advice. 
They should make notes, so they can then compare it to 
their advice. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Then play it 
again if necessary.
	 Check the answer first, then find out what Sts think of the 
advice, and if they have any other suggestions.
c – The expert’s advice is to let Jamie go on holiday, but talk to 
him about paying rent when he gets back.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 109@@
8A
109
e 8.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
J = Jane, E = expert
J	 Hello. My name’s Jane. 
E	 Hi, Jane. So, why are you calling?
J	 Well, a month ago, my friend Susan and I decided to go on 
holiday together this summer, to Turkey. So we planned 
everything and, er, I was really looking forward to it, as Susan’s 
an old friend and I don’t see her very often. But the other day, 
she told me that she was telling another friend of hers about 
our holiday – somebody I don’t know, a woman called Angie – 
and Angie was really interested, and now Susan has invited 
her to come, too. Susan never asked me what I thought! I don’t 
even know Angie, and I really don’t want to go on holiday with 
someone I don’t know. What should I do?
b – The expert’s advice is to try to get to know Angie first. If 
Miriam likes her, then the holiday will be a success. If not, then 
she should tell her friend Susan she isn’t going.
e 8.10
(script in Student’s Book on pp.123–124)
E	 I think your friend has been a bit insensitive, and she’s put you in a 
difficult position. You have several different options. You could say 
that you aren’t going if Angie goes, but then you’ll put Susan in 
a difficult position. Or you could just cancel, and suggest having 
another holiday later, with just the two of you. Or you could invite 
someone else who you like, and then there would be four of you, 
which is sometimes a better number than three. But in fact, you 
don’t know Angie, and maybe you’ll like her. So I think you should 
try to get to know her first. If you like her, then the holiday will 
probably be a success. If not, then you should tell your friend you 
aren’t going because you don’t think it will work with Angie. You 
know, a bad holiday is worse than no holiday.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on pp.123–124, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
5	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  get
a	 Focus on the instructions, the three sentences, and the 
meanings. 
	 Get Sts to match them and then compare with a partner. 
	 Check answers.
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  b
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank get on p.159.
Vocabulary notes
Get is one of the most common verbs in English, mainly 
because it has many different meanings and there are also 
many phrasal verbs with get. It’s important for Sts to be 
clear about the four main meanings (become, buy / obtain, 
arrive, and receive) and to begin learning some of the most 
common phrasal verbs.
When focusing on the first become section, highlight the 
difference between be angry / divorced, etc. and get angry / 
divorced, etc.
Highlight the different phrasal verbs for cars (get into / out 
of  ) and public transport, e.g. buses, planes, and trains (get 
on / off  ).
	 Focus on the get box and go through it with the class. 
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Many of these 
words / phrases may already be familiar to them. 
	 e 8.11  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.11
7	 get angry
3	 get divorced
5	 get fit
4	 get lost
2	 get married
1	 get nervous
6	 get ready
9	 get better / get worse
8	 get colder
11	 get a job
12	 get a newspaper
10	 get a ticket
16	 get into a car
15	 get on a bus a bus
13	 get on with somebody
14	 get up
18	 get home
19	 get to school
17	 get to work
21	 get an email
20	 get a present
22	 get a prize
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
	 Finally, do Activation and get Sts to cover the phrases 
and look at the pictures. They can test themselves or a 
partner.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the questionnaire and go through the questions. 
Get Sts to ask you one or two of the questions. 
	 Then get Sts to ask and answer in pairs. 
	 Monitor and help, making sure they are using get 
correctly.
	 Get feedback from a few pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 110@@
110
8B
 G 	 if + present, will + infinitive (first conditional)
 V 	 confusing verbs: carry, wear, win, earn, etc.
 P 	 homophones
Lesson plan
This lesson presents the first conditional through the 
humorous context of ‘Murphy’s Law’, which states that 
if something bad can happen, it will happen. The lesson 
begins with a reading text about the origins of Murphy’s Law 
and Sts try to match two halves of some common examples. 
This leads into the grammar presentation of the first 
conditional, which is followed by a listening activity in which 
Sts hear two true stories about real examples of Murphy’s 
Law. The vocabulary and speaking focus is on verbs which 
are often confused, like know / meet and borrow / lend, 
which are practised in a questionnaire. The lesson ends with 
a pronunciation focus on homophones, e.g. wear – where, 
write – right, etc.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  if + present, will + infinitive (first 
conditional) p.194 
Vocabulary  Confusing verbs p.268 (instructions p.255) 
Communicative  Conditionals race p.239  
(instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  8B
Online Practice  8B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write MURPHY’S LAW on the board and elicit from the class 
anything they know about it. Try to elicit a concrete example 
of one of Murphy’s laws. If the class don’t seem to have 
much idea, you could ask them What always happens if you 
drop a piece of bread or toast on the floor? Which way does 
it fall? (with the buttered side on the floor). You could use 
mime to help make this clear. 
1	READING
a	 Books open. Focus on the question. Sts will probably 
try to express that the queue they were in before will 
move faster. 
b	 Focus on the article and tell Sts to read the two 
paragraphs (up to where the examples start). Give Sts 
a few minutes to read and answer the questions. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Murphy was an American aerospace engineer.
His 'Law' is ‘if there is something that can go wrong, it will 
go wrong.’
c	 Give Sts time to read the examples of Murphy’s Law (1–8) 
and to match them to the correct endings A–H.
	 Check answers. 
1  D    ​2  H    ​3  B    ​4  C    ​5  A    ​6  F    ​7  E    ​8  G
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 In pairs, small groups, or as a whole class, Sts answer the 
question. 
	 If Sts worked in pairs or small groups, get some feedback.
You could tell Sts if these things happen to you.
2	GRAMMAR  if + present, will + infinitive
a	 In pairs, Sts cover A–H in 1c and try to remember the 
laws, using the first half of the sentences in the article as 
prompts.
b	 Now tell Sts to focus on the full sentences and to decide 
which structures are used in both parts.
	 Check answers and explain that sentences with if are 
often called conditional sentences, and that this structure 
(a sentence with if + present, future) is often called the first 
conditional.
The verb after if is in the present simple and the other verb is in 
the future (will / won’t + infinitive). 
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.140. 
Grammar notes
Since first conditional sentences refer to future 
possibilities, some Sts may try to use the future after if.  
A typical mistake is: If he’ll phone, I’ll tell him.
The present simple is also used after when, rather than 
will, e.g. I’ll tell him when he arrives. You may want to point 
this out in this lesson.
	 e 8.12  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 8B on p.141. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  D    ​2  G    ​3  E    ​4  F    ​5  A    ​6  B
b	 
1	 If you tell me what really happened, I won’t tell anybody else.
2	 If I don’t write it down, I won’t remember it.
3	 Will you call me if you get any news?
4	 She’ll help you if you ask her nicely.
5	 I’ll phone you if I hear from Alex.
6	 You’ll miss your friends if you move to Paris.
7	 If you listen carefully, you’ll understand everything.
8	 Your boss won’t be pleased if you are late for work today.
9	 I’ll drive you home if you give me directions.
10	If you don’t take an umbrella, it’ll rain!
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
	8B	 Murphy’s Law
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 111@@
111
8B
Peter waited four months for a job interview, but when the 
phone call finally came for an interview, the call got cut off.
Sue got up early for a trip to see a tiger, but didn’t see one. 
However, other people who went on a trip to see birds saw 
the tiger.
e 8.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
Peter wanted to get a job
I did maths at university and normally, after doing maths at 
university, people get a job in a bank or in IT, but when I finished 
it was the recession and it was very difficult to get a job. I was 
unemployed for quite a long time. I was looking for jobs, and I 
applied for lots of different jobs, but they just answered, ‘Sorry, we 
don’t want you,’ and I was getting a bit depressed. This went on for 
about four months, and then one day, I was on a number forty-nine 
bus in London – I can even remember where I was sitting – and my 
phone rang. I said, 'Hello' and a woman said, ‘Hello, you applied for 
a job with us a few months ago. Are you still interested?’ So I said, 
‘Yes, absolutely. I’m very interested.’ So then she said, ‘We’d like you 
to come for an interview’...and then, at that moment, we got cut 
off because the bus went into a tunnel. And the phone number 
wasn’t on my phone – it just said ‘unknown number’, and I couldn’t 
remember what the name of the company was because I’d applied 
for so many jobs. So I thought, ‘Four months of nothing, and then 
when they ring, I get cut off.’ Luckily, they called back the next day, 
and in the end, I had an interview and I got the job.
Sue wanted to see a tiger
This happened when I was at a conference in Thailand. The 
conference hotel was amazing – it was in a beautiful national park 
called Khao Yai, north of Bangkok. We were very busy with talks 
and meetings most of the time, but we had one free morning, and 
we could choose from different trips or activities. I was interested 
in either a trip to see birds or a trip to see a tiger. A tiger, not tigers, 
because they told us that there was only one tiger in the whole 
park! Well, I chose the tiger trip, because I thought it would be really 
cool to see a tiger in the wild. But we had to leave really early in the 
morning because we had to travel quite a long way to the part of the 
park where the tiger usually was – the bird trip was nearer the hotel. 
So we tiger-watchers got up at five in the morning, but our guide 
said that we probably wouldn’t see the tiger because, you know, 
there was only one tiger. We finally got there and we spent the 
whole morning looking for the tiger, but no luck. But we saw some 
nice birds, and it was fun, so when we got back to the conference 
hotel, we felt we’d had a really good morning. But then the other 
group got back – the ones who went to see the birds – and of course 
they saw lots of amazing birds, but they also saw the tiger! I suppose 
that day, it wasn’t in its usual part of the park. And I thought, ‘Isn’t 
that typical – you go on the tiger trip and you don’t see the tiger, but 
the people on the bird trip see the tiger!’
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–6. 
	 Play the audio, pausing at the end of Peter’s story. Give 
Sts time to mark 1–3 T or F and then play Sue’s story. Then 
give Sts time to do the same with 4–6 T or F. Remind them 
that they need to correct the F sentences.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen again.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the prompts for Sts to make new ‘Murphy’s Laws’. 
Highlight that there is not one correct answer. Remind Sts 
of the original 'Law': If there is something that can go wrong, 
it will go wrong.
	 While Sts complete their laws in pairs, monitor and help 
with vocabulary and spelling. You may want to teach the 
verb spill.
e	 Put Sts in small groups or get them to stand up and move 
around, and get them to read their ‘laws’ to each other.
	 Get feedback and write the ‘laws’ on the board. Accept all 
logical endings. 
Possible endings
1	 they won’t have your size
2	 you won’t find / see one
3	 you’ll spill tomato sauce / red wine on it
4	 you’ll get / miss an important call
5	 your team / someone will score a goal
3	LISTENING  understanding an anecdote
a	 e 8.13  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the task.
	 Check answers.
1  recession    ​2  applied for    ​3  got cut off    ​4  either, or    
5  in the wild    ​6  the whole morning
e 8.13
1	 It was the recession and it was very difficult to get a job.
2	 I applied for lots of different jobs.
3	 We got cut off because the bus went into a tunnel.
4	 I was interested in either a trip to see birds or a trip to see a tiger.
5	 I thought it would be really cool to see a tiger in the wild.
6	 We spent the whole morning looking for the tiger.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss what they 
think the words and phrases they circled mean.
	 Check answers. Model and drill pronunciation.
1	 recession = a difficult time for the economy of a country
2	 applied for = sent applications and CVs to possible employers
3	 got cut off = lost phone connection
4	 either, or = one of two options
5	 in the wild = in its natural state
6	 the whole = all of
b	 e 8.14   Tell Sts they are now going to listen to both 
Peter’s and Sue’s stories. They must decide why they are 
examples of Murphy’s Law.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. You could 
pause it after Peter’s story to give Sts time to complete 
the task.
	 Check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 112@@
112
8B
•	 look / look like:
	
We use look + adjective, e.g. You look tired.
	
We use look like + a noun, e.g. You look like Brad Pitt.
•	 miss / lose:
	
You miss a class, a bus, a plane (e.g. if you are late / ill).
	
You lose a sports match or lose an object, e.g. your keys.
•	 bring / take:
	
This depends on where the speaker is. The teacher 
(at school) says: Don’t forget to bring your book to class 
tomorrow. The student (at home) says: I must remember 
to take my book today.
•	 look for / find:
	
Look for is the action of trying to locate something you 
have lost or need, e.g. I’m looking for a new job. 
	
Find is used when you have located it, e.g. I have found a 
new job.
•	 say / tell:
	
Say is used like this:
	
Jack said, ‘Hello.’
	
Jack said hello to me yesterday.
	
Susan told a lie.
	
Susan told me a lie.
•	 lend / borrow:
	
I lent my brother some money.
	
My brother borrowed some money from me.
•	 hear / listen to:
	
hear = be aware of sounds in your ears, e.g. I heard the 
baby next door crying.
	
listen to = to pay attention to sb / sth that you can hear, 
e.g. I listen to the news on the radio every morning.
	 e 8.15  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.15
Confusing verbs
2	 wear jewellery, wear clothes, carry a bag, carry a baby
8	 win a match, win a medal, win a prize, earn a salary, earn money
5	 know somebody well, know something, meet somebody for the 
first time, meet at eleven o'clock
1	 hope that something good will happen, hope to do something, 
wait for a bus, wait for a long time
3	 watch TV, watch a match, look at a photo, look at a view
11	 look happy, look about twenty-five years old, look like your 
mother, look like a model
4	 miss the bus, miss a class, lose a match, lose your glasses
9	 bring your dictionary, bring something back from holiday,  
take an umbrella, take your children to school
6	 look for your glasses, look for a job, find your glasses, find a job
10	 say sorry, say hello, say something to somebody, tell a joke,  
tell a lie, tell somebody something
7	 lend money to somebody, borrow money from somebody
12	 hear a noise, hear the door bell, listen to music, listen to the radio
	
1	 F (Peter did maths at university.)
2	 T
3	 F (Peter couldn’t call them back because his phone said 
‘unknown number’.)
4	 T
5	 F (The guide wasn’t optimistic about seeing the tiger.)
6	 F (Sue enjoyed her trip.)
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could also tell Sts 
what you think, and tell any Murphy’s Law stories that you 
can think of.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  confusing verbs
a	 Focus on the question and elicit answers from the class. 
1  looking for    ​2  told
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Confusing verbs on 
p.160 and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Many of 
these words / phrases may already be familiar to them. 
Vocabulary notes
Some of these verbs are often confused because in some 
Sts’ L1, one verb may be used for both meanings. Use the 
notes below to help clarify where necessary. Encourage 
Sts to learn the verbs in a phrase, e.g. know someone well, 
meet someone for the first time, etc.
•	 wear / carry:
	 You wear clothes or jewellery, i.e. have it on your body, 
e.g. I wear glasses to read.
	 You carry something heavy and take it from one place 
to another, e.g. He was carrying a suitcase.
•	 win / earn:
	 You win a sports match, something in a competition, 
the lottery, etc.
	 You earn money when you work.
•	 know / meet:
	
know a person = you have met and seen this person 
before 
	
meet a person = to get to know somebody for the first 
time, e.g. Nice to meet you, or to arrange to be with a 
person in a certain place / at a certain time, e.g. Let’s 
meet in the café at 6.30.
•	 hope / wait:
	
hope = what you want to happen, e.g. I hope that it’s 
sunny tomorrow.
	
wait = sit / stand and do nothing until something 
happens, e.g. wait for the doctor
•	 watch / look at:
	
You watch something where there is movement, e.g. 
We watched a cricket match in the park, We watched the 
children playing. 
	
You look at something static, e.g. a photo, somebody’s 
passport
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 113@@
113
8B
e 8.16
1	 a  What are you going to wear tonight?
	
b  A  Where are you from?
	
    B  I’m from Warsaw.
2	 a  I don’t know what to do.
	
b  There’s no milk in the fridge!
3	 a  Hi. Nice to meet you.
	
b  Do you want meat or fish?
4	 a  The maximum weight for hand luggage is ten kilos.
	
b  I’m coming! Wait for me!
5	 a  Please write soon.
	
b  Is it on the left or on the right?
6	 a  There’s only one ticket left.
	
b  Brazil won the match five–one.
7	 a  I can’t see the board!
	
b  I love swimming in the sea.
8	 a  Have you ever read War and Peace?
	
b  It was cold, so she wore a coat.
b	 e 8.17  Tell Sts they are going to hear four sentences and 
they must write them down. The first time, tell them just 
to listen, not to write. 
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board and 
getting Sts to spell the homophones in each sentence.
e 8.17
1	 I can see the sea from here.
2	 I write with my right hand.
3	 He won one game.
4	 I know there’s no hope.
	 Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen and repeat 
the sentences and copy the rhythm.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the hope and expect and bring and take box 
and go through it with the class. 
	 Finally, get Sts to do Activation in pairs. A says a verb and 
B a continuation, and then they swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Get Sts to read questions 1–10 and circle the correct verb 
in each one. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  look like    ​2  missed    ​3  listening to    ​4  earn    ​5  meet    ​
6  tell    ​7  lent    ​8  looking for    ​9  wear    ​10  watch
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
5	PRONUNCIATION  homophones
EXTRA IDEA   You could introduce the concept of 
homophones by dictating individual words, like here, where, 
no, etc. Then get Sts, in pairs, to compare how they’ve 
spelled them. Finally, elicit some of the words onto the 
board and explain that both words, e.g. here and hear, are 
pronounced exactly the same.
a	 e 8.16  Focus on the Homophones box and go through 
it with the class, stressing that the pronunciation of the 
words is identical.
	 Give Sts time to quickly read 1–8. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each b sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Check answers by eliciting the words onto the board, 
getting Sts to spell them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Pause the audio after the first one, and 
elicit the answer to check Sts know what they have to do.
1  Where    ​2  no    ​3  meat    ​4  Wait    ​5  right    ​6  won    ​7  sea    ​
8  wore
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 114@@
114
8C
 G 	 possessive pronouns
 V 	 adverbs of manner: dreamily, completely, etc.
 P 	 reading aloud
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is a short story by the famous 
American writer O. Henry (1862–1910), which has a 
characteristic ‘twist’ at the end.
Sts read and listen to the first part of the story and then 
practise reading aloud with good sentence rhythm in 
Pronunciation. Examples taken from the story lead into the 
grammar focus on possessive pronouns. Then Sts watch or 
listen to both the first two parts. Parts 3 and 4 are dramatized 
in video listening. Finally, there is a vocabulary and writing 
focus on using adverbs of manner. 
This lesson provides a good opportunity to remind Sts of 
the value of reading Graded Readers (sometimes called 
Easy Readers) in English. Reading Graded Readers helps 
to consolidate what Sts already know and to build their 
vocabulary. Some Graded Readers also have accompanying 
audio and some are available as e-books, which can be 
used to help to improve Sts’ listening comprehension and 
pronunciation. You could recommend the Oxford Bookworm 
series level 2, which has a selection of other O. Henry stories 
in a book called New Yorkers.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  possessive pronouns p.195 
Communicative  Reading questionnaire p.240 
(instructions p.213)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Girl
For students
Workbook  8C
Online Practice  8C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write this question on the board and get Sts to ask each 
other in pairs: 
WHICH OF THESE THINGS DO YOU READ IN ENGLISH?
•  SCHOOL OR UNIVERSITY TEXTBOOKS      •  WEBSITES
•  VIDEO OR COMPUTER GAME INSTRUCTIONS      •  SONG LYRICS
•  GRADED READERS      •  ANYTHING ELSE
Remind Sts that Graded Readers are books which are 
written in simple language, using grammar and vocabulary 
according to level. 
Get feedback from the class and use this opportunity to 
stress the importance of reading in English outside class. If 
you haven’t already done so, draw Sts’ attention to Graded 
Readers, particularly if your school has a library. If not, you 
could consider starting a class library by getting Sts to buy 
one book each and then swapping the books among all the 
Sts in the class. You could also have a wallchart recording the 
books Sts have read and a brief comment or score.
1	READING  understanding a story
a	 Books open. Focus on the task and tell Sts to look at the all 
the photos in the lesson. Elicit answers from the class.
Suggested answer: I think the story takes place in the 19th 
century, because of the costumes. 
b	 e 8.18  Tell Sts they are going to read and listen to an 
extract from Girl by O. Henry. You might want to tell them 
that his real name was William Sydney Porter (1862–1910) 
and that he was a famous American author.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through while Sts 
follow Part 1 of the story. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story, check whether 
you want to pre-teach any vocabulary.
e 8.18
See Part 1 in Student’s Book on p.66
	 Then give Sts time to read Part 1 again without the audio. 
In pairs, Sts answer questions 1–4 and the Think about the 
story so far question. 
	 Check answers to 1–4 and elicit ideas for Think about the 
story so far.
1	 He gave Hartley Vivienne’s address. He offered to follow her.
2	 He left the detective’s office and went to find where Vivienne 
lived.
3	 She looked about 21, her hair was red gold, and her eyes sea-
blue.
4	 Because she didn’t answer his letter.
c	 e 8.19  Before telling Sts to read and listen to Part 2, go 
through the Glossary on p.67 with them. 
	 Then play the audio once the whole way through while 
Sts read Part 2 of the story.
e 8.19
See Part 2 in Student’s Book on p.67
	
	8C	 Who is Vivienne?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 115@@
115
8C
b	 e 8.21  Play the audio, pausing after each name for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
e 8.21
See names in Student’s Book on p.67
c	 Focus on the Reading aloud box and go through it with 
the class. 
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Then focus on the instructions. 
Remind Sts that they need to pay attention to the 
adverbs, e.g. slowly, etc. as they read. They also need to 
stress words which should be stressed and to pause 
momentarily when there is a comma.
	 Give Sts time, in pairs, to read their section of Part 2 of 
the story. 
EXTRA IDEA   If you think your Sts would enjoy it, you could 
put them in groups of three, with one student playing 
Hartley, one Vivienne, and one being the narrator, as they 
heard on the audio. When they have finished, get a group to 
perform in front of the class.
3	GRAMMAR  possessive pronouns
a	 Tell Sts to look at the two sentences from the story, and to 
complete the gaps.
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts what the difference 
between the two words is (my = possessive adjective and 
mine = possessive pronoun).
1  my    ​2  mine
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8C on p.140. 
Grammar notes
Sts will probably need reminding of how possessive 
adjectives (my, your, his, etc.) are used, and in particular, 
how they agree with the subject of a sentence, not the 
object (e.g. Jack helps his sister a lot. NOT Jack helps her 
sister a lot.) and how they never change (e.g. your books 
NOT yours books).
When Sts learn possessive pronouns, e.g. These are yours / 
hers / ours, they may then tend to start adding an s to 
possessive adjectives.
	 e 8.22   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 8C on p.141. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Now give Sts time to read Part 2 again without the audio. 
In pairs, Sts answer questions 1–5 and the Think about the 
story so far question. 
	 Check answers to 1–4, elicit ideas for 5 and Think about the 
story so far.
!   At this stage of the story, Sts will probably assume that 
Hartley is in love with Vivienne and wants her to come and 
live with him. They will also probably imagine that Héloise is 
his wife. Don’t confirm or reject these assumptions.
1	 She doesn’t think she would enjoy living in the suburbs.
2	 He told her she could come to the city whenever she wants.
3	 At the Montgomerys’.
4	 Because she has someone else.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
2	PRONUNCIATION  reading aloud
Pronunciation notes
Reading aloud in class is an activity which divides 
teachers. Some feel that it can give Sts valuable 
pronunciation practice, while others find it painful. We 
believe that in small doses, it can be helpful to improve 
Sts’ awareness of word and sentence rhythm. However, 
we believe that reading aloud needs to be focused, 
with short pieces of text which all Sts can work on (with 
teacher correction). This can be much more effective than 
just getting Sts to read a text aloud around the class, with 
each person reading a different sentence. 
a	 e 8.20  Focus on the task and on the last four lines of the 
story on p.67 (from “Vivienne,” said Hartley masterfully to 
the end). Get Sts to read the two questions, and then play 
the audio.
	 Check answers.
a  punctuation    ​b  the adverbs, i.e. masterfully, calmly
e 8.20
H = Hartley, N = narrator, V = Vivienne
H	 Vivienne…
N	 …said Hartley, masterfully.'
H	 You must be mine.
N	 Vivienne looked him in the eye.
V	 Do you think for one moment…
N	 …she said calmly…
V	 …that I could come to your home while Héloise is there?
	 Play the extract again and ask Sts to focus on the rhythm 
of the sentences, and how the speaker pauses.
	 Now give Sts a few moments to read the text aloud 
(quietly) to themselves. Tell them to try to get the correct 
rhythm, to pause momentarily when there is a comma, 
and to read the two lines with adverbs (masterfully and 
calmly) in the appropriate way.
	 Then choose a couple of Sts to read the text aloud to the 
class with good rhythm, correcting them as necessary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 116@@
116
8C
e 8.24
H = Hartley, N = narrator, V = Vivienne
Part 3
H	 Héloise will go. 
H	 I haven’t had one day without problems since I met her. You're 
right, Vivienne. Héloise must go before I can take you home. But 
she will go. I've decided…
V	 Then…my answer is yes. I will be yours.
H	 Promise me.
V	 I promise.
H	 I will come for you tomorrow.
V	 Tomorrow. 
N	 An hour and forty minutes later, Hartley stepped off the train when 
it stopped in the suburbs. He walked to his house, went inside and 
walked up the stairs. 
c	 e 8.25  Now tell Sts they are going to watch or listen to 
Part 4 of the story and they must answer questions 1–3.
	 Play Part 4 of the video / audio once the whole way 
through. Then play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Hartley’s wife    ​2  The Montgomerys’ cook    ​3  Hartley’s cook
e 8.25
HW = Hartley’s wife, H = Hartley
Part 4
HW	 My mother's here. But she’s leaving in half an hour. She came to 	
	 have dinner, but there’s nothing to eat.
H	 	 I have something to tell you.
HW	 Oh, Mother!
HW	 What do you think? Vivienne is coming to be our cook! She 
is the cook that was with the Montgomerys. She’s going to 
be ours! And now, dear…you must go to the kitchen and tell 
Héloise to leave. She's been drunk again all day.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell Sts your 
reaction the first time you read the story.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  my    ​2  yours    ​3  ours    ​4  her    ​5  mine    ​6  their    ​7  theirs    ​
8  your    ​9  hers
b	
1	 Hers is a white Peugeot
2	 Maya has a new boyfriend, but I haven’t met him yet.
3	 Look. Here’s a photo of Alex and Kim with their new baby.
4	 We’ve finished paying for our house, so it’s ours now.
5	 Can you give Maria and Marta theirs?
6	 Can you tell us how to get to the station?
7	 Would you like to see our garden?
8	 London is famous for its beautiful parks.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 8.23  Focus on the instructions and the example. 
Tell Sts they are going to listen to seven sentences, and 
each time, they must change the object for a possessive 
pronoun. 
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
make the transformation. 
e 8.23
1	 It’s my book. (pause) It’s mine.
2	 It’s her scarf. (pause) It’s hers.
3	 They’re our coats. (pause) They’re ours.
4	 It’s his bike. (pause) It’s his.
5	 It’s your phone. (pause) It’s yours.
6	 It’s their house. (pause) It’s theirs.
7	 They’re your sweets. (pause) They’re yours.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
4	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 e 8.18  8.19  Tell Sts to close their books and watch or 
listen to Parts 1 and 2 of the story again.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through.
e 8.18  8.19
See Part 1 and Part 2 in Student’s Book on pp.66–67
b	 e 8.24  Tell Sts they are going to watch or listen to Part 3 
of the story and they must answer two questions and the 
Think about the story so far question. 
	 Play Part 3 of the video / audio once the whole way 
through. Then play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers to 1 and 2. Elicit ideas for Think about the story so 
far, but don’t tell Sts if they are right yet.
1	 He said Héloise must go.
2	 She promised Hartley she would be his.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 117@@
117
8C
e 8.26
1	 I’m sorry, but I don’t love you.
2	 Give me back all my letters.
3	 I think...I have an idea.
4	 Don’t make a noise. Everyone is asleep.
5	 I don’t feel like doing anything.
6	 This is a very important matter.
d	 Focus on the task, and remind Sts that at the end of the 
story, Hartley’s wife tells him to tell the cook (Héloise) to 
leave. In pairs, give Sts, e.g. five minutes to write their short 
scene. Tell them that they should also include at least two 
adverbs in their dialogues after said. 
	 Get Sts to perform their dialogues in front of the class. You 
could get them to vote for the best ones.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get pairs to read their scenes to each 
other and see how similar they are.
5	VOCABULARY & WRITING  
	 adverbs of manner
Vocabulary notes
Some Sts at this level still have problems distinguishing 
between adjectives and adverbs.
If necessary, remind them that adverbs describe actions 
(verbs) and elicit the basic rules for the formation of 
adverbs:
Adjective
Adverb
quiet
quietly
add -ly
sadly
sadly
possible
possibly
change -ble to -bly
comfortable
comfortably
lazy
lazily
y add -ily
angry
angrily
good
well
irregular
fast
fast
hard
hard
a	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to underline 
six adverbs in Part 2.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Sts may underline the adverb well (line 39). You 
could also accept this as an answer.
dreamily (line 24)    ​slowly (line 25)    ​completely (line 35)    ​
suddenly (line 43)    ​masterfully (line 49)    ​calmly (line 51)
b	 Focus on the instructions and get Sts to make adverbs 
from the adjectives in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
angrily  lazily  quietly  sadly  seriously  slowly
c	 e 8.26  Get Sts to read sentences 1–6 and to think what 
the missing adverbs from b might be. 
	 Now play the audio the whole way through. Then play 
it again, pausing after each sentence for Sts to write an 
adverb to describe how the person is speaking.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  sadly    ​2  angrily    ​3  slowly    ​4  quietly    ​5  lazily    ​
6  seriously
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 118@@
118
Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  c    ​5  b    ​6  a    ​7  a    ​8  c    ​9  c    ​10  b    ​
11  a    ​12  b    ​13  b    ​14  c    ​15  b
VOCABULARY
a
1  meet    ​2  tell    ​3  miss    ​4  hope    ​5  wears 
b
1  forget    ​2  learn    ​3  feel like    ​4  promise    ​5  hate    ​6  mind  ​
7  enjoy    ​8  finish
c
1  with    ​2  in    ​3  of    ​4  at    ​5  for 
d
1  lost    ​2  home    ​3  better    ​4  tickets    ​5  on    ​6  divorced    ​ 
7  presents
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  choose /uː/    ​2  look /ʊ/    ​3  love /v/    ​4  doing /ŋ/    
5  know /n/ 
d
1  survive    ​2  happiness    ​3  afraid    ​4  pretend    ​5  borrow
CAN YOU understand this text?
a  1
b
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  f    ​4  e    ​5  b    ​6  d
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  c    ​5  a
e 8.27
1
I = interviewer, S = Susie
I	 What’s your idea of happiness?
S	 That’s a difficult question. Um, my idea of happiness is probably 
relaxing with friends in my home, listening to nice music, with 
lovely food for everyone.
2
I = interviewer, T = Tarquin
I	 What foreign languages do you speak?
T	 I speak French.
I	 How well do you speak it?
T	 Quite well. Not fluently, but well enough to get around.
3
I = interviewer, K = Katelyn
I	 If you have a problem, who do you ask for advice, friends or 
family?
K	 When I have a problem, I usually ask close friends for advice.
I	 Why?
K	 My parents are a lot older than me, so their advice is really great 
for certain things, but most of the things I’m going through right 
now, my friends are pretty good.
4
I = interviewer, J = Joseph
I	 What advice would you give someone who can’t sleep at night?
J	 If someone couldn’t sleep at night, I’d usually advise them to do 
something like meditation, so some kind of breathing exercises 
which would calm them down, um, and also just to be in an 
environment where they feel comfortable and safe I guess, rather 
than in an environment that stresses them out, maybe keep their 
phone out of the bedroom, or something like that.
5
I = interviewer, A = Alison
I	 Do you think the British are bad at learning languages?
A	 I think we do tend to be rather bad at learning languages.
I	 Why?
A	 I think we can be a bit lazy, because everybody else speaks 
English.
	7&8	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 119@@
119
 G   if + past, would + infinitive (second conditional)
 V   animals and insects: lion, tiger, goat, etc.
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
A survival quiz, where Sts have to choose what they would 
do in a variety of situations involving animals and insects, is 
the context for Sts to learn about the second conditional for 
hypothetical and imaginary situations. 
The lesson begins with Vocabulary. Sts learn the names of 
common animals, and Pronunciation focuses on how to 
pronounce the words for animals in English which may be 
similar in Sts’ own language. Next, Sts listen to an interview 
about the five most dangerous animals in the UK. This 
leads to Reading and Speaking, where Sts read and answer 
questions in a quiz and then find out if they have chosen 
the best option. Questions from the quiz are used to lead 
into Grammar, where the second conditional is analysed 
and practised. Finally, both the grammar and vocabulary are 
recycled and practised in Speaking.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  if + past, would + infinitive (second 
conditional) p.196 
Vocabulary  Animal quiz p.269 (instructions p.256) 
Communicative  I think you’d… p.241 (instructions p.213)
For students
Workbook  9A
Online Practice  9A
 OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Give Sts, in pairs, three minutes to brainstorm words they 
know for animals. 
Elicit answers, getting Sts to spell the words, and write them 
on the board. Elicit the correct pronunciation. You could also 
write the animals in columns, depending on whether they 
are wild animals, farm animals, insects, etc.
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
	 animals and insects; word stress
Vocabulary notes
Many animal words are similar in other languages, and 
Sts may not only have pronunciation problems, but also 
problems with spelling, e.g. crocodile in English is cocodrilo 
in Spanish.
a	 e 9.1  Books open. This listening consists only of sound 
effects. Play the audio, pausing after each sound for Sts to 
say or write the name of the animal.
	 Check answers. 
e 9.1
(sound effects of the following)
1	 chicken (or hen)    2  horse    3  monkey    4  snake    5  cat   
6	 dog    7  lion    8  bull
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Animals on p.161. 
Focus on the four headings and make sure Sts understand 
them. Model and drill the pronunciation of insects  
/ˈɪnsekts/ and wild /waɪld/.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 9.2  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 9.2
Animals
Insects
5  bee
2  butterfly
6  fly
1  mosquito
4  spider
3  wasp
Farm animals
8  bull
10  chicken
12  cow
7  goat
13  horse
11  pig
9  sheep
Wild animals
16  bat 
18  bear 
21  bird 
14  camel 
26  crocodile 
28  deer 
17  elephant 
15  giraffe 
22  kangaroo 
20  lion 
19  monkey 
23  mouse 
25  rabbit 
27  rat 
29  snake 
24  tiger
Sea animals
32  dolphin 
30  jellyfish 
33  shark 
31  whale
	 Either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Go through the bite and sting box with the class.
	 Finally, do Activation and get Sts to cover the words and 
look at the photos. They can test themselves or a partner.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the Stress in words that are similar in other 
languages box and go through it with the class.
	 Tell Sts to look at the animal words in the list and to 
underline the stress.
d	 e 9.3   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 9.3
camel    ​crocodile    ​dolphin    ​elephant    ​giraffe    ​kangaroo    ​ 
lion    ​mosquito
	9A	 Beware of the dog
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 120@@
120
D	 Wasps and bees. They cause more deaths in the UK than any 
other type of animal or insect. About five people a year die from 
bee or wasp stings, and it’s nearly always because they have an 
allergic reaction. About twenty-five per cent of the population 
in the UK have a bee or wasp allergy – some more serious than 
others. However, people are usually allergic to either bees or 
wasps, but not both. Bees and wasps only sting in self-defence or 
when they’re provoked, but wasps are more aggressive than bees. 
So if you ever see a wasp nest in your garden, make sure you call a 
professional to come and destroy it.
P	 Definitely. Well, David, that was certainly…
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again and 
this time they need to complete the facts in the charts 
with one or two words only. Go through the items in the 
chart, making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. by 
accident, weigh, etc. 
	 Give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to try to guess what 
the missing words might be.
	 Now play the audio again. You could pause it after each 
animal or insect is mentioned to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  one metre    ​2  step on    ​3  every year    ​4  walking dogs    ​
5  early summer    ​6  100 kilos    ​7  autumn    ​8  50,000    
9  Very few    ​10  their owners    ​11  five    ​12  Wasps    ​13  bees
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell Sts about 
your own experience if you have one.
3	READING & SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the list of animals, and elicit the pronunciation of 
each one.
	 Now focus on the instructions and the quiz. Tell Sts, in 
pairs, to just complete each gap in the questions with one 
of the animals or insects in the list. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts do the quiz, check whether you 
need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the highlighted 
verbs and verb phrases.
1  dog    ​2  bee, wasp    ​3  snake    ​4  cows    ​5  jellyfish    ​6  shark
b	 Focus on the highlighted verbs and verb phrases. Get 
Sts, in pairs, to guess their meaning. Tell them to read the 
whole sentence, as the context will help them guess.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, miming, 
translating into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their 
dictionaries.
	 If you are teaching a monolingual class, ask them if the 
stress is in the same place in their L1.
e	 Quickly go through questions 1–7, making sure Sts 
understand them.
	 Put Sts in pairs, and get them to ask and answer the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class by asking individual Sts 
for some of their answers.
2	LISTENING  understanding facts
a	 Focus on the pictures and the task.
	 Elicit some ideas for the most dangerous animal or insect 
and then the least dangerous. Don’t tell Sts if they are 
right.
b	 e 9.4   Focus on the chart in c, and tell Sts that as they 
listen and check their answers to a, they should write the 
names of the animals or insects in the headings. Tell them 
not to worry about the rest of the chart.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear the answers in an interview, 
but that the answers will be given in reverse order, i.e. the 
least dangerous of the five will be first. Play the audio for 
Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
5th  a snake (the adder)    4th  cows    3rd  red deer    2nd  dogs 
1st  wasps and bees
e 9.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
P = presenter, D = David
P	 So David, what are the five most dangerous animals in the UK? 
Can you tell us in reverse order – I mean, starting with the fifth 
most dangerous?
D	 Yes, of course. At number five is a snake: the adder. The adder 
is the only poisonous snake in the UK. They can be about one 
metre long and they’re quite common in some parts of the UK. 
They don’t normally attack people, except when people step on 
them by accident. A bite from an adder can be very painful, and, 
occasionally, can kill. However, the last death from an adder bite 
was more than forty years ago.
P	 And number four?
D	 The fourth most dangerous animals in the UK are cows. People 
think cows are slow and a bit stupid, but in fact, cows kill at least 
one person every year. However, nearly all attacks happen when 
people are walking dogs in a field of cows, and they usually 
happen in spring or early summer, when young cows are with 
their mothers. So that’s when you need to be careful.
P	 And third?
D	 In third place are red deer. These are large animals – they can 
weigh one hundred kilos. You need to be especially careful in the 
autumn, when the male deer can get very aggressive. They also 
cause frequent accidents on the road by running out in front of 
cars – there are about fifty thousand car accidents a year which 
involve deer. 
P	 And in second place?
D	 Dogs. They are responsible for around two hundred thousand 
attacks a year in the UK, although most of them aren’t serious, 
and very few actually cause death. Certain breeds of dog, like 
German shepherds, Rottweilers, and Pit Bulls, are more aggressive 
than others. One reason for this is that they were traditionally 
hunting dogs or guard dogs. Dog attacks can happen at any time, 
and some dogs even attack their owners.
P	 And in first place?
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 121@@
121
	 e 9.5   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the be in second conditionals box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 9A on p.143. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  E    ​2  D    ​3  C    ​4  F    ​5  G    ​6  B
b	 
1	 We would / could get a dog if we had a garden.​
2	 If you tried Indian food, I’m sure you’d like it.
3	 I wouldn’t buy it if I didn’t like it.​
4	 If we hired a car, we could drive to the mountains.​
5	 We’d see our children more often if they lived nearer.
6	 I wouldn’t go to that restaurant if I were you…​
7	 You’d learn more if you did more homework.​
8	 I’d cycle to work if the traffic wasn’t / weren’t so bad.​
9	 Would you work abroad if you found a well-paid job?​
10	 I wouldn’t be happy if I had to leave.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
5	SPEAKING
	 Go through the questions and make sure Sts understand 
them all. 
	 Then focus on the Talking about imaginary situations 
with would / wouldn’t box and go through it with the 
class. 
	 Get some Sts to choose a question to ask you. Answer, 
giving as much detail as you think Sts will understand, and 
trying to use some of the phrases in the box.
	 Put Sts into groups of three, and tell them to take turns to 
choose a question they want to ask their partners. They 
should also answer that question themselves. Encourage 
Sts to ask for more information (Why?, etc.). 
	 Monitor and help Sts, correcting any misuse of tenses in 
the second conditional.
	 Get some feedback from the class, asking if anyone found 
their partners’ answers surprising / funny, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start, you might also want to 
elicit some useful phrases for them to use when they are 
discussing the questions in their groups, e.g. Me too., I don’t 
think that’s a good idea because…, Really? Why (not)?, etc.
shout /ʃaʊt/ = to say something in a loud voice
keep still /kiːp stɪl/ = not move
wave /weɪv/ = to move your hand or arm from side to side in 
the air, in order to attract attention, etc.
suck /sʌk/ = to take liquid, air, etc. into your mouth with your 
lips
tie /taɪ/ = to fasten something with string, rope, etc.
rub /rʌb/ = to move your hand backwards and forwards over a 
surface while pressing firmly
float /fləʊt/ = to stay on the surface of water
	 Finally, go through the three alternatives for each quiz 
question and deal with any other new vocabulary. Model 
and drill the pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Give Sts a few minutes to read the questions again and 
choose their answers.
	 Get Sts to compare their choices with a partner. 
Encourage them to try to say why they have chosen each 
option.
d	 Put Sts into groups of three. Tell them to go to 
Communication Would you know what to do?,  
A on p.105, B on p.110, and C on p.107. Explain that all Sts 
A are going to read the answers to In the city, Sts B to  
In the country, and Sts C to In the water.
!   If the number of Sts you have does not divide into groups 
of three, have one or two pairs where they read and tell 
each other the answers to A and B, and then simply read the 
answers to C.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. Monitor 
and help with vocabulary while they are reading.
	 When Sts have read their answers, put them back into 
their groups, so they can tell each other what the correct 
answers are and why the others are wrong.
	 When they have finished, they could see who in their 
group got the most answers correct.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
e	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. If you have 
been in any of the situations, tell the class about it.
4	GRAMMAR  if + past, would + infinitive
a	 Focus on the task. Get Sts, in pairs, to look at questions 
1–6 in the quiz in 3, or go through them with the whole 
class. 
	 Check answers.
They are all about an imagined future situation. 
The tense of the verb after if is the past simple. The other form is 
would + infinitive.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.142. 
Grammar notes
Sts may find it strange to be using past tenses in the if half 
of these conditional sentences, and it needs emphasizing 
that they do not refer to the past, but rather to a 
hypothetical situation.
Sts have seen and used would / wouldn’t + infinitive before 
with the verb like, so should not have problems with the 
form of would. You may want to tell them that this form is 
sometimes called the conditional tense.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 122@@
122
9B
	9B	 Fearof.net
1  Fear of driving    ​2  Fear of butterflies    ​3  Fear of doctors    ​
4  Fear of heights    ​5  Fear of crowds
c	 Tell Sts that five people have written about their phobias 
on the website. Sts need to read each comment and 
match it to a phobia in b.
	 Give Sts time to match comments A–E to phobias 1–5. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You could ask Sts which words helped them to 
match the comments and fears.
A  3    ​B  1    ​C  2    ​D  5    ​E  4
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to match the 
seven highlighted words and phrases in the phobias and 
comments to definitions 1–6.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  fear    ​2  terrified    ​3  scared, frightened    ​4  dizzy    ​5  panic    ​
6  suffers from
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Focus on the task and example.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss the three 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING
a	 e 9.6   Focus on the instructions and tell Sts to copy the 
chart on a piece of paper, so that they have more space  
to write. Make sure Sts understand the meaning of  
therapy (= a way of helping people who are physically or 
mentally ill).
	 Play the audio, pausing it after the first interview to give 
Sts time to write. 
	 Then play the rest of the audio. If Sts think the button 
phobia is unlikely, tell them it’s a real interview!
b	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1 (Julia)
1	 Spiders
2	 Since she was 12
3	 A very big spider went across the room in the flat where she 
lived.
4	 She’s better now and can sit in same room as a spider, but not 
for long. In the past it affected her a lot – she couldn’t sit in 
the same room as a spider, always kept doors and windows 
shut.
5	 Yes 
 G   present perfect + for and since
 V   words related to fear: afraid, frightened, etc., phrases with 
for and since
 P   sentence stress
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts study the present perfect with for and 
since to talk about unfinished actions or states. The context 
is phobias, and the lesson begins with some information 
about phobias from a website called fearof.net. Sts learn 
some words related to fear. In Listening and Speaking, Sts 
hear two women talking about the phobias they suffer 
from. In Grammar, examples of the present perfect are taken 
from the listening activity and analysed before Sts go to the 
Grammar Bank. Sts then look at phrases with for and since. In 
Pronunciation, Sts work on sentence stress in present perfect 
sentences to prepare them for the speaking activity – a 
survey in which Sts find out how long their classmates have 
done certain things. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect + for and since p.197 
Communicative  Famous phobias p.242  
(instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  9B
Online Practice  9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Play Hangman with the word phobia.
When Sts have worked out the word, elicit the pronunciation 
(reminding Sts that ph is always pronounced /f/). 
Then ask Sts How do you feel if you have a phobia of 
something? and elicit afraid (or frightened / scared).
1	READING  recognizing topic links
a	 Books open. Do this as a whole-class activity. Check first 
that Sts know what all the photos represent. You could tell 
Sts if you are afraid of any of the things.
	 Then elicit any other things Sts can think of that people 
sometimes have phobias of, and write them on the board.
b	 Focus on the title of the website and, if you didn’t do the 
Optional lead-in, make sure Sts understand phobia. You 
may also need to explain here that fear is the noun from 
afraid (though this is focused on later). Now tell Sts to 
read the text and complete each phobia with one of the 
headings in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the text, check whether you 
need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the highlighted 
words and phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 123@@
123
9B
	 Finally, ask Sts if the phobias are better now.
They both still have their phobias, but they are better.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, making sure Sts know 
the meaning of rational (= based on reason rather than 
emotions). You could also tell them what you think.
3	GRAMMAR & VOCABULARY  present perfect; 
phrases with for and since
a	 Tell Sts to focus on the extract from the first interview 
(Julia’s) and to answer the three questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  When she was 12. / More than 30 years ago.    ​2  Yes    ​ 
3  The present perfect (have + past participle)
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.142. 
Grammar notes
The present perfect with for and since can be tricky for 
Sts as they may use a different structure in their language 
to express this concept, e.g. the present tense. A typical 
mistake is: I live here since three years / since three years ago.
The important thing to highlight is that the present 
perfect with for and since is used to say how long a 
situation has continued from the past until now, i.e. we 
use it for situations which are still true, e.g. I’ve been in this 
class for two years (= I started two years ago and I am still 
in this class now).
In the following lesson, the present perfect for unfinished 
actions / periods of time will be contrasted with the past 
simple for finished actions / periods.
	 e 9.7   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the 
class.	
	 Now focus on the exercises for 9B on p.143. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full questions and 
sentences.
a	 1	 How long have you been afraid of flying?
	
2	 How long has your sister had her new car?
	
3	 How long have they lived in this town?
	
4	 How long has your dad been a teacher?
	
5	 How long have you known your boyfriend?
	
6	 How long has Spain been in the EU?
	
7	 How long have you had your cat?
	
8	 How long has Dan been in this class?
b	 1	 I’ve been afraid of flying since I was about 15.    ​
	
2	 She’s had her car for three weeks.    ​
	
3	 They’ve lived in this town for a long time.    ​
	
4	 He’s been a teacher for more than 20 years.    ​
	
5	 I’ve known my boyfriend since May.    ​
	
6	 It’s been in the EU since 1986.    ​
	
7	 We’ve had our cat for about two years.    ​
	
8	 He’s been in this class since last month.
Speaker 2 (Chloe)
1	 Buttons
2	 Since she was six or seven months old
3	 Her mum tried to dress her in a cardigan with buttons.
4	 She has problems buying winter coats, as there aren’t many 
that don’t have buttons. She doesn’t like hugging people who 
are wearing clothes with buttons. Her mum had to adapt her 
school uniform.
5	 No 
e 9.6
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
I = interviewer, J = Julia, C = Chloe
Julia
I	 Do you have any phobias?
J	 Yes, I’m very, very scared of spiders.
I	 And how long have you had this phobia?
J	 I’ve had it since I was about twelve, so for more than thirty years.
I	 Did something happen to start the phobia?
J	 I remember – and it’s when I think I started being frightened – I 
remember a very big spider in the flat that we lived in at the 
time coming out from under the television and going across the 
room, and me being absolutely terrified, and that’s the first time I 
remember being scared.
I	 How does it affect your life?
J	 In the past, it was really awful. I mean, I couldn’t sit in the same 
room as a spider, and I always had to keep all the doors and 
windows shut because I was frightened that spiders might come 
in. But I had some therapy, and I can now sit in the same room 
as a spider – not for long; it still has to be moved – and I can put 
it in a glass now and take it outside myself if I have to – if there’s 
nobody else there. So it doesn’t affect me as badly as it did before, 
but I still don’t like them.
I	 What kind of therapy did you have? How long did it take?
J	 Probably about six weeks. I went to the therapist’s office and he 
used a kind of hypnosis. He made me go back to that first incident 
with the spider and the TV, and we talked about it again and 
again, until it wasn’t so frightening. And then in the last session, 
he brought in a spider in a jar, into the room, and he made me 
hold the jar. I couldn’t put the spider on my hand, but that was 
a great improvement, because before I couldn’t even look at a 
drawing of a spider in a children’s book, and I certainly couldn’t 
look at photos of spiders.
I	 Wow. Amazing.
Chloe
I	 Do you have any phobias?
C	 Erm, yes, I have a phobia of buttons.
I	 Buttons on clothes?
C	 Yes. I don’t like touching them.
I	 And how long have you had the phobia?
C	 All my life, I think. For as long as I can remember.
I	 Do you know what happened to start the phobia?
C	 I don’t know exactly, but my mum has told me that when I was 
very little, about six or seven months old, she tried to dress 
me in a cardigan, a woollen cardigan with buttons that my 
grandmother had made for me, and apparently I screamed and 
screamed until she took it off again.
I	 OK. And how does the phobia affect your life?
C	 It really affects the kind of clothes I can buy, especially in the 
winter, when I need a coat – there aren’t many coats that don’t 
have buttons. But it’s better than it was: when I was younger, I 
refused to wear anything that had buttons, so for example, my 
mother had to adapt my school uniform so that there were no 
buttons.
I	 Have you had any therapy?
C	 No, no. I haven’t had any therapy. It seems such a silly thing to be 
afraid of.
I	 What about if other people are wearing clothes with buttons on – 
is that OK?
C	 Well, if the buttons aren’t touching me, that’s fine, but I don’t like 
hugging people that have buttons on their clothes.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 124@@
124
9B
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the chart and instructions. Elicit the answer to 
the first question from the class, and tell them that all the 
sections have the same two tenses.
The two verb forms are the present simple and the present 
perfect.
	 Now give Sts time to complete the questions.
b	 e 9.11   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
See the words in bold in script 9.11
e 9.11
have
Do you have a pet? What is it? How long have you had it?
Do you have a tablet? What kind? How long have you had it?
live
Do you live in a modern flat? How old is it? How long have you lived 
there?
Do you live near this school? Where exactly? How long have you 
lived there?
know
Do you know anybody from another country? Where is he or she 
from? How long have you known him or her?
be
Are you a fan of a football team? Which team? How long have you 
been a fan?
Are you a member of a club or organization? Which one? How long 
have you been a member?
Are you married? What’s your partner’s name? How long have you 
been married?
c	 Tell Sts they are going to move around the class, asking 
other Sts the questions. If someone says Yes, I do / am to 
the first question (the present simple question), then they 
must ask the follow-up question (including the present 
perfect question). They should try to find someone 
different for each question. Encourage Sts to ask for 
and give as much information as they can so that the 
survey becomes more of a conversation, rather than just 
question and answer.
	 When Sts have finished, get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Check Sts can make the questions correctly 
by getting them to ask you some of the questions first. Give 
short, natural answers with for and since, and some more 
information if you can, as a model for how Sts should answer.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Give Sts time to complete the gaps with for or since.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
d	 e 9.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You might want to point out to Sts the 
linking between for and since and the words that follow 
when they start with a vowel, e.g. for ages, for about,  
since I, etc.
since 1990    for a long time    for about 20 years    for ages   
since I was a child    for six months    since the 4th of May   
for a few weeks    since then    since I got up this morning
since 8.15    for five minutes
e 9.8
since nineteen ninety, for a long time, for about twenty years, for 
ages, since I was a child, for six months, since the fourth of May, for 
a few weeks, since then, since I got up this morning, since eight 
fifteen, for five minutes
	 Get Sts, in pairs, to practice saying the phrases.
4	PRONUNCIATION  sentence stress
a	 e 9.9  Here Sts practise sentence rhythm in the present 
perfect to prepare for the speaking activity in 5.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. 
	 Now play it again, pausing after each section for Sts to 
repeat, building up to the whole sentence or question. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
e 9.9
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.73
	 Finally, get Sts to practise in pairs.
b	 e 9.10  Now tell Sts they are going to hear five  
sentences / questions and they must write them down.
	 Play the audio once for Sts just to listen. 
	 Now play it again, pausing after each line to give Sts time 
to write. Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
e 9.10
1	 How long have you worked here?
2	 They’ve been married for twenty years.
3	 She hasn’t travelled by plane since two thousand and five. 
4	 How long has he lived in Italy?
5	 We’ve known them for a long time.
	 In pairs, get Sts to practise saying the sentences. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 125@@
125
9C
	9C	 Scream queens
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
biographies; word stress, /ɔː/
a	 Books open. Focus on the list of phrases. Elicit / Teach 
the meaning of events (= things which happen to you). 
Go through the list, making sure Sts understand them all. 
Point out that sb stands for somebody.
	 Now tell Sts to number the events in a logical order 
between be born and die. 
	 Put Sts into pairs and get them to compare their order 
with a partner. Do they agree?
	 Finally, elicit from the class a typical order of the events. 
A possible order
​2  go to primary school    ​3  go to secondary school    ​4  leave 
school    ​5  go to university    ​6  get a job    ​7  fall in love    ​
8  marry sb / get married    ​9  have children    10  separate    ​
11  divorce sb / get divorced    ​12  retire
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to mark the expressions:  
E = everybody does it, M = most people do it, S = some 
people do it
b	 e 9.12   Give Sts time to look at the highlighted words 
and mark the stress.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. 
e 9.12
marry somebody / get married
go to primary school
have children
go to secondary school
go to university
separate
divorce somebody / get divorced
retire
	 Then play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
Pronunciation notes
The most common spellings of the /ɔː/ sound are or 
(when it is stressed), al, and aw.
However, words beginning wor- are pronounced /ɜː/, 
e.g. work, world, worse, etc., which is confusing for Sts, 
who often pronounce these words with the /ɔː/ sound. 
Learning the rule here should help them to avoid this 
common pronunciation error.
c	 e 9.13   Focus on the sound picture and elicit the word 
and sound: horse and /ɔː/. 
	 Then play the audio for Sts to listen.
e 9.13
See sound and words in Student’s Book on p.74
	 Now play the audio again and get Sts to listen and repeat.
 G   present perfect or past simple? (2)
 V   biographies
 P   word stress, /ɔː/
Lesson plan
The main focus of this lesson is how to describe your or 
somebody else’s life, and the contrast between the past 
simple for completed actions or situations in the past, and 
the present perfect for situations or actions which started 
in the past, but are still true now. The context is famous 
mothers and daughters, and famous fathers and sons. 
The lesson begins with Sts learning the vocabulary for 
verb phrases often used in biographies. There is then a 
pronunciation focus on the word stress in these phrases, and 
on the /ɔː/ sound. This lexis is recycled in Reading, where 
Sts read about the lives of the actress Janet Leigh and her 
daughter, Jamie Lee Curtis. The contrast between the verb 
forms used for the mother (who is dead) and her daughter 
(who is still alive) is used to show Sts a fundamental 
difference between how the past simple and the present 
perfect are used in English. In Listening, Sts hear about 
another famous parent–child pair: David Bowie (father) and 
Duncan Jones (son). The lesson finishes with a speaking 
activity where Sts talk about the life of an older person who 
they know well. This leads into Writing, where Sts are asked 
to write a short biography about either someone they know 
or a famous person.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect or past simple? (2) p.198 
Communicative  Like father, like son p.243  
(instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  9C
Online Practice  9C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts, in pairs, to brainstorm famous people whose parents 
are / were also famous. 
Elicit answers, getting Sts to tell you what the people do, and 
write their names on the board.
Possible answers
Actors
Angelina Jolie and Jon Voight; Melanie Griffith and Tippi Hedren; 
Jaden Smith and Will Smith; Kiefer Sutherland and Donald 
Sutherland; Charlie Sheen, Emilio Estevez, and Martin Sheen, etc.
Singers
Norah Jones and Ravi Shankar; Enrique Iglesias and Julio Iglesias; 
Ziggy Marley and Bob Marley, Stella McCartney and Paul 
McCartney, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 126@@
126
9C
3	GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple? (2)
a	 Tell Sts to cover the text, and give them time to answer 
the questions about sentences 1–6. 
	 Check which sentences are about Janet Leigh and which 
are about Jamie Lee Curtis.
1, 3, and 6 are about Janet Leigh. 
2, 4, and 5 are about Jamie Lee Curtis.
	 Now ask Sts why the tenses in the sentences about Janet 
Leigh are different to the ones in the sentences about 
Jamie Lee Curtis.
The ones about Janet Leigh are all in the past simple because 
she is dead. The ones about Jamie Lee Curtis are in the present 
perfect because she is alive, and the actions or situations are true 
about her life up to now.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9C on p.142. 
Grammar notes
The contrast between the past simple and the present 
perfect was first focused on in 4B (see Grammar Bank 4B 
p.132).
Highlight that the present perfect is used in the examples 
about Jamie Lee Curtis because her career as an actress 
hasn’t finished. She is still an actress and will probably be 
in more films.
The past tense is used for Janet Leigh because the 
sentences refer to a finished period of time. Janet Leigh 
won’t write a book now because she is dead, so wrote is 
used. If she were still alive and writing, then has written 
would be used.
	 e 9.15   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 9C on p.143. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs. 
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 
1  Martin left    ​2  I lived    ​3  Anna’s been    ​4  My sister had    ​
5  I’ve worked    ​6  The city has changed    ​7  They were    ​ 
8  I met, was
b	
1	 How long has he lived there?
	
He moved there last September.
2	 When did Picasso die?
	
How long did he live in France?
	
He left Spain when he was 25.
3	 How long have they been married?
	
They’ve been married since 1995.
	
They met at university.
	
What university did they go to?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the words in the list and tell Sts that some of 
them have the /ɔː/ sound. Sts should say the words and 
circle the ones with the /ɔː/ sound. Remind them that it is 
easier if they say the words aloud to themselves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
e	 e 9.14   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
Sts should circle: 
more, small, walk, talk, ball, form, bought, four
e 9.14
See words in Student’s Book on p.74
	 Now ask Sts What rule can you hear for words with wor + 
consonant? and elicit the answer.
wor + consonant words are normally pronounced /ɜː/.  
You may want to point out that after other consonants, or is 
usually pronounced /ɔː/, e.g. more, born, horse, etc.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
2	READING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to read a text about two actresses, 
Janet Leigh and Jamie Lee Curtis. Focus on the photos 
and ask the class if they have heard of them. You may 
want to explain that in the black-and-white photo, Jamie 
Lee Curtis (on the left) is holding a photo of her mother in 
the famous shower scene from the Hitchcock film Psycho.
	 Read the introduction together and then ask Sts if they 
have seen any of the actresses’ films, and if they liked 
them. (Janet Leigh: Little Women (1949), The Manchurian 
Candidate (1962), The Fog (1980);  
Jamie Lee Curtis: Scream Queens (2016), NCIS (2012), Freaky 
Friday (2003), A Fish Called Wanda (1988).)
	 Finally, ask Sts what the title Like mother, like daughter 
means (= the daughter is doing the same as her mother 
did, i.e. making a career in acting).
b	 Focus on the task and tell Sts, in pairs, to read each 
paragraph and decide if it refers to Janet Leigh (JL) or 
Jamie Lee Curtis (JLC).
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the paragraphs the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
JL:  1, 4, 7, 9, 10
JLC:  2, 3, 5, 6, 8
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A re-read the paragraphs 
about Janet Leigh and Sts B the ones about Jamie Lee 
Curtis. 
	 Now, books closed, A tells B anything he / she can 
remember about Janet Leigh. Then Sts swap roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 127@@
127
9C
c	 Explain the task and focus on 1–9, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. a commercial and paparazzi. 
Point out that the first one has been done for them. In 
pairs, Sts quickly try to remember what connection there 
might be between the information in 2–9 and Duncan 
Jones.
	 Listen to their ideas, but don’t tell them if they are right 
or not.
	 Play the audio once and tell Sts not to write anything, 
just to listen to see whether they remembered the 
connections correctly. 
	 Then play the audio again, and get Sts to make notes. 
Pause the audio, as necessary, to give Sts time to make 
notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the audio 
again if necessary. 
	 Check answers. Try to elicit as much of the information in 
the key as possible.
2	 He was born in the UK in 1971.
3	 His parents divorced when he was nine. He stayed with his 
father. He saw his mother, Angie, until he was 13, but hasn’t 
seen her since then.
4	 His father tried to get him to learn the drums, the saxophone, 
and the piano.
5	 He went to the London Film School and studied to be a film 
director.
6	 His father bought him an 7mm video carema, which he used 
to make films about his Star Wars toys.
7	 He directed the TV commercials in the early years of his career.
8	 He made Moon in 2006. It’s a science-fiction drama and was 
very successful. He won the prize for Best New British Director.
9	 He made Source Code, a science fiction thriller, and Warcraft, 
based on the game World of Warcraft. They have both been 
successful.
10	 He wanted to be a film director because he wanted to be 
behind the cameras, not in front of them. He hated the 
paparazzi who were around when he was a child and doesn’t 
like being photographed.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.124–125, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity and elicit 
opinions. You could tell Sts what you think. 
4	LISTENING  understanding biographical 	
	 information
a	 Tell Sts to look at the photo of a famous father and son. 
Ask if they know them. If they do, then what else do they 
know about them? Listen to their ideas, but don’t tell 
them if they are right or not.
b	 e 9.16   Tell Sts they are going to listen to a radio 
programme about the son and they need to check their 
answers to a as well as answer the question How well did 
he and his father get on?.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
 	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
They are Duncan Jones and his father, David Bowie.
They had a very good relationship. 
e 9.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
Good evening and welcome to Family, the programme where we 
discuss issues concerning parents and children. Last week, we 
talked about children following their parents into the same job, 
and whether children of celebrities have an easier life than other 
children. Today, we’re going to look at a celebrity son who did 
something different, and has been successful without the help of 
his famous father. Duncan Jones may not be a name you recognize 
if you’re not a serious cinema fan. Duncan Jones is his real name, 
but when he was very young, he was called Zowie Bowie. His father 
was the famous singer David Bowie, whose real surname was Jones. 
Zowie was actually Duncan’s middle name. 
Duncan was born in the UK in nineteen seventy-one. When he was 
nine, his parents divorced, and Duncan stayed with his father. He 
continued to visit his mother, David Bowie’s first wife, Angie, until 
he was thirteen, but their relationship wasn’t a happy one, and he 
hasn’t seen her since then. 
When he was a child, Duncan wasn’t interested in music. His father 
tried and tried to get him to learn an instrument – the drums, the 
saxophone, and the piano – but Duncan just wasn’t interested. He 
was more interested in sport, and in films. So, his father bought him 
a little eight-millimetre video camera, and he used it to make films 
with his Star Wars toys.
After he left school, Duncan went to the London Film School and 
studied to be a film director. 
In the early years of his career, Duncan directed TV commercials, 
for example for the fashion label French Connection, and Heinz 
ketchup, and he also worked on video games. 
In two thousand and six, he made his first film, called Moon, a 
science fiction drama, which was a great success. He won many 
awards for the film, including the prize for Best New British Director. 
Since then, he has made many more successful films, including 
Source Code, a science-fiction thriller starring Jake Gyllenhaal, and 
Warcraft, based on the game World of Warcraft.
Duncan has said that one of the reasons why he went into film 
directing was that he wanted to be behind the camera, not in 
front of it. As a child, there were often paparazzi around, which he 
hated. Even now, as a successful film director, he doesn’t like being 
photographed.
Although, as he says, ‘I’ve never needed to use my father’s name,’ 
Duncan was very close to his father all his life, and was with him 
when he died in January two thousand and sixteen. He said of him, 
‘He was a wonderful father who encouraged me to be creative, but 
different.’
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 128@@
128
9C
5	SPEAKING & WRITING
a	 In this activity Sts put into practice the contrast between 
the past simple and the present perfect through talking 
about an older person – a friend or member of their 
family.
	 Focus on the activity and give Sts five minutes to think 
about who they are going to talk about and to prepare 
their answers to the questions. Stress that it should be an 
older person, not a younger one, because they will have 
had more experiences.
	 Focus on the question prompts. You could demonstrate 
the activity by getting the class to ask you about one of 
your grandparents, elderly relatives, or a friend.
b	 Sit Sts in pairs, ideally face-to-face. Set a time limit for 
Sts to interview each other. Encourage Sts answering to 
give as much information as possible, and Sts asking the 
questions to ask for extra information where possible. 
	 Then Sts swap roles.
	 Find out if their two people had anything in common.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A biography on p.118 and to do 
a. Tell them not to worry about the gaps in the biography.
	 When they have finished, elicit three things about Matt 
Damon that they remember.
	 Now tell Sts to do b by putting the verbs in brackets in the 
past simple or present perfect. Point out that the first one 
(was born) has been done for them.
	 Check answers.
2  divorced    3  lived    4  became    5  appeared    6  went   
7  wrote    8  starred    9  won    10  didn’t finish    11  has become
12  has appeared    13  has received    14  won    15  has been
	 Now focus on the Writing a biography – use of tenses 
box and go through it with the class.
	 For c, get Sts to write a biography of someone who is 
still alive – so someone they know or a famous person. 
Tell them to make notes for the three paragraphs in the 
model. 
	 For d, it is probably better to set this writing for homework 
to allow Sts to research the person they want to write 
about. They could also attach a photo of the person.
	 In e, Sts should check their biography for mistakes.
EXTRA IDEA   If Sts wrote their biographies for homework, 
when they bring them in, get them to swap with other Sts, 
or put them up round the class for people to read, and then 
ask the class which ones they found most interesting.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 129@@
129
PE5
R	 Mm hm. 
H	 Is it with anybody I know?
R	 No, it isn’t. Anyway, excuse me a minute. I need to go to ‘the 
restroom’.
H	 That’s very American. I’ll order more coffees. 
R	 OK.
J	 (on the phone) Rob?
H	 Is that you, Jennifer?
J	 Oh, hi, Holly. Erm…is Rob there?
H	 Yeah, one second. Rob! Not anybody I know, huh?
R	 Hi, Jenny.
J	 Rob? Are you still in Brooklyn?
R	 Yeah. 
J	 You know the reservation at the restaurant’s for eight, right?
R	 Don’t worry. I’ll be there! Oh, how do I get to Greenwich Village on 
the subway?
b	 Play the video / audio again so Sts can watch or listen and 
correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
3	 He has a date in Manhattan.
5	 Jenny phones Rob.
6	 The restaurant is booked for eight o’clock.
	 Elicit from Sts that the restaurant is in Greenwich Village, 
a well-known area of Manhattan, and that Greenwich is 
pronounced /grenɪtʃ/.
	 Now focus on the British and American English box and 
go through it with the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
2	r VOCABULARY  directions
a	 Tell Sts to look at the pictures and then complete 
phrases 1–5.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 9.18   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and check. 
	 Check answers.
1  left    ​2  straight    ​3  next    ​4  traffic    ​5  roundabout
e 9.18
1	 Turn left.
2	 Go straight on.
3	 Take the next turning on the right.
4	 Turn right at the traffic lights.
5	 Go round the roundabout and take the third exit.
	 Now play the video / audio again for Sts to watch or listen 
and repeat the phrases.
c	 Tell Sts to cover the phrases, look at the pictures, and say 
the phrases.
Function  asking how to get there
Vocabulary  directions: traffic lights, take the…, etc.
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn how to give and understand simple 
directions, both for in the street and for public transport.
In the storyline, Rob is with Holly in Brooklyn. Jenny rings 
to confirm their dinner date in Manhattan. She gives Rob 
directions on the subway to the restaurant. However, 
Rob arrives late. When he gets there, Jenny is leaving the 
restaurant, after having waited an hour, and they have an 
argument.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 5 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 5 
Can you remember...? 1–9
Online Practice  Practical English 5 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Elicit from the class what happened in the previous episode. 
Ask some questions, e.g. What did Rob and Jenny do in the 
morning? Why did Rob go to the pharmacy? What did he buy? 
Where did Rob go in the evening?
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 4.
1	r HOLLY AND ROB IN BROOKLYN
a	 e 9.17   Books open. Focus on the photos and elicit what 
Sts think is happening. Don’t tell them if they are right or 
not yet.
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and give Sts time to read them. 
	 Now play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for them to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Make 
it clear that they don’t need to correct the false sentences 
yet. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  T    ​2  T    ​3  F    ​4  T    ​5  F    ​6  F
e 9.17
H = Holly, R = Rob, J = Jenny
H	 That was a good day’s work, Rob. You did a great interview.
R	 You took some great photos, too. They’re really nice.
H	 Thanks. Hey, let’s have another coffee.
R	 I don’t know. I have to get to Manhattan.
H	 You don’t have to go right now.
R	 I’m not sure. I don’t want to be late.
H	 Why do you have to go to Manhattan?
R	 I’ve got a…erm…
H	 A date? You have a date?
	 5	
Practical English  Getting around
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 130@@
130
PE5
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Elicit that 
the You say phrases are what Rob says and the You hear 
phrases are said by Jenny, who is giving Rob directions. 
These phrases will be useful for Sts if they need to ask for 
directions.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again and get Sts to complete the gaps. Play 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Take    ​2  off    ​3  stop    ​4  straight    ​5  first    ​6  right    ​7  lost
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. 
c	 e 9.20   Now focus on the You say phrases and tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm and intonation. 
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases.
e 9.20
Same as script 9.19 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. A is Rob and B is Jenny. Get Sts to 
read the conversation aloud, and then swap roles.
e	 Still in their pairs, Sts role-play asking for and giving 
simple directions using the subway map. Go through the 
instructions with them. A starts with Go to the subway 
station at…
	 Monitor and help with any issues relating to directions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by giving the 
class directions to somewhere on the map, and then ask 
them where they are.
f	 When they have finished, they should swap roles.
	 You could get a few pairs to perform in front of the class.
4	r ROB IS LATE…AGAIN
a	 e 9.21   Focus on the photos and ask Sts some questions, 
e.g. What’s happening? How do they look?, etc.
	 Get Sts to focus on the question, or get them to close 
their books, and write it on the board.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through, and 
then check the answer.
No, it isn’t.
3	r ASKING HOW TO GET THERE
a	 e 9.19   Focus on the map of the New York subway and 
ask Sts Is Rob in Manhattan or Brooklyn now? (Brooklyn), 
Is the restaurant in Brooklyn? (No, it isn’t. It’s in Greenwich 
Village, Manhattan.)
	 Make sure Sts can see where Rob is on the map.
	 Tell Sts that they are going to hear Rob asking Jenny for 
directions and they need to listen to the directions and 
try to mark the route on the map. Play the video / audio at 
least twice.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check that 
they have marked the correct route.
!   The map in the Student’s Book has been adapted and is 
simplified rather than strictly accurate.
A
A
B
B
A
B
34th St
34th St
23rd St
14th St
23rd St
14th St
West 4th St
West 4th St
Spring St
Canal St
Chambers St
Fulton St
High St
Jay St-
Metro Tech
Hoyt St-
Schermerhorn St   
Lafayette Av
Grand St
Broadway-Lafayette St
Seventh Av
DeKalb
Av
Atlantic Av
Clinton-
Washington
Avs
Church Av
Prospect Park
Kingston-
Throop
Avs
Nostrand Av
Franklin Av
A line
B line
M
A
N
H
A
T
T
A
N
B
R
O
O
K
L
Y
N
e 9.19  9.20
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 How do I get to Greenwich Village on the subway? (repeat)
J	 Go to the subway station at Prospect Park. Take the B train to West 
Fourth Street.
R	 How many stops is that? (repeat)
J	 Six or seven.
R	 OK. And then? (repeat)
J	 From West Fourth Street, take the A train and get off at 
Fourteenth Street. 
R	 Could you say that again? (repeat)
J	 OK. From Prospect Park, take the B train to West Fourth Street, 
and then take the A train to Fourteenth Street. That’s only  
one stop.
R	 Where’s the restaurant? (repeat)
J	 Come out of the subway on Eighth Avenue, go straight on for 
about fifty yards, and take the first left. That’s Greenwich Avenue. 
The restaurant’s on the right. It’s called The Tea Set.
R	 OK, thanks. See you later. (repeat)
J	 And don’t get lost!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 131@@
131
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    ​B  1, 2    ​C  5    ​D  4
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language 
PE5
e 9.21
R	 Jenny! I’m here.
J	 Hi.
R	 I’m so sorry. There was a problem on the underground.
J	 We call it the ‘subway’ here.
R	 Right. Anyway, the train stopped for about twenty minutes. I tried 
to call, but there was no signal.
J	 I’ve been here since seven forty-five.
R	 I know. I ran from the underground…subway station…I’m so 
sorry.
J	 You’re always late. It’s funny, isn’t it?
R	 I said I’m sorry. Look, why don’t we go back inside the restaurant? 
J	 I waited for an hour for you. I don’t want to stay here any more.
R	 Maybe we could…we could go for a walk. We could find another 
restaurant.
J	 I don’t feel like a walk. It’s been a long day. 
R	 OK.
J	 But the night is still young. Maybe you have time to meet up with 
Holly again.
R	 Holly?
J	 I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to say that.
R	 I don’t care about Holly.
J	 Forget it, Rob. Now, if you don’t mind, I’d like to go home.
R	 Listen to me, Jenny. Holly is just a colleague.
J	 I said forget it. It’s OK.
R	 No, it isn’t OK. Look, I know I’m always late. And I know the 
underground is the subway. But that’s not the point! I’m not 
interested in Holly. I came to New York because of you. The only 
person I’m interested in is you!
b	 Now give Sts time to read questions 1–5.
	 Play the video / audio again the whole way through. Play 
it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
1	 He says there was a problem on the underground.
2	 An hour 
3	 Go back in the restaurant, go for a walk, or go to a different 
restaurant. 
4	 He could meet up with Holly.
5	 Jenny
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 9.22   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  sorry    ​2  said    ​3  feel    ​4  long    ​5  mean
e 9.22
1  I’m so sorry.
2  I said I’m sorry. 
3  I don’t feel like a walk. 
4  It’s been a long day. 
5  I didn’t mean to say that. 
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 132@@
	1A	 Welcome to the class
132
10A
 G   expressing movement: go over, etc.
 V   sports: team, player, etc., expressing movement: into, 
through, etc.
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn how we express movement in English 
using a verb and an adverb or preposition, e.g. walk under the 
bridge, go out of the door, and the context is sport. At the start 
of the lesson, in Vocabulary and Pronunciation, Sts look at 
various sports, as well as verbs that go with sports. Then they 
practise pronouncing the names of sports in English, before 
doing a questionnaire about which sports they like and don’t 
like, etc. In Vocabulary and Grammar, Sts focus on words 
which describe movement (up, down, along, through, etc.) 
and they learn how to combine these words with a verb to 
express movement. In Reading and Speaking, Sts read some 
comments posted on an American site called The Atlantic 
about women’s sports. Finally, in Writing, Sts read a model 
essay about public running events, and then write an essay of 
their own about an activity they enjoy in their free time.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  expressing movement p.199 
Vocabulary  Expressing movement p.270  
(instructions p.256) 
Communicative  The race p.244  (instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  10A
Online Practice  10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write SPORTS on the board and give Sts, in pairs, two minutes 
to think of English words for sports. Tell them that they must 
try to write down at least ten. Tell them to keep their lists, as 
they will be using them later.
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  sports; 
word stress
Vocabulary and Pronunciation notes
Some words for sports in other languages are similar to 
the English word, or even the same. However, they are 
sometimes spelled differently and the pronunciation 
is usually different. This means that there may often be 
interference from Sts’ L1 when they use the English word 
for a particular sport.
The way the verbs do, play, and go are used with sports 
may also be different in your Sts’ L1. Remind them of the 
difference between, e.g. swim and go swimming (see 2A).
With sports ending in -ing (cycling, etc.), we can also use 
the verb, e.g. I cycle at weekends.
We use do for sport and exercise in general, e.g. I do a lot 
of exercise.
a	 Books open. Focus on the photos and ask Sts to name all 
the sports. Write their answers on the board.
1  athletics (high jump)    2  basketball    3  tennis    4  skiing    
5  cycling    6  handball    7  rugby 
b	 e 10.1   Focus on the list of sports and make sure Sts 
know what they are.
	 Give Sts time to underline the stressed syllable in 
each one.
	 Play the audio once for Sts to listen and check.	
See the underlining in the script below
e 10.1
athletics, baseball, basketball, cycling, football, gymnastics, handball, 
karate, rugby, skiing, tennis, volleyball, windsurfing, yoga
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before playing the audio, put Sts in pairs 
and get them to say together how they think the sports are 
pronounced, and to underline the stressed syllable.
c	 Now focus on the chart, and point out the three headings 
and examples. 
	 Give Sts time to put the sports in the correct column.
	 Check answers.
play
go
do
baseball, 
basketball, 
football, handball, 
rugby, tennis, 
volleyball
cycling, skiing, 
windsurfing
athletics, 
gymnastics, 
karate, yoga
	 Tell Sts to add two more sports to each column. If you did 
the Optional lead-in, Sts could look at their lists and see 
if any have not been named so far. Elicit their spelling and 
pronunciation, and write them on the board.
Possible answers
play: badminton, table tennis, cricket, netball, golf
go: sailing, running, jogging, swimming, ice skating
do: judo, t’ai chi, aerobics, tae kwon do
	10A	Into the net
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 133@@
133
10A
	 Focus on the across or through box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then focus on the away and back box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Finally, focus on Activation. Get Sts to cover the words in 
a and look at the pictures. From memory, they take turns 
to tell their partner where the woman and her dog went.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the activity and check that Sts understand the 
verbs in the list and the words in bold. You could use the 
photos in a to elicit the meaning of hoop, net, etc.
	 Now get Sts to complete the sentences.
	 Check answers. 
1  throw    2  kick    3  hit    4  run
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.144. 
Grammar notes
In English, movement is usually expressed by adding 
a preposition or adverb of movement to a verb, e.g. 
walk up the steps, climb over the wall. In your Sts’ L1, this 
may be expressed in a different way, e.g. by just using a 
single verb.
	 e 10.4   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the come or go? and in or into? out or out 
of? boxes and go through them with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 10A on p.145. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 
1  to, into    ​2  past    ​3  along    ​4  over    ​5  towards    
6  over, into    ​7  round    ​8  across
b	
1	 When I was walking under the bridge, a train went over it.
2	 Come in. The door’s open.
3	 Go up the stairs – the office is on the second floor.
4	 He walked into the café and ordered some lunch.
5	 Go out of the building and turn left.
6	 Go away! I don’t want to talk to you.
7	 I cycle down a big hill on my way home.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
2	SPEAKING
	 Now focus on the sports questionnaire and go through 
the questions, making sure Sts understand them. Point 
out that live in the penultimate question is an adjective 
and is pronounced /laɪv/. Demonstrate the activity by 
answering some of the questions yourself. 
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions. Encourage them to ask for and give more 
information, so that this becomes a conversation, rather 
than just questions and answers.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
3	VOCABULARY & GRAMMAR  expressing 
movement
a	 e 10.2   Focus on the task. Give Sts time to look at the 
illustration and read the passage.
	 Tell Sts they will hear some of the commentary before and 
after the passage in the Student’s Book. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
complete the gaps. Then play it again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  past    2  towards    3  over    4  into
e 10.2
England really need a goal now: they’re losing two–one, with 
only five minutes left. But here comes Matthews. What can he do 
here? He goes past one defender, and another! The goalkeeper’s 
coming towards him. Matthews shoots. And the ball goes over the 
goalkeeper, and into the goal! That is a fantastic goal! That is the 
Matthews magic! England: two, Germany: two!
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Expressing 
movement on p.162 and get them to do a individually or 
in pairs.
Vocabulary notes
Sts may not be clear about the difference between to and 
towards. Highlight that He walked to the car = he reached 
the car, and He walked towards the car = he walked in the 
direction of the car.
	 e 10.3   Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen  
and check.
	 Check answers.
e 10.3
Expressing movement
6	 under the bridge
11	 along the street
10	 round the lake
8	 through the tunnel
4	 into the shop
2	 across the road
3	 over the bridge
12	 up the steps
7	 past the church
9	 towards the lake
1	 down the steps
5	 out of the shop
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words and phrases your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 134@@
134
10A
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. You 
might want to point out that serve and return can also be 
nouns, e.g. Djokovic has a good serve. His return was out.
serve /sɜːv/ = hit the ball over the net to start a point
opponent /əˈpəʊnənt/ = the person who you compete against
return /rɪˈtɜːn/ = to hit the ball back over the net
team /tiːm/ = a group of players playing together 
athlete /ˈæθliːt/ = someone who competes in sport
ice skating /ˈaɪs skeɪtɪŋ/ = either dancing or racing on ice
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
e	 Give Sts time to read each comment again and tick the 
ones they agree with.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to compare which 
comments they ticked. They should tell their partner why 
they agree with the comment and what they think of the 
other comments.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs, and open up the 
discussion to the whole class.
5	WRITING
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An article on p.119 and to do a. 
Tell them not to worry about the gaps in the article.
	 When they have finished, check the answer.
2	 Because she likes doing exercise with other people
	 Now tell Sts to do b by reading the article again and 
completing the gaps with the adjectives in the list.
	 Check answers.
1  faster    2  overweight    3  local    4  friendly    
5  young    6  healthy
	 Now focus on c, where Sts look at the topic in each 
paragraph of the article. Get them to match 1–4 to the 
correct summary.
	 Check answers.
1	 She gives basic information about the activity.
2	 She says when and why she started doing it. She gives more 
details about when and where she does it now.
3	 She explains why she enjoys it.
4	 She recommends the activity, and explains why.
	 For d, get Sts to make notes about an activity that they 
enjoy doing in their free time – explain that it doesn’t have 
to be a sport; it can be any free-time activity. Tell them 
they must then write an article with four paragraphs by 
following the model. Point out the highlighted phrases in 
the article. Sts should make a list of useful phrases for their 
activity.
	 For e, you may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or 
you could set it as homework.
	 In f, Sts should check their article for mistakes. Then they 
should swap articles with other Sts. Find out if any Sts 
wrote about the same activity. Finally, find out if any Sts 
would like to try an activity they read about.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   With a class which is very keen on 
sport, you could get Sts to practise more sports rules. Put 
Sts in groups of four: A, B, C, and D. A thinks of a sport he / 
she knows well. The others have to guess it by asking a 
maximum of ten yes / no questions, e.g. Is it a team sport? Do 
you play it inside? Do you have to throw the ball?, etc. When 
they have guessed, B thinks of a sport, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the instructions and the example. Before Sts 
start, you could pre-teach some words they might need, 
e.g. line, jump, etc. Point out that the first one (jumping 
over) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts time to complete each sentence with the correct 
verb and preposition, depending on what they can see in 
the photos in 1.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  throwing…through    3  hitting…over    4  skiing down
5  cycling round    6  throwing…into    7  running towards
4	READING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 opinions
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the title, and make sure Sts 
understand the meaning of popular (= liked by a lot of 
people).
	 Give Sts time to read the comments and complete 
the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
!   The reading text is adapted from an online forum. It is 
important for Sts to realize that there may be opinions 
expressed in this text which they strongly disagree with. The 
opinions expressed here do not represent the views of the 
authors or of Oxford University Press.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the comments the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, 
but not the words in d.
One person who obviously prefers women’s sport: A (RichSmith)
One who obviously prefers men’s sport: E (SimonB)
c	 Tell Sts to read comments A–F again and this time match 
them to 1–6, which represent the main idea that each 
person was making.
	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare with a 
partner.
	 Check answers.
1  F    2  A    3  C    4  E    5  B    6  D
d	 Focus on the highlighted sports words. Get Sts, in pairs, to 
guess their meaning and how they are pronounced. Tell 
them to read the whole sentence, as the context will help 
them guess.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 135@@
135
10B
	10B	Early birds
1	READING & SPEAKING
a	 Books open. Read the questions with the class, making 
sure Sts remember the meaning of all the verbs, e.g. the 
difference between wake up (= stop sleeping) and get up 
(= leave your bed). 
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to interview their 
partner.
	 Get some feedback from the class. You could also tell the 
class about yourself.
b	 Focus on the photos and the captions. Elicit from Sts 
what time they think Ella and Peter get up, but don’t tell 
them yet.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Early birds, A on p.105, B on p.111. You 
could explain that an early bird is a person who gets up 
very early. You could also write the idiom on the board  
THE EARLY BIRD CATCHES THE WORM. Elicit / Explain that it 
means it is a good thing to get up early, and ask Sts if they 
have an equivalent idiom in their language. 
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Point out the Glossary with each text. Get Sts to read 
their text and answer the questions with short notes on a 
separate piece of paper. 
Student A (about Ella)
1	 She gets up at 2.35 a.m. 
2	 She sets the alarm on her phone, and her partner does, too.
3	 She usually feels pretty terrible. 
4	 No, she doesn’t eat or drink anything before she goes to work. 
5	 She walks to work. 
6	 She starts at 3.00 a.m. and finishes at 3.00 p.m. 
7	 She usually goes to bed at 8.30 p.m. 
8	 Yes, she would like to change her working hours, so she could 
sleep more.
Student B (about Peter)
1	 He gets up at 4.45 a.m. 
2	 He has two alarms, one that repeats and a Fitbit that vibrates.
3	 He feels a bit sleepy at first. 
4	 He has a cup of tea before going to work. 
5	 He drives. 
6	 He has to be at work at 5.30 a.m.; his show starts at 6.00 a.m. 
He finishes work late afternoon.
7	 He usually goes to bed at 11.00 p.m. 
8	 No, he doesn’t want to change his working hours.
	 Then sit Sts A and B face-to-face. A tells B about Ella’s 
day, using his / her notes. Then B tells A about Peter’s day, 
using his / her notes. 
	 When they have finished, they should find similarities and 
differences between Ella and Peter.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
Similarities
They both get up early, live near work, set two alarms, have their 
clothes already chosen, have long working days, get similar 
amounts of sleep, and love their work. They don’t go out with 
friends during the week.
 G   word order of phrasal verbs
 V   phrasal verbs: look up, look after, find out, etc.
 P   linking
Lesson plan
This lesson provides an introduction to phrasal verbs and 
how they work. Phrasal verbs are an important feature of 
English, and are used very frequently by native speakers. 
Sts will probably have already learned some in English File 
Elementary, such as wake up, get up, turn off, and here they 
revise ones which have come up so far during the course, 
and learn some more common ones, including how they 
work grammatically.
The context is about the pros and cons of getting up early in 
the morning. The lesson begins with Reading and Speaking, 
where Sts read a text about Ella, a baker, or Peter, a DJ who 
has an early morning radio programme, and then tell each 
other what they found out. In Vocabulary, the focus is on 
common phrasal verbs, and in Grammar, the word order of 
phrasal verbs is analysed. In Listening, Sts listen to a radio 
programme about the advantages of getting up early. Then 
in Pronunciation, Sts have more practice of linking. The 
lesson finishes with Speaking, where the phrasal verbs Sts 
have learned are recycled and practised in a questionnaire.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  word order of phrasal verbs p.200 
Vocabulary  Phrasal verbs p.271 (instructions p.256) 
Communicative  Phrasal verb conversations p.245 
(instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  10B
Online Practice  10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Draw a clock on the board and quickly revise telling the time. 
Then say a few ‘digital times’ to Sts (e.g. eight fifteen, eleven 
forty, etc.) and elicit the other way of saying them  
(a quarter past eight, twenty to twelve).
Then tell Sts to continue in pairs, A and B. A says a digital time 
and B has to say it the other way. Then B says a digital time, 
etc. Stop the activity when you think Sts have had enough 
practice.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 136@@
136
10B
e 10.5
Phrasal verbs
9	 The match will be over at about five thirty.
11	 My alarm goes off at six o’clock every morning.
14	 We set off for the airport at six thirty.
4	 I want to give up chocolate.
1	 Don’t throw away that letter!
10	 Turn down the music! It’s very loud.
5	 Turn up the TV! I can’t hear.
7	 He looked up the words in a dictionary.
2	 Could you fill in this form?
13	 I want to find out about hotels in Madrid.
8	 It’s bedtime – go and put on your pyjamas.
12	 Could you take off your boots, please?
3	 My sister’s looking after Jimmy for me today.
6	 I’m really looking forward to the holidays.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the box explaining the three types of phrasal 
verbs and go through it with the class, making sure Sts 
understand the difference between them. 
	 Now focus on Activation. For a, get Sts to cover the 
sentences and look at the pictures. They can test 
themselves or a partner. Encourage them to say phrases, 
e.g. throw away a letter, fill in a form, as learning phrasal 
verbs in context makes it easier to remember their 
meaning.
	 Now tell Sts to focus on b. Elicit the meaning of these 
phrasal verbs from Sts, or if you know your Sts’ L1, 
translate them.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Here Sts focus on the grammar of phrasal verbs. Focus on 
the photo and instructions. 
	 Get Sts to compare which words they have underlined, 
and check answers.
1  the alarm clock    2  the alarm clock    3  it
e	 Focus on the instructions and check Sts know the 
difference between a noun and a pronoun. Get Sts to read 
and complete the rules. 
	 Check answers.
1  noun    2  pronoun
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.144. 
Grammar notes
Sts will probably ask How do we know if a phrasal verb 
which takes an object is type 2 or type 3? There is no easy 
rule. Tell them:
1	 to always put new phrasal verbs into an example 
sentence, and if they are type 2, to write the object in 
the middle, e.g. turn (the radio) down.
2	 in a dictionary, a type 2 phrasal verb will always be 
given with sth / sb between the verb and the particle, 
e.g. turn sth down.
Differences
Ella gets up two hours earlier than Peter, and goes to bed two 
and a half hours earlier; Ella feels terrible first thing and wants 
more sleep, but Peter just feels a bit sleepy first thing and gets 
enough sleep; Ella walks to work, Peter drives; Ella’s first cup 
of tea is at work, Peter’s is at home before going to work; Ella 
doesn’t go out during the week at all, but Peter will go out if it is 
a necessary work event.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
d	 Get Sts to discuss the questions in pairs, or ask the 
questions to the whole class. You could demonstrate the 
activity by answering some of the questions yourself.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
2	VOCABULARY & GRAMMAR  phrasal verbs
Vocabulary notes
Technically, a phrasal verb is a verb + particle. The particle 
can be a preposition or an adverb. However, at this level it 
is probably easier to call them prepositions, which many of 
them are, rather than confusing Sts with a new term.
Some Sts have a ‘phobia’ of phrasal verbs and are 
convinced that they are impossible to learn. It is important 
to make Sts realize that at the end of the day, they are just 
more vocabulary items. They can often use an alternative 
verb (e.g. continue instead of go on); however, there are 
some concepts which can only really be expressed with a 
phrasal verb (e.g. get up, get on with), and native speakers 
often use them, so it is important for Sts to gradually 
increase their knowledge. 
a	 Focus on the Phrasal verbs box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the instructions and give Sts a few minutes 
to work out what the highlighted verbs mean in the five 
sentences. 
	 Check answers.
1  rings    2  stop sleeping    3  get out of bed    4  leave home to 
do something, like eat in a restaurant or meet up with friends    
5  stop doing it
b	 Now elicit answers for questions 1–3. You might want to 
point out that get on isn’t always followed by with, e.g. My 
brother and I don’t get on well.
1  look for    2  try on    3  get on with
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Phrasal verbs on 
p.163 and get them to do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 10.5   Now do b and play the audio for Sts to listen  
and check.
	 Check answers. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 137@@
137
10B
e 10.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Tim Powell isn’t a morning person. Which is surprising because on 
weekdays, he gets up very early. While most of us are still asleep, 
Powell wakes up at five forty-five, does exercise for thirty minutes 
in his home gym, and has a big breakfast. Then he gets ready for 
work and drives to the office. When he gets to the building where he 
works, he goes for a walk around a local park, then he goes inside to 
start work at nine o’clock. And on Thursdays, he gets up even earlier, 
at five twenty a.m., to study German.
Powell is a lawyer. He works seventy hours a week, and he says that 
getting up early helps him to do more during the day. He isn’t the 
only one – many busy, successful people get up very early.
c	 e 10.8   Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the 
three sentences.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  quiet    2  go to bed    3  do things, energy
e 10.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Experts agree that getting up early is a big help if you have a lot of 
things to do. There are three main reasons for this. The first reason 
why it’s good to get up early is that the early morning is quiet. 
Nobody phones you at six a.m. There aren’t any important emails 
or messages to answer. There aren’t any meetings. There aren’t any 
people. The morning is your time.
The second reason is that if you get up early, you go to bed early. 
Most people don’t do anything useful in the evenings. People who 
go to bed late spend many hours watching TV, seeing their friends, 
and spending time on social media. So if you want to do a lot, it’s 
better to go to bed early, and have shorter evenings and longer 
mornings.
The third reason is that it’s better to do things in the morning, 
when you have energy. Most people are tired after a day at work or 
college. And when you’re tired, the last thing you want to do is to 
exercise, or to study, or to practise a musical instrument. 
And if you find it impossible to get up early? Set your alarm five 
minutes earlier than you usually get up. And the next day set it five 
minutes earlier again. After three weeks, you’ll have nearly two hours 
that you never had before!
d	 Tell Sts to listen and write down examples the expert gives 
for each reason in c. Sts should also listen for the advice he 
gives to people who have problems getting up early.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each reason to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Nobody phones you at 6.00 a.m. There aren’t any important 
emails or messages to answer. There aren’t any meetings. 
There aren’t any people.
2	 Most people don’t do anything useful in the evenings. People 
who go to bed late spend many hours watching TV, seeing 
their friends, and spending time on social media.
3	 Most people are tired after a day at work or university. And 
when you’re tired, the last thing you want to do is to exercise, 
or to study, or to practise a musical instrument.
	 e 10.6   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the 
class, and remind Sts that the green phrasal verbs in the 
Vocabulary Bank are type 1; the red are type 2; and the 
blue are type 3.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 10B on p.145. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	 
1  look after my little sister    2  go out this evening    
3  f    4  looking for a new job    5  f    6  try them on    
7  f    8  get on with her    9  take it back    
10  get up in the morning
b	
1	 Pick them up.
2	 Put it on.
3	 Look it up.
4	 Please fill them in now.
5	 When can you give it back?
6	 Trun it on and see.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	LISTENING  understanding reasons
a	 e 10.7   Focus on the task and items 1–6. Point out to Sts 
that the first one has been done for them. Give them time 
to quickly read 2–6.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
2	 He does exercise for 30 minutes.
3	 He goes for a walk around a local park.
4	 He starts work at 9.00 a.m.
5	 He studies German at 5.20 a.m. on Thursdays.
6	 He works 70 hours a week.
b	 Now play the audio again for Sts to complete the 
sentences about Tim.
	 Check answers.
…it helps him to do more during the day.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 138@@
138
10B
	 Now ask Sts what advice the expert gave for people who 
have problems getting up early.
Get up five minutes earlier every day.
	 Finally, ask Sts what they think of this advice.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could share your 
ideas with the class and also find out who gets up the 
earliest and who gets up the latest.
4	PRONUNCIATION  linking
a	 e 10.9   Here Sts practise deciphering connected speech, 
and all the examples involve phrasal verbs. Write on the 
board as an example GET UP and remind Sts that when a 
word ends with a consonant sound and the next word 
begins with a vowel sound, they are linked together 
and sound like one word, especially when people speak 
quickly. Draw a linking mark on the board between the t 
in get and the u in up. 
	 Point out that the first one (Please turn it off  ) has been 
done for them. Play the audio once for Sts to hear the six 
sentences. Tell them just to listen, not to write. 
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each sentence to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
2  Pick it up    3  look it up    4  Put it on    5  look after it    
6  Take it off
e 10.9
1	 I can’t concentrate with the radio on. Please turn it off.
2	 There’s a wet towel on the floor. Pick it up.
3	 If you don’t know what the word means, look it up.
4	 Why have you taken your coat off? Put it on!
5	 This book was very expensive. Please look after it.
6	 Why are you wearing your coat in here? Take it off!
EXTRA SUPPORT   When writing the answers on the board 
draw the linking mark between the words to show Sts 
where to link words. This will help them when listening and 
repeating in b.
b	 Play the audio again, pausing for Sts to repeat the 
sentences and copy the rhythm.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Go through the questionnaire with Sts, making sure they 
understand all the vocabulary. 
	 Then give Sts some time to think about their answers.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, and get them to interview each other with 
the questionnaire. Tell them to ask alternate questions, 
and to return the questions to each other with What 
about you?.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to choose a few questions to ask 
you before they interview each other.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 139@@
139
10C
	10C	International inventions
b	 Focus on the Talking about people from different 
countries box and go through it with the class. You could 
point out to Sts that not all nationalities fit into these two 
categories, e.g. Czechs, Greeks, Thais, etc. 
	 Focus on countries 1–8 and give Sts time to complete 
the gaps.
c	 e 10.10   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Then either use the audio to drill the 
pronunciation of the words, or model them yourself. 
e 10.10
1	 England	
English	
the English
2	 Brazil	
Brazilian	
the Brazilians
3	 Russia	
Russian	
the Russians 
4	 Turkey	
Turkish	
the Turkish 
5	 Argentina	
Argentinian	
the Argentinians 
6	 Poland	
Polish	
the Polish 
7	 Japan	
Japanese	
the Japanese
8	 Spain	
Spanish	
the Spanish
Pronunciation notes
The most common spelling of the /ʃ/ sound is sh. 
However, ti and ci before another vowel are also 
pronounced /ʃ/ , as in invention and musician. 
The most common spelling of the /tʃ/ sound is ch or tch.
The most common spelling of the /dʒ/ sound is j; g before 
e, i, or y; and dge.
d	 e 10.11   Focus on the three sound pictures and elicit the 
words and sounds: shower /ʃ/, chess /tʃ/, and jazz /dʒ/.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat.
e 10.11
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.82
e	 e 10.12   Focus on the task. Remind Sts that this type of 
activity is easier if they say the words aloud to themselves.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to complete the task.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the sounds before Sts listen to 
the audio.
1  b, a    2  b, b, a    3  c, b    4  c, c    5  c, a
e 10.12
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.82
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
 G   the passive
 V   people from different countries
 P   /ʃ/, /tʃ/, and /dʒ/
Lesson plan
This lesson focuses on inventions – firstly, things that were 
invented by different nationalities in different centuries, and 
later, in the video listening, things invented by women. The 
lesson begins with Vocabulary and Pronunciation, where Sts 
look at nationality adjectives and the three sounds: /ʃ/,  
/tʃ/, and /dʒ/. Inventions through the ages provide the 
context for the introduction of the present and past passive 
in Grammar. Next, in Speaking, Sts ask each other quiz 
questions that use the passive. Finally, the lesson ends with a 
video listening, where Sts watch or hear a programme about 
six things invented by women.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  the passive: be + past participle p.201  
Communicative  General knowledge quiz p.246 
(instructions p.215)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Invented by women
For students
Workbook  10C
Online Practice  10C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the following phrase on the board:
THE MOST IMPORTANT INVENTION OF THE 20TH CENTURY WAS…
Give Sts, in pairs, two or three minutes to complete the 
sentence.
Get feedback and write Sts’ ideas on the board. 
Then get Sts to vote, with a show of hands, for the most 
useful invention.
1	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  people 
from different countries; /ʃ/, /tʃ/, and /dʒ/
Vocabulary notes
Talking about people of different nationalities is a 
complicated area in English. In this lesson we just focus 
on people in general from different countries, rather than 
individuals (an Englishman, a Dane, etc.). If relevant to 
your Sts, you could explain that some nationalities also 
have a specific word for people from that country (that is 
different from the nationality adjective), e.g. the Scottish – 
the Scots, the Turkish – the Turks, the Polish – the Poles,  
the Spanish – the Spaniards, etc.
a	 Books open. Do this as a whole-class activity.
1	 American, Belgian, Italian (all end in an)
2	 Chinese, Swiss, French, Dutch, English, Spanish 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 140@@
140
10C
2	GRAMMAR  the passive
a	 Focus on the instructions and the photos. Make sure Sts 
know the meaning of a century (= a period of 100 years) 
and to invent (= to make or think of sth for the first time).
	 Put Sts in small groups and tell them to complete 
sentences 1–10 with the items which are shown in the 
photos. Tell them to look carefully at the verbs to see if the 
item should be in the singular or plural.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are right.
b	 e 10.13   Tell Sts they are now going to hear the answers 
as well as some extra facts about each item. First, they just 
need to listen and check their answers to a.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each item to check the answer.
1  Guns    2  Glasses    3  The hot-air balloon    4  Stamps    
5  The saxophone    6  Dynamite    7  The watch    
8  The mobile phone    9  Lego    10  CDs
e 10.13
The thirteenth century
Guns were invented by the Chinese. The first guns were quite large, 
like small cannons. The oldest gun that still exists today was made in 
about twelve eighty.
Glasses were invented by the Italians in about twelve eighty-six. 
Sunglasses were invented even earlier, in the twelfth century.
The eighteenth century
The hot-air balloon was invented by two French brothers, Joseph 
and Jacques Montgolfier. The first flight with people was in 
seventeen eighty-three, and the balloon flew three kilometres,  
over Paris.
The nineteenth century
Stamps were invented by an English teacher, Rowland Hill. The 
first stamp, from eighteen forty, was called the Penny Black, and it 
showed the head of the young Queen Victoria.
The saxophone was invented by a Belgian musician in eighteen 
forty-six. His name was Adolphe Sax. Saxophones were first used 
mainly in military bands, but are now used in all kinds of music.
Dynamite was invented by a Swedish scientist called Alfred Nobel. 
The Nobel Prize is named after him. Since its invention, it has been 
used all over the world for demolition, for making tunnels, cutting 
canals, and building railways.
The wrist watch was invented by the Swiss. The first one was made 
for a Hungarian countess by Patek Philippe in eighteen sixty-eight, a 
company which still makes luxury watches today.
The twentieth century
The mobile phone was invented by the Americans. It was first 
produced by the company Motorola. On the third of April nineteen 
seventy-three, Martin Cooper, a Motorola researcher and executive, 
made the first mobile telephone call. His phone weighed one point 
one kilos.
Lego was invented by a Danish businessman, Ole Kirk Christiansen. 
The name Lego comes from the Danish phrase leg godt, which means 
‘play well’. Twenty billion pieces of Lego are produced every year.
CDs were invented by a Dutch company, Philips. Sony also worked 
on CDs, and they were designed to play seventy-four minutes of 
music because that was the length of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony – 
the Sony boss’s favourite piece of music.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and they need to 
write down one more piece of information about each 
invention.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each invention to give 
Sts time to write.
	 Elicit any information Sts understood about each invention.
See script 10.13
d	 Focus on the task and the example. Tell Sts to write four 
more true sentences using information from each column 
once only.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
2	 The first stamp was called the Penny Black.
3	 Twenty billion pieces of Lego are produced every year.
4	 The saxophone was invented by Adolphe Sax.
5	 The Nobel Prize is named after the inventor of dynamite.
e	 Focus on the two sentences, a and b, and read the three 
questions aloud to the class. Elicit answers from the 
whole class, getting a majority opinion on each one and 
confirming if it is right or wrong.
1  Yes    2  b    3  a
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10C on p.144. 
Grammar notes
This lesson provides an introduction to the passive and Sts 
are taught present and past forms only.
The form of the passive is not difficult for Sts as it is 
composed of known items: the verb be and a past 
participle.
The passive is often used in English where other 
languages use an impersonal subject.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may want to point out to Sts that all 
other forms of the passive are made simply by changing the 
form of be, e.g. will be made, has been made, etc.
	 e 10.14   Focus on the example sentences and play 
the audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Make sure they 
pronounce the  
-ed endings in the participles correctly, and encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 10C on p.145. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 Many of the things we use every day were invented by 
women.
2	 In the UK most children are educated in state schools.
3	 DNA was discovered by Watson and Crick in 1953.
4	 This morning I was woken up by the neighbour’s dog.
5	 Cricket is played in the summer in the UK.
6	 The songs on this album were written last year.
7	 Millions of toys are made in China every year.
8	 Carols are songs which are sung at Christmas.
9	 These birds aren’t usually seen in northern Europe.
10	 The London Eye was opened on 31 December 1999…
b	
1	 St Paul’s Cathedral was designed by Christopher Wren.
2	 This olive oil is produced by a small Italian company.
3	 Australia was discovered by the Dutch in 1606.
4	 The Star Wars films weren’t directed by Spielberg.
5	 Sunflowers was painted by Van Gogh in 1888.
6	 Glass wasn’t invented by the Chinese.
7	 The Harry Potter books were written by J.K. Rowling.
8	 Skoda cars are made in the Czech Republic.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10C.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 141@@
141
10C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	SPEAKING 
	 Put Sts into pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Passives quiz, A on p.106, B on p.111. 
	 Give Sts time to complete their sentences and circle the 
correct answers. 
	 Get Sts to sit face-to-face if possible. A reads his / her 
sentences to B, who listens and says if A’s sentences are 
right or wrong, and corrects the wrong answers. 
	 Sts then swap roles.
	 Monitor and help as Sts do the task, making sure they are 
forming the passive and pronouncing the past participle 
correctly.
	 End the activity when the majority of pairs have finished.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10C.
4	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Focus on the photos and give Sts, in pairs, a couple of 
minutes to guess which six things were invented by 
women. Don’t check answers yet.
b	 Play the video for Sts to check their answers.
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts understand what all the 
words mean, e.g. disposable = you throw it away after you 
have used it once. Model and drill pronunciation.
	 Get feedback to find out if Sts had guessed correctly. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen.
The six inventions are: the dishwasher, disposable nappies, 
windscreen wipers, the life raft, solar heating, and CCTV.
Invented by women
Hello, and welcome to Science Now. When we think of famous 
inventors, we usually think of men – like Alexander Graham Bell, 
Guglielmo Marconi, and Thomas Edison. But many of the things 
which make our lives easier or safer today were invented by women. 
And on today’s show, we’re going to look at six of them.
One invention that definitely improved the lives of millions of 
people was the disposable nappy. They were invented by a woman 
called Marion Donovan. Her father and uncle were inventors and, 
when she had young children, she invented a nappy that you 
could use and then throw away. Before her invention, babies wore 
nappies made of cotton – like these. And this meant a lot of washing. 
Although she invented the disposable nappy in the nineteen forties, 
it wasn’t until nineteen fifty-one that an American company bought 
Donovan’s idea. Today, millions of disposable nappies are used every 
day, and Donovan’s invention is now more eco-friendly. You can buy 
biodegradable nappies!
And now another invention which has made life easier. 
The dishwasher was invented by a woman called Josephine 
Cochrane in eighteen eighty-six. She was a rich American who gave 
a lot of dinner parties. But she was annoyed that her servants often 
broke plates and glasses when they were washing up after a party. 
Oops! So, Cochrane decided to invent a machine which could wash 
a lot of plates and glasses safely. She said, ‘If nobody else is going to 
invent a dishwasher, then I will!’ She designed the machine, and then 
she found a company to make it. At first, only hotels and restaurants 
bought Cochrane’s new machine, but today, the dishwasher is used 
in homes all over the world.
	The car was invented by a man, but it was a woman, Mary Anderson, 
who solved one of the biggest problems of driving. On a trip to 
New York in nineteen oh three, Anderson noticed that drivers had 
to open their windows to see where they were going when it was 
raining. When she returned to her home in Alabama, she invented 
windscreen wipers, which made driving a lot safer.
	Our fourth invention made life safer for people living in flats or 
apartments – video entry phones. They were invented in nineteen 
sixty-six by Marie Van Brittan Brown, a nurse who lived in New York. 
Her neighbourhood was quite dangerous and Brown was often 
at home alone, so she decided to invent something that would 
make her feel safer. With the help of her husband, an electrician, 
she developed a camera that you could put by the front door. This 
camera sent a picture of the person at the door to a screen inside the 
flat, and there was also a microphone so you could talk to the person 
outside. If the person was a welcome visitor, you pushed a button 
to let them in. If not, you could push another button to contact a 
security company. This system is now common all over the world.
	And now an invention that has saved a lot of lives. The modern life 
raft was invented by Maria Beasley in eighteen eighty and then 
improved in eighteen eighty-two. Before her invention, life rafts 
were just wooden platforms, and many people died in accidents 
at sea. Four of her life rafts were used on the Titanic, alongside the 
ship’s normal lifeboats. When the Titanic sank in nineteen twelve, 
only seven hundred and six people survived, and nearly two 
hundred of them were in the life rafts designed by Beasley.
Our last invention is one of today’s most important green 
technologies. Mária Telkes, a Hungarian-American scientist, worked 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States 
in the nineteen forties. She was so interested in the power of the 
sun, that her nickname was ‘the Sun Queen’. In nineteen forty-eight, 
she designed the first house which was heated completely by the 
sun. The system worked for three years. The solar technology we 
use today is very different from Telkes’s invention, but – like all our 
female inventors – she showed the world what was possible. And 
today solar technology has the power to change our lives and save 
our environment.
c	 Focus on the questions and give Sts time to read them. 
	 Play the video again for Sts to watch for more detail. Pause 
after each invention to give Sts time to write their answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, then play the video 
again if necessary. 
	 Check answers.
1	 They were inventors. Nappies were made of cotton. In 1951, 
an American company bought her invention.
2	 Her servants often broke plates and glasses when they were 
washing up. The first customers were hotels and restaurants.
3	 She got the idea in 1903 on a trip to New York. They had to 
open their windows to see where they were going.
4	 She was a nurse. She lived in a dangerous neighbourhood. 
Her husband helped her with her invention. You could push a 
button to contact a security company.
5	 They were used on the Titanic. Nearly 200 survivors had used 
her invention.
6	 She was Hungarian-American. Her nickname was ‘the Sun 
Queen’. In 1948 she designed the first house to be heated by 
the sun.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 142@@
142
Revise and Check
	9&10	 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    2  a    3  b    4  c    5  a
e 10.15
1
I = interviewer, H = Hope
I	 What animal would you most like to see in the wild, for example 
on a safari? 
H	 Oh, that’s a really good question. Probably an elephant.
I	 Why?
H	 I think they’re amazing. They’re so big, and just, they sort of live in 
the wilderness, and yeah.
2
I = interviewer, M = Mairi
I	 Do you have a phobia?
M	 I'm frightened of spiders.
I	 How long have you had it?
M	 Er, since I was about five or six I think, but I’m not sure.
I	 How does it affect your life?
M	 Um, I normally have to check a room to see if there’s a big spider 
in it before I go to sleep, because, one time a spider, er, joined me 
in my bed.
3
I = interviewer, D = Dave
I	 Who’s the oldest person you know well? 
D	 My great aunt is a hundred and four, living in California. 
I	 What kind of life has she had? 
D	 She has had a great life. She’s still travelling at a hundred and four.
4
I = interviewer, S = Sarah
I	 Do you do any sport or exercise?
S	 I run and I hike, and I do yoga.
I	 Do you enjoy it?
S	 I love hiking, hiking is my favourite, and I just love being in nature 
and outdoors, and experiencing nature on foot.
5
I = interviewer, K = Kathy
I	 Are you a morning or evening person?
K	 Um, I’m a morning person. Um, I feel a lot more awake in the 
morning than in the evening, um, so I tend to get up early, even 
when I’m not at, even when I’m not at work. Um, and I prefer to 
go to bed earlier.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    2  c    3  a    4  c    5  c    6  a    7  c    8  a    9  c    10  a    
11  c    12  b    13  b    14  c    15  b
VOCABULARY
a
1	 goat (the others are insects)
2	 lion (the others are farm animals)
3	 spider (the others live in the sea)
4	 retire (the others are to do with marriage)
5	 cycling (the others are sports with a ball)
b
1  for    2  for    3  since    4  since    5  for
c
1  through    2  into    3  along    4  towards    5  past    6  off    
7  up    8  down (off)    9  forward    10  out
d
1  Japanese    2  French    3  Swiss    4  Belgians    5  Spanish
PRONUNCIATION
c
1  giraffe /dʒ/    2  work /ɜː/    3  divorce /ɔː/    4  invention /ʃ/    
5  Dutch /tʃ/
d
1  butterfly    2  retire    3  secondary    4  athletics    5  karate
CAN YOU understand this text?
b
1  Robert Bauer    2  Jon Drummond    3  Angel Matos    
4  Nelson Piquet    5  Luciano Gaucci
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 143@@
143
11A
 G   used to
 V   school subjects: history, geography, etc.
 P   used to / didn’t use to
Lesson plan
In this lesson Sts learn to use used to to talk about repeated 
past actions, and the main context is school experiences.
The lesson begins with a vocabulary focus on school 
subjects. Then Sts read an article in which three teachers talk 
about a student of theirs who became famous. Extracts from 
the article are used to present the grammar of used to / didn’t 
use to. This is followed by a pronunciation focus on how to 
pronounce the new language. In Listening and Speaking, Sts 
listen to six people talking about whether they liked school 
or not, which leads into a speaking activity where Sts talk 
about their own experiences at primary or secondary school.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar   used to / didn't used to p.202 
Communicative   My past p.247 (instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  11A
Online Practice  11A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write on the board:  
WHAT PRIMARY / SECONDARY SCHOOL DID YOU GO TO? DID YOU LIKE IT? 
WHY (NOT)? 
Model and drill the pronunciation of primary and secondary. 
Answer the question yourself and tell Sts a bit about your 
school experience. If your Sts are at secondary school, they 
should talk about their primary school experience. Then get 
them to ask and answer in pairs, and get some feedback.
1	VOCABULARY  school subjects
a	 e 11.1   Books open. Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts 
they are going to hear nine teachers in their classrooms. 
Model and drill the pronunciation of subjects  
/ˈsʌbdʒekts/. 
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and number the lessons 
they hear.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
e 11.1
T = teacher, Sts = students, S = student
1	
T	 OK, so now repeat after me: du pain.
Sts	Du pain
T	 De la salade
Sts	De la salade
T	 Des saucisses
Sts	Des saucisses
2	
T	 So last week, we looked at percentages, and today, we’re going to 
look at fractions. Can someone give me an example of a fraction?
S	 Three quarters?
T	 Yes, exactly. And what would that be as a percentage?
S	 Seventy-five per cent.
3	
T	 Can anybody tell me the dates of the First World War?
S	 Me sir, me sir!
T	 Angela?
S	 Nineteen thirty-nine to nineteen forty-five, sir.
T	 No, that’s the Second World War. Try again.
4	
T	 So we’re going to start by defining a few words and phrases. 
I’m going to dictate the terms and I want you to write a short 
definition. So, for example, if I said the word cookies, what would 
you write?
S	 Biscuits?
T	 Very funny, Carl. Anna?
S	 Er, pieces of text that, er, websites put onto your computer?
T	 That’s right. And what do internet cookies do?
S	 They record details of the websites you’ve visited and, er, how 
long you've spent on them.
5	
T	 OK. Act three, scene one. OK, Jack, you can be Hamlet. This is a 
very important speech. Are you ready?
S	 Yes. To be, or not to be, that is the question. Whether…
6	
T	 So I have a small piece of sodium here – about one cubic 
centimetre – and we’re going to see what happens when we add 
it to water. So if you could all stand back a bit…further back…
OK…Here we go… 
7	
T	 Today, we’re going to look at two self-portraits from different 
centuries. Take a look at these.
S	 The one on the right looks like you, sir! 
T	 Thank you, Jasper. Now, I want you to start by thinking about two 
questions. When do you think the self-portraits were painted? 
And how old do you think the artists were when they painted 
them?
8	
T	 OK, we’re going to warm up first. I want you to run round the 
track three times.
Sts	Can’t we play football?
T	 No, come on, three times round the track. Ready, steady, go.
9	
T	 There are no active volcanoes in the UK, but there are quite a lot 
in the rest of Europe. Can anyone tell me a European country that 
has active volcanoes?
S	 France?
T	 Not France, no…
Sts	Italy? Italy has Mount Etna.
T	 Yes, Italy. In fact, Etna is the highest active volcano in Europe, at 
over three thousand three hundred metres. 
	11A	Ask the teacher
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 144@@
144
11A
9	 geography
T	 There are no active volcanoes in the UK, but there are quite a lot 
in the rest of Europe. Can anyone tell me a European country that 
has active volcanoes?
S	 France?
T	 Not France, no…
Sts	Italy? Italy has Mount Etna.
T	 Yes, Italy. In fact, Etna is the highest active volcano in Europe, at 
over three thousand three hundred metres. 
c	 e 11.3   Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the 
subjects.
e 11.3
See words in a in Student’s Book on p.86
	 Then repeat the activity, getting individual Sts to repeat. 
Point out that history /ˈhɪstri/ and literature /ˈlɪtrətʃə/ 
each have a syllable which isn’t pronounced (the o in 
history and the e in literature).
d	 Focus on the task and elicit answers to the first question. 
Write the subjects on the board.
	 Now focus on the second question and the three options. 
Point out the speech bubble and the use of at after good, 
OK, and bad.
	 Demonstrate the activity by talking about the subjects 
yourself.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a few minutes to talk to 
each other. 
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	READING
a	 Focus on the task and either put Sts in pairs or do this as a 
whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the title and read the introduction together. 
Make sure Sts understand fame (noun from famous), 
academy, and spark (= a special quality of energy, 
intelligence, or enthusiasm that makes sb very clever, 
amusing, etc.). Model and drill pronunciation. Point out 
the Glossary.
	 Give Sts time to read the article to check their answers to a.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
the most popular: Alex Turner
the most unpopular: Jude Law
the quietest: J.K. Rowling
c	 Focus on the instructions and questions 1–6, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. pupil, perform, etc. Model 
and drill the pronunciation of pupil /ˈpjuːpl/.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and answer the 
questions.
	 Check answers.
1  Jude Law’s teacher    ​2  J.K. Rowling    ​3  Alex Turner’s teacher  ​
4  J.K. Rowling’s teacher    ​5  Jude Law    ​6  Alex Turner
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
b	 e 11.2   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers by asking the subject and which words 
helped Sts guess. 
Possible answers
1	 foreign languages (French): repeat after me, all French words
2	 maths: percentage, fraction, three quarters, 75%
3	 history: First World War, 1939 to 1945, Second World War
4	 IT: cookies, website, computer, internet
5	 literature: act, scene, speech, Hamlet
6	 science (chemistry) sodium, add, water
7	 art: self-portraits, painted, artists
8	 PE: warm up, run, track, football
9	 geography: active volcanoes, European countries, Mount Etna
e 11.2
T = teacher, Sts = students, S = student
1	 foreign languages
T	 OK, so now repeat after me: du pain.
Sts	Du pain
T	 De la salade
Sts	De la salade
T	 Des saucisses
Sts	Des saucisses
2	 maths
T	 So last week, we looked at percentages, and today, we’re going to 
look at fractions. Can someone give me an example of a fraction?
S	 Three quarters?
T	 Yes, exactly. And what would that be as a percentage?
S	 Seventy-five per cent.
3	 history
T	 Can anybody tell me the dates of the First World War?
S	 Me, sir. Me, sir!
T	 Angela?
S	 Nineteen thirty-nine to nineteen forty-five, sir.
T	 No, that’s the Second World War. Try again.
4	 IT
T	 So we’re going to start by defining a few words and phrases. 
I’m going to dictate the terms and I want you to write a short 
definition. So, for example, if I said the word cookies, what would 
you write?
S	 Biscuits?
T	 Very funny, Carl. Anna?
S	 Er, pieces of text that, er, websites put onto your computer?
T	 That’s right. And what do internet cookies do?
S	 They record details of the websites you’ve visited and, er, how 
long you've spent on them.
5	 literature
T	 OK. Act three, scene one. OK, Jack, you can be Hamlet. This is a 
very important speech. Are you ready?
S	 Yes. To be, or not to be, that is the question. Whether…
6	 science
T	 So I have a small piece of sodium here – about one cubic 
centimetre – and we’re going to see what happens when we add 
it to water. So if you could all stand back a bit…Further back…
OK…Here we go… 
7	 art
T	 Today, we’re going to look at two self-portraits from different 
centuries. Take a look at these.
S	 The one on the right looks like you, sir! 
T	 Thank you, Jasper. Now, I want you to start by thinking about two 
questions. When do you think the self-portraits were painted? 
And how old do you think the artists were when they painted 
them?
8	 PE
T	 OK, we’re going to warm up first. I want you to run round the 
track three times.
Sts	Can’t we play football?
T	 No, come on, three times round the track. Ready, steady, go.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 145@@
145
11A
4	PRONUNCIATION  used to / didn’t use to
Pronunciation notes
As mentioned earlier, Sts might confuse used to + 
infinitive with the past of the verb use. As well as having 
a completely different meaning, the two verbs are 
pronounced differently (used to is pronounced /ˈjuːstə/ 
and used (past of use) is /juːzd/).
The final /t/ in used and the /t/ in to are run together 
and make one /t/ sound. For this reason, use to or used 
to sound the same, and Sts sometimes write Did you 
used to…?.
a	 e 11.5   Focus on the Pronouncing used to box 
and go through it with the class. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of used to /ˈjuːstə/. 
	 Now focus on the task. Play the audio once for Sts just to 
listen. 
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
e 11.5
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.87
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
b	 e 11.6   Focus on the task and the example. Tell Sts that 
for the first four sentences, they must make positive 
used to sentences; for the next four, negative ones; and 
questions for the final four.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase to give Sts time 
to make the transformation.
e 11.6
Positive sentences
have a lot of friends (pause) I used to have a lot of friends.
be lazy (pause) I used to be lazy.
wear a uniform (pause) I used to wear a uniform.
play football (pause) I used to play football.
Negative sentences
like exams (pause) I didn’t use to like exams.
do much homework (pause)	 I didn’t use to do much homework.
be good at maths (pause)	 I didn’t use to be good at maths.
enjoy PE (pause) I didn’t use to enjoy PE. 
Questions
work hard (pause) Did you use to work hard?
like school (pause) Did you use to like school?
do sport (pause) Did you use to do sport?
have long hair (pause)	 Did you use to have long hair?
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups. You 
could tell the class what you think your teachers thought 
of you. If any of your Sts are still at school, ask them what 
they think their teachers think of them.
3	GRAMMAR  used to
a	 Tell Sts to read the three sentences from the article and 
answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
1  b    ​2  a
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11A on p.146.
Grammar notes
Used to only exists in the past, and is used for past habits 
or states. Sts may not have an equivalent form in their 
language. If they do have an equivalent verb, it may also 
exist in the present (for present habits), which means 
Sts may try to say I use to for present habits, rather than 
using the present simple and an adverb of frequency  
(I usually…). A typical mistake is: I use to go to the gym 
every Friday.
 !   Sts might confuse used to + infinitive with the past of 
the verb use, e.g. I used my dictionary when I did my English 
homework.
	 e 11.4   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the used to or usually? box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 11A on p.147. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 He used to have long hair.
2	 He didn’t use to wear glasses.
3	 He didn’t use to have a beard.
4	 He used to play / like / love / be interested in football.
5	 He didn’t use to wear a tie.
b	 
1	 Angie used to hate maths, but she loves it now.
2	 Where did you use to work when you lived in Cairo?
3	 I didn’t use to like reading when I was a child.
4	 What did you use to do in the summer holidays when you 
were young?
5	 The British didn’t use to cook with olive oil, but now it’s very 
popular.
6	 This restaurant used to be a cinema in the 1960s.
7	 Did your sister use to eat meat, or has she always been a 
vegetarian?
8	 I didn’t use to be interested in athletics, but now I always 
watch it.
9	 Did you use to have a motorbike when you were a student?
10	 Telegrams used to be the quickest way to send important 
messages.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 146@@
146
11A
4	
I	 Did you like school?
W	 I didn’t like it – I absolutely loved it! I liked all the subjects, 
especially English and history. I remember one time when I was 
about six or seven, I got ill during the Easter holidays and I was 
really, really sad, and my mum thought I was sad because I was 
ill during the holidays, but in fact, I was terrified that I’d never get 
better and I’d never go back to school. 
5	
I	 Did you like school?
W	 Er, sometimes. Yeah, most of the time. 
I	 What did you like about it?
W	 Well, I had some good friends, and I liked learning things, but 
there were some subjects that I didn’t like very much, and I hated 
PE. I used to invent a lot of excuses, like saying that I was ill, 
because I didn’t want to do it. 
6	
I	 Did you like school?
W	 Yes, definitely. I really enjoyed school. Elementary school was all 
fun and we had great teachers. I always really looked forward 
to getting back to school. High school was harder work and we 
used to have lots of exams and tests, but we had really inspiring 
teachers. My favourites were in math and biology. And overall, 
yeah, I really liked it.
	 Remind Sts that speakers 1–3 are men and 4–6 are 
women, then ask the class if the men enjoyed school 
more than the women, or if it was about the same. 
The women enjoyed school more than the men.
	 Finally, ask Sts if they think in their country girls tend to 
enjoy school more than boys
c	 Tell Sts that they are now going to hear the people again 
and they must make a list of the subjects they liked and 
disliked.
	 Play the audio again and then check answers. Elicit other 
details if possible.
Speaker 1: He liked PE and English, but didn’t like maths, history, 
and science. 
Speaker 2: He didn’t really like any of the subjects. 
Speaker 3: He liked English and maths, but hated geography 
and PE. He enjoyed quite a lot of subjects. 
Speaker 4: She liked all the subjects, especially English and 
history. 
Speaker 5: She hated PE.
Speaker 6: She really liked maths and biology. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Focus on the instructions and give Sts time to think about 
their answers.
e	 Put Sts in small groups of three and get them to tell each 
other about their answers to d. 
	 Get some feedback from various groups. You could also 
tell the class whether you used to like school.
5	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 	
	 attitude
a	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. point out that the first one (P) has 
been done for them
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
No, not really. I didn’t like it at all.  N
I didn’t hate school, but I don’t think I liked it very much.  N
Sometimes. Yeah, most of the time.  P
Well, yes and no.  B
Yes, definitely. I really enjoyed school.  P
b	 e 11.7   Focus on the task and tell Sts that all the speakers 
are answering the same question as in a, Did you like 
school?.
	 Before playing the audio, tell Sts that one of the speakers 
is American. Focus on the Education in the UK and the 
US box and go through it with the class.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to match the speaker to their answer in a. Play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1: I didn’t hate school, but I don’t think I liked it 
very much.
Speaker 2: No, not really. I didn’t like it at all.
Speaker 3: Well, yes and no.
Speaker 4: I didn’t like it – I absolutely loved it!
Speaker 5: Sometimes. Yeah, most of the time. 
Speaker 6: Yes definitely. I really enjoyed school.
e 11.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
I = interviewer, M = man, W = woman
1	
I	 Did you like school?
M	 I didn’t hate school, but I don’t think I liked it very much. I used to 
enjoy PE; I used to enjoy sport; um, I quite liked English, but there 
were lots of subjects I didn’t like. I didn’t like maths very much, 
history was boring, and I found science difficult. I had a small 
group of friends – not many, but a close group of friends – and I 
used to spend time with them, talking about sport, talking about 
music. So it wasn’t too bad, but I didn’t like it very much. I’ve 
never been back to school – I’ve never been to a school reunion, 
or anything like that.
2	
I	 Did you like school?
M	 No, not really. I didn’t like it at all.
I	 Why not?
M	 It was a boys’ school and I got bored with just being with boys all 
the time. And I didn’t really like any of the subjects.
3
I	 Did you like school?
M	 Well, yes and no. Some things I really loved; some things I 
thought, ‘This isn’t much fun’; but I used to enjoy quite a lot of the 
subjects.
I	 Like what?
M	 I liked English and I liked maths.
I	 And what didn’t you enjoy?
M	 I hated geography. And I hated PE. The PE teacher once caught 
me reading a book on the football pitch, and I was punished for 
that.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 147@@
147
11B
	11B	Help! I can’t decide!
	 Get feedback from various pairs to find out which of them 
is more indecisive, and find out (with a show of hands) if 
the majority of the class is indecisive or decisive.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to interview you first. Give as 
many examples as you can.
b	 e 11.8   Focus on the photo and the task, and elicit 
the vocabulary for all the things Sts can see in Nancy’s 
suitcase. You could ask Sts what they think Brian might say 
that Nancy doesn’t need to pack.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
1  trainers    2  raincoat    3  hairdryer    4  two pairs of jeans
e 11.8
B = Brian, N = Nancy
B	 Have you finished packing? The taxi will be here in fifteen 
minutes.
N	 Er, nearly. I can’t decide what to take.
B	 Well, hurry up. You don’t need all that! You’ll never close that 
suitcase. And we can only take fifteen kilos each.
N	 Yes, I know. 
B	 You don’t need your trainers. We’re going to be on the beach 
most of the time! 
N	 Yes, but I might go to the gym. There’s one in the hotel.
B	 And why are you taking a raincoat? It’s not going to rain in Greece 
in June.
N	 It might rain. It sometimes rains in the summer. 
B	 What’s that?
N	 It’s my hairdryer.
B	 But the hotel will have a hairdryer.
N	 It might not have one. Hotels don’t always have hairdryers. And I 
need it. 
B	 And two pairs of jeans? We’re only going to be there for a week.
N	 They’re different styles. I’m not sure which ones I’ll want to wear.
B	 You need to take some things out. Extra baggage costs a fortune. 
It’s something like ten pounds per kilo.
N	 Yes, yes, I will. I promise. 
B	 Well, hurry up. The traffic might be a bit slow because of the rain. 
N	 I’ll be ready in five minutes…
***
B	 The taxi’s here. 
N	 I’ve closed my case. Can you take it downstairs?
B	 I’m sure this is more than fifteen kilos.
N	 I think it’ll be OK…
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and they must write 
down the reasons Nancy gives for wanting to take each 
item mentioned in b.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and complete 
sentences 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  I might go to the gym.   
2  It might rain.    
3  The hotel might not have one.   
4  They’re different styles.
 G   might
 V   word building: noun formation, e.g. decide – decision
 P   diphthongs
Lesson plan
This lesson presents the modal verb might, used to express 
possibility through the context of a person who is very 
indecisive. The lesson begins with Speaking, where Sts 
interview each other to find out whether they are indecisive. 
In the Grammar Bank, Sts see that may is an alternative to 
might. Although both forms are common, in oral practice Sts 
are asked simply to use might, in order to avoid confusion. 
Then in Pronunciation, Sts work on some common 
diphthongs. This is followed by a listening which asks 
whether there is too much choice in today’s world. Finally, 
in Vocabulary and Speaking, Sts get some practice in word 
building (formation of nouns).
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  might / might not (possibility) p.203 
Communicative  I might…but I might not p.248 
(instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  11B
Online Practice  11B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write DECIDE on the board. Ask Sts what it means (= to think 
carefully about the different possibilities that are available 
and choose one of them) and which part of speech it is 
(verb, noun, etc.), and elicit that it’s a verb. Ask where the 
stress is and mark it on the board (DECIDE). 
Then ask What’s the noun from decide? and elicit that it’s 
decision. Teach / Elicit the phrase make a decision.  
Then elicit / teach the adjective decisive and its meaning (it 
describes a person who can make decisions quickly), and 
then teach / elicit the opposite, indecisive. 
1	GRAMMAR  might
a	 Books open. Focus on the Are you indecisive? questionnaire 
and put Sts in pairs. If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, 
write indecisive on the board and underline the stressed 
syllable. Go through the questions and make sure Sts 
understand the phrase change your mind (= make a 
decision and then change it). Tell them they are going 
to interview each other to find out who is the more 
indecisive of the two of them. 
	 Give Sts time to interview each other. Monitor and 
encourage them to ask for / give more information, and to 
illustrate their answers with examples.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 148@@
148
11B
g	 Focus on the task and the example in the speech bubbles. 
You could demonstrate the activity by answering a couple 
of the questions yourself. 
	 Make sure Sts understand that they must give two 
possibilities each time and return the question with 
What about you?. Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and 
answer the five questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	PRONUNCIATION  diphthongs
Pronunciation notes
A diphthong is a combination of two vowel sounds which 
run together to produce a new sound. For example, the 
diphthong /ɪə/ is a combination of /ɪ/ and /ə/. There are 
eight diphthongs in English, which are all practised here.
a	 e 11.11   Look at the eight picture words and sounds, 
and tell Sts to listen to how they are pronounced. Or, you 
could elicit the ones you think Sts already know. Play the 
audio once for Sts to just listen.
e 11.11
1	 bike /aɪ/
2	 train /eɪ/
3	 phone /əʊ/
4	 chair /eə/
5	 ear /ɪə/
6	 tourist /ʊə/
7	 owl /aʊ/
8	 boy /ɔɪ/
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat each 
sound. Play again if necessary, concentrating especially on 
any sounds your Sts find more difficult to make.
b	 Tell Sts to look at all the words in each category and 
to find the odd word out, i.e. the one that doesn’t 
have the same diphthong sound. Remind Sts that this 
kind of exercise is easier if they say the words aloud to 
themselves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
c	 e 11.12   Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  since    ​2  key    ​3  trousers    ​4  fear    ​5  where    ​6  bus    ​
7  throw    8  town
e 11.12
See words in Student’s Book on p.88
	 Then play the audio, pausing after each line for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
d	 e 11.13   Tell Sts they are going to hear one sentence 
for each of the eight sounds in b. They must listen and 
repeat it.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
d	 e 11.9   Tell the class Brian and Nancy are now at the 
airport. Sts must listen and answer the question What 
happens?.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check the answer.
Nancy’s suitcase is too heavy (17.5 kilos, and she can only  
take 15). They tell her to pay £25 extra. She tries to take some 
things out and put them in Brian’s case.
e 11.9
BD = bag drop, B = Brian, N = Nancy
BD	Can you put your case on the scales, please?
B	 Shall I help you?
N	 No, I’m fine.
BD	That’s seventeen and a half kilos. You can only take fifteen.
B	 I knew it. I told you it was too heavy.
BD	You need to go to the window over there and pay for the extra 
two and a half kilos. That’ll be twenty-five pounds.
N	 Twenty-five pounds? No, wait. Brian, I can put some things in your 
case. Yours was only ten kilos. Look, take this pair of jeans…and 
the hairdryer…and these books…and the raincoat…
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
2	 a possibility
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11B on p.146. 
Grammar notes 
Might and may are synonyms, but might is probably more 
frequent in spoken English, which is why the presentation 
focuses on this form. However, may is also commonly 
used, especially in writing, so it is important that this is 
pointed out to Sts.
At this level, might is taught more for recognition than 
production, as it is an example of ‘late assimilation’ 
language. In conversation, Sts are more likely to try to 
express the same idea in another way, e.g. by using 
maybe, possibly, or It’s possible.
	 e 11.10   Focus on the examples and play the audio for 
Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the may / may not box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 11B on p.147. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  H    ​2  G    ​3  A    ​4  C    ​5  B    ​6  I    ​7  F    ​8  E
b	
1  She might be ill.    ​
2  He might be in a meeting.    ​
3  You might not like it.    ​
4  I might not have time.    ​
5  I might have the pasta.   
6  It might be cold later.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 149@@
149
11B
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the five main 
points and their options. Make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis.
	 Play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to choose their answers before 
they listen again.
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  b    5  c
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Either put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to 
discuss the two questions for each situation.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  word building: 	
	 noun formation
Vocabulary notes
There are several ways of making nouns from verbs, 
but here we focus on the three most common endings: 
-ion, -sion, and -ation. More complicated for Sts is when 
the noun is a different word altogether – Sts learn six 
common examples here.
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Model and drill 
pronunciation of each word.
choose = verb  choice = noun   
decide = verb  decision = noun
b	 Focus on the Making nouns from verbs box and go 
through it with the class. 
	 Now focus on the chart, point out the two sections, and 
make sure Sts know all the nouns. Highlight the -ion 
ending and the spelling changes. Point out that the first 
one (decide) has been done for them, and get Sts to 
continue in pairs.
c	 e 11.15   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
2  revise    3  confuse    4  invent    5  compete    6  educate    
7  invite    8  pronounce    9  choose    10  advise    11  fly    
12  live    13  die    14  succeed
	 Now get Sts to underline the stressed syllables in the 
verbs and nouns.
	 Check answers.
e 11.13
1	 I might buy a white tie. 
2	 It may rain later.
3	 We don’t know where to go.
4	 There’s a hairdresser in the square.
5	 Here’s a really good idea for a souvenir.
6	 The tourists are curious about Europe. 
7	 We’re now in a small town in the south.
8	 Those noisy boys are annoying me.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  identifying the main 	
	 points in a talk
a	 Focus on the photos and the different styles of jeans, and 
make sure Sts know what they all are. Then put Sts in pairs 
or small groups to answer the questions.
	 Elicit some feedback from the class.
b	 e 11.14   Focus on the task, but don’t ask Sts their opinion 
as they will be giving it later. You might want to tell Sts 
that the speaker is American.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Yes
e 11.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Buying jeans isn’t as easy as it used to be. Years ago, there was only 
one kind of jeans – probably Levi’s. Nowadays, there are hundreds 
– different styles, different colours, different lengths, with buttons, 
with zips. There are so many options that you feel the perfect pair 
must be waiting for you somewhere…
And it isn’t just jeans. In big supermarkets, we have to choose 
between thousands of products – my local supermarket has thirty-
five different kinds of milk! When we’re buying clothes or electrical 
gadgets, ordering a coffee in a café, looking for a hotel on a travel 
website, deciding which TV channel to watch, or even choosing a 
future partner on a dating website, we constantly have to choose 
from hundreds of possibilities.
People often think that being able to choose from a lot of options 
is a good thing. However, university researchers have discovered 
that too much choice is making us feel unhappy and dissatisfied. 
The problem is that we have so many options that we get stressed 
every time we have to make a decision, because we’re worried about 
making the wrong one. Then when we choose one thing, we feel 
bad because we think we are missing other opportunities, and this 
makes us dissatisfied with what we’ve chosen.
Research also shows that we feel happier when we have less choice. 
In a study, Professor Mark Lepper at Stanford University found that 
people who tried six kinds of jam and then chose one felt happier 
with their choice than those who were offered twenty-four jams to 
taste.
But if all this choice is bad for us, what can we do about it? Professor 
Lepper suggests that we should try to relax when we have to decide 
what to buy. ‘Don’t take these choices too seriously or it will become 
stressful,’ he says. ‘If you pick a sofa from IKEA in thirty seconds, you’ll 
feel better than if you spend hours researching sofas – because you 
won’t know what you’re missing.’
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 150@@
150
11B
e 11.15
1	 decide	
decision
2	 revise	
revision
3	 confuse	
confusion
4	 invent	
invention
5	 compete	
competition 
6	 educate	
education
7	 invite	
invitation
8	 pronounce	
pronunciation
9	 choose	
choice
10	 advise	
advice
11	 fly	
flight
12	 live	
life
13	 die	
death
14	 succeed	
success
2  revise, revision    ​3  confuse, confusion    ​4  invent, invention    ​
5  compete, competition    ​6  educate, education    ​7  invite, 
invitation    ​8  pronounce, pronunciation    ​9  choose, choice    ​
10  advise, advice    ​11  fly, flight    ​12  live, life    ​13  die, death    ​
14  ucceed, success
	 Now you could ask Sts what the rule is for nouns which 
end in -ion, -sion, and -ation.
With nouns ending in -ion, -sion, and -ation, the stressed syllable 
is always the one before the ending. 
	 Finally, play the audio one more time for Sts to listen and 
repeat.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Give Sts some more verb prompts to 
change into nouns, e.g. celebrate – celebration, communicate 
– communication, etc.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete questions 
1–8 with nouns from b.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  decision    2  invitation    3  flight    4  invention    
5  competition    6  advice    7  life, death    8  pronunciation
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs to complete the questions, 
and then check as a class.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions in d. Tell them to give as much information as 
possible or to ask for more information.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 151@@
151
11C
 G   so, neither + auxiliaries
 V   similarities and differences
 P   /ð/ and /θ/
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is twins. The lesson begins with 
Reading and Listening about a website called Twin Strangers, 
which helps you find your lookalike anywhere in the world. 
The vocabulary focus is on different words / phrases used 
to express similarity, and the structure So am I / Neither 
am I is presented in Grammar through the true case of 
identical twins who were separated at birth, but reunited 
40 years later. The pronunciation focus is on the two 
possible pronunciations of th, /ð/ as in neither, and /θ/ as 
in both. The lesson ends with a speaking activity in which 
Sts first complete some sentences so they are true about 
themselves, and then they try to find a classmate like them. 
At this level, Sts will find it hard to manipulate this structure 
with much fluency, so here they just practise using the 
present forms So am / do I and Neither am / do I.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  so, neither + auxiliaries p.204 
Communicative  So do I! p.249 (instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  11C
Online Practice  11C
 OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Draw a picture of a head on the board with as many facial 
features as possible, e.g. face, eyes, nose, mouth, hair, lips.
Then elicit these words from Sts and write them on 
the board.
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding 	
	 similarities and differences
a	 Books open. Focus on the instructions and photos. Make 
sure Sts know the meaning of identical twins and complete 
strangers.
	 With a show of hands, find out which photo Sts think is of 
identical twins. Don’t tell them if they are right.
b	 Tell Sts to read about a project called Twin Strangers and 
check their answer to a. Point out the Glossary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Photo 2 – Thomas and Toby
c	 Before Sts read the article again, tell them that the Irish 
name Niamh is pronounced /ˈniːv/. Explain that to set up a 
website / business, etc. means to start it.
	 Now tell Sts to read the article again and answer the two 
questions.
	 Check answers.
It was set up by Niamh Geaney and two friends. 
What was surprising was that one of the twins Niamh found 
is Italian.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 e 11.16  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
the situation.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the two questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA IDEA   If you didn’t do the Optional lead-in, you 
could do it here before Sts listen.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Yes, Maggie found someone who looked very like her. 
It was a strange feeling, but she’s happy she found her ‘twin’.
e 11.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.125) 
I went onto the Twin Strangers website. All you have to do is pay 
three dollars ninety-five, upload a photo of your face, and then 
describe it – your nose, mouth, and eyes. I looked in a mirror and 
decided that I have an oval face, blue eyes, and, unfortunately, 
thin lips. 
Immediately, I got a lot of photos of possible matches. My 
first reaction was, ‘They all look totally different from me.’ Then 
something interesting began to happen. Some of the people 
started to look familiar, like people in my family. I found one woman 
who looked just like my brother. I started to wonder. Was there 
something there?
I called my husband to come and have a look at all these ‘twins’. His 
first reaction was the same as mine, but then he went a bit quiet. He 
pointed to one woman who, at first sight, looks completely different 
from me, but whose picture I had stopped at several times. He said, 
‘She has the same mouth as you. In fact, she’s a bit like you.’ And he 
was right. 
I decided to change my profile a bit. Many people tell me I look 
younger than I really am, so I put my age as ten years younger, and 
then searched again. The result was surprising. Suddenly, there 
seemed to be a number of women a bit like me. Especially one. I put 
her picture on my Facebook page and asked my friends what they 
thought. The first person to answer was my brother. ‘Yes,’ he wrote, 
‘she looks like you and our sister.’
It’s a strange feeling. I keep looking at her picture. We’re very similar, 
but not identical – for example, she has brown eyes, but mine are 
blue. But there’s something there. Not just the blonde hair and the 
thin lips. There’s something in her eyes that I recognize. It’s a very 
strange feeling, but I’m really happy that I found her. I sent her a 
message through the website, but she hasn’t replied yet. I’m going 
to keep trying. I want to know who she is.
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to Maggie again and need 
to answer questions 1–8.
	 Give Sts time to read the questions.
	11C	Twinstrangers.net
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 152@@
152
11C
1	 They are (American) identical twins.
2	 Because they were adopted by two different families when 
they were babies.
3	 He decided to try to find his brother.
4	 Six weeks
b	 e 11.18   Either tell Sts to cover the conversation or get 
them to close their books. Tell Sts that the two men have 
a lot of things in common. They should listen to the 
conversation for at least three things.
	 Before playing the audio, you might want to tell Sts that 
neither can be pronounced /ˈnaɪðə/ or /ˈniːðə/, and that 
in this audio they will hear the American version /ˈniːðə/.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Play again if 
necessary.
	 Elicit answers from the class onto the board. You may 
need to teach the word both here.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to try and hear as many things as 
possible that the men have in common.
Sts should mention three of these:
Both men have been married twice, they both have a son called 
James Allen, neither went to college, they were both terrible 
students, they both have a dog called Toy, they don’t do any 
exercise, they own the same car (a Chevrolet), and they both 
drink Miller Lite beer.
e 11.18
A	 Hi! I’m Jim.
B	 So am I. Great to meet you. Sit down. Are you married, Jim?
A	 Yes…well, I’ve been married twice.
B	 Yeah? So have I. Do you have any children?
A	 I have one son.
B	 So do I. What’s his name?
A	 James Allen.
B	 That’s amazing! My son’s name is James Allen, too!
A	 Did you go to college, Jim?
B	 No, I didn’t.
A	 Neither did I. I was a terrible student.
B	 So was I. Hey, this is my dog, Toy.
A	 I don’t believe it! My dog’s called Toy, too!
B	 He wants to go outside. My wife usually takes him. I don’t do any 
exercise at all. 
A	 Don’t worry. Neither do I. I drive everywhere.
B	 What car do you have?
A	 A Chevrolet.
B	 So do I! 
A and B	 Let’s have a beer, Jim. 
A	 What beer do you drink?
B	 Miller Lite.
A	 So do I!
c	 Get Sts to look at the conversation. Tell them to listen 
again and to complete the gaps in the conversation. Play 
the audio once and then play it again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  am    ​2  have    ​3  do    ​4  did    5  was    6  do    7  do    8  do
	 Finally, ask Sts which coincidence they find the most 
surprising.
d	 Focus on the instructions and put Sts in pairs. Give them 
time to answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
	 Now play the audio again.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 She says 'I have an oval face, blue eyes and, unfortunately, thin 
lips.'  
2	 She thought they all looked totally different from her.
3	 Her brother
4	 Her husband thought one of the twins had the same mouth. 
Yes, she did.
5	 She changed her age by making herself ten years younger.
6	 He thought she looked like Maggie and their sister.
7	 They both have blonde hair and thin lips.
8	 No, they haven't. Maggie sent her a message, but she hasn't 
replied.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could tell the 
class your answers, too.
2	VOCABULARY  similarities and differences
a	 Here Sts learn some different ways of expressing 
similarities. Focus on the sentences about the people in 1.
	 Get Sts to complete the gaps with words from the list.
b	 e 11.17  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  both    ​2  identical    ​3  from    ​4  like    5  as    6  similar
e 11.17
1	 Cordelia and Ciara were both on Erasmus scholarships.
2	 The two girls looked identical.
3	 The first photos Maggie looked at were totally different from her. 
4	 Maggie found one woman who looked just like her brother.
5	 Her husband said, ‘She has the same mouth as you.’
6	 Maggie’s ‘twin’ looks very similar to her.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may also want to teach the rules for 
the position of both, i.e. before the main verb, but after be 
(like adverbs of frequency).
c	 Say the sentences about yourself. Encourage Sts to ask for 
more information.
	 Then give Sts a few moments to complete the sentences 
with a family word.
!   For 4, they need to add other words, too. They can use the 
same family member more than once.
	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss their answers.
	 Get feedback by eliciting different sentences from 
various pairs.
3	GRAMMAR  so, neither + auxiliaries
a	 Focus on the photo and ask Sts if the two men look 
similar. Elicit that they are twins.
	 Now focus on the instructions. Give Sts time to read the 
text and answer the questions. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 153@@
153
11C
4	PRONUNCIATION  /ð/ and /θ/
Pronunciation notes
/ð/ and /θ/
Sts should be aware by now of the small difference 
between these two sounds, as they occur in so many 
common words. Here they get some extra practice to help 
them to hear the difference and produce the two sounds. 
a	 e 11.21   Focus on the two sound pictures, mother /ð/ 
and thumb /θ/, and play the audio once for Sts just to 
listen to the sounds and words. Encourage Sts to try to 
approximate the th sound as far as possible, and to hear 
the difference between the voiced sound /ð/ and the 
unvoiced sound /θ/, although they may find this quite 
difficult.
e 11.21
See sounds and words in Student’s Book on p.91
	 Then play the audio again, pausing for Sts to listen and 
repeat the words and sounds.
b	 e 11.22   Tell Sts they are going to hear four words with 
the mother sound and then four with the thumb sound. 
They must listen and write the words.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and write. 
	 Check answers by eliciting the words onto the board.
e 11.22
mother	 /ð/  although, other, there, without
thumb	
/θ/  maths, thing, thirsty, through
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each word or 
group of words, and get Sts to repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Say some words for Sts to identify the 
sound, /ð/ or /θ/.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions. Make sure Sts understand all 
the categories in brackets, and give them a few minutes 
to complete the sentences.
b	 Go through the instructions and focus on the speech 
bubbles. Demonstrate by going to different Sts and saying 
I love (whatever kind of music you like) to individual Sts 
until somebody says So do I. If they don’t like it, encourage 
them to say a whole sentence, e.g. Really? I don’t like it. / I 
hate it.
	 Tell Sts to stand up and start saying their sentences from 
a to each other to find someone who is the same. Stop 
the activity when one student has a name for all his / her 
sentences.
	 Get some feedback from the class.
1	
+ So am I, So have I, So was I, So do I 
− Neither did I, Neither do I
2	 The auxiliary verb changes to follow the tense or form used 
by the first speaker.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 11C on p.146. 
Grammar notes
The main problem Sts may have is thinking that So (do) I 
is used to agree with a statement and Neither (do) I to 
disagree. It is important to stress that both are used to say 
that two people have the same opinion or do the same 
thing, but we use So… when it is a positive thing and 
Neither… when it is a negative thing.
Sts will probably already know the expression Me too, 
which is a ‘shortcut’ way to express So do I, etc. You may 
want to teach Sts the negative version, Me neither.
	 e 11.19   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the neither and nor box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 11C on p.147. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1  am    ​2  did    ​3  was    ​4  do    ​5  have    ​6  can    ​7  would    ​
8  did    ​9  would    ​10  can
b	 
1  So do I.    ​2  Neither am I.    ​3  So did I.    ​4  Neither have I.    ​
5  Neither do I.    ​6  So can I.    ​7  So will I.    ​8  So am I.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 11C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 e 11.20   Focus on the instructions and the example. Explain 
that Sts are going to hear a sentence and they have to use 
So...I or Neither...I to say that they are the same. You might 
want to stress that Sts mustn’t think about themselves, but 
simply answer so that they agree with the speaker.
	 Play the audio, pausing after the first sentence to elicit  
So do I from the whole class. Continue, pausing the audio 
after each sentence to elicit a response.
e 11.20
1	 I catch the bus to work. (pause) So do I.
2	 I like chocolate. (pause) So do I.
3	 I’m happy. (pause) So am I.
4	 I’m not angry. (pause) Neither am I.
5	 I don’t like football. (pause) Neither do I.
6	 I’m going out tonight. (pause) So am I.
7	 I have a big family. (pause) So do I.
8	 I’m not English. (pause) Neither am I.
9	 I live in a flat. (pause) So do I.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write SO 
 I and NEITHER 
 I on 
the board for Sts to focus on.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 154@@
154
PE6
Function  on the phone 
Lesson plan
In this final Practical English lesson Sts learn some vocabulary 
related to phoning, leaving messages, and responding 
to news.
Rob and Jenny are depressed that his stay in New York is 
coming to an end. Rob goes off to do his last interview. 
Meanwhile, Barbara is trying to get hold of him. Rob gets 
her message, and tries to phone her back, but has problems 
getting through. In the final scene, Rob and Jenny meet 
in Central Park. They both have news for each other. Jenny 
tells hers first – she has sent Barbara an email to say she is 
resigning as she wants to move to London. However, Rob’s 
news is that Barbara has offered him a permanent job in 
New York, which he has accepted. Jenny desperately phones 
Barbara and tells her not to open the email, and all ends well. 
They have a future in New York.
The story is continued in New York in English File 
Intermediate.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Practical English Episode 6 
Quick Test 11 
File 11 Test
For students
Workbook  Practical English 6 
                     Can you remember...? 1–11
Online Practice  Practical English 6 
                             Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Elicit what happened in the last episode by asking some 
questions, e.g. How did Rob get to his date with Jenny? Did they 
have a good meal at the restaurant?, etc.
Alternatively, you could play the last scene of Episode 5.
1	r ROB AND JENNY TALK ABOUT 	
	 THE FUTURE
a	 e 11.23  Books open. Focus on the photo and elicit what 
Sts think Jenny and Rob are talking about.
	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and go through them with Sts. 
	 Then play the video / audio once the whole way through 
for them to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Make it 
clear that they don’t need to correct the F sentences yet. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  F    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F
e 11.23 
J = Jenny, R = Rob, B = Barbara
J	 I can’t believe it. Your month here is nearly over. It’s gone so fast.
R	 I know. I’ve had a great time, Jenny.
J	 Me too. It’s been really special. But…
R	 But what?
J	 It won’t be the same when you’re in London and I’m here.
R	 But we’ll still be in touch. You can visit me in London and I can 
come back here to see you.
J	 It still won’t be the same.
R	 No. No, it won’t.
J	 Maybe…I could come back to London with you?
R	 You can’t do that, Jenny. You’ve just got this job.
J	 That’s true.
R	 Well, we still have some time together. We’re going out for dinner 
tonight!
J	 Yes, and I’m going to take you somewhere really nice.
R	 Look at the time. I have to go now; it’s my last interview in New 
York. I don’t want to be late.
J	 OK. See you later, then.
R	 Bye.
***
B	 Jenny, is Rob here?
J	 Oh, you just missed him, Barbara.
B	 I really need to talk to him. I’ll try him on his cell phone… (on the 
phone) Hello, Rob? It’s Barbara. Can you give me a call? There’s 
something I’d like to talk about.
	 Now focus on the British and American English box and 
go through it with the class.
b	 Play the video / audio again so Sts can watch or listen and 
correct the false sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 Rob is going home soon.
2	 He says Jenny can visit London and he can come back to 
New York.
4	 He doesn’t think it’s a good idea.
6	 Barbara wants to talk to Rob.
	 Ask Sts what they think Barbara wants to talk about, and 
elicit ideas, but don’t tell them the answer yet.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
	 6	
Practical English  Time to go home
EPISODE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 155@@
155
PE6
2	r ON THE PHONE
a	 e 11.24   Focus on the photos and elicit what Sts think is 
happening.
	 Focus on the instructions and the two questions. 
Alternatively, you could get Sts to close their books, and 
write the questions on the board. 
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and play the video / 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  He wants to speak to Barbara.    ​2  He has to call three times.
e 11.24 11.25
M = man, R = Rob, Re = receptionist, B = Barbara
M	 Hello. Broadway Grill.
R	 Oh, sorry. I have the wrong number. (repeat) 
***
Re	NewYork 24seven. How can I help you?
R	 Hello. Can I speak to Barbara Keaton, please? (repeat)
Re	Just a second. I’ll put you through…Hello.
R	 Hi, is that Barbara? (repeat)
Re	No, I’m sorry. She’s not at her desk right now.
R	 Can I leave a message, please? (repeat)
Re	Sure.
R	 Can you tell her Rob Walker called? (repeat) I’ll call back later. 
(repeat)
Re	I’ll give her the message. You could try her cell phone.
R	 Yes, I’ll do that. Thank you. (repeat) 
***
B	 I’m sorry, I can’t take your call at the moment. Please leave a 
message after the beep.
R	 Hello, Barbara. This is Rob, returning your call. (repeat)
***
Re	NewYork 24seven. How can I help you?
R	 Hello. It’s Rob again. (repeat) Can I speak to Barbara, please? 
(repeat)
Re	Just a second…I’m sorry, the line’s busy. Do you want to hold?
R	 OK, I’ll hold. (repeat)
B	 Hello.
R	 Hi, Barbara. It’s me, Rob. (repeat)
B	 Rob, hi! I tried to call you earlier.
R	 What did you want to talk about? (repeat)
b	 Now focus on the conversation in the chart. Ask Sts Who 
says the You hear sentences in each conversation? and 
elicit that first it is a man working in a restaurant, then the 
receptionist at NewYork24seven, and, finally, Barbara.
	 Then ask Who says the You say sentences? and elicit that 
it is Rob. Tell Sts that if they want to make a call, they will 
need the You say phrases.
	 Give Sts a minute to read through the conversation and 
think what the missing words might be. Then play the 
video / audio again, and get Sts to complete the gaps. 
Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  How    ​2  put    ​3  desk    ​4  message    5  call    6  leave    
7  busy
	 Go through the conversation line by line with Sts, 
helping them with any words or expressions they don’t 
understand. 
c	 e 11.25   Now focus on the You say phrases. Tell Sts 
they’re going to hear the conversation again. They should 
repeat the You say phrases when they hear the beep.
	 Play the video / audio, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
repeat the phrases. Encourage them to copy the rhythm 
and intonation.
e 11.25
Same as script 11.24 with repeat pauses
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell Sts A to read the part of the 
man, the receptionist, and Barbara, and Sts B to read Rob. 
In pairs, Sts read the conversation aloud. 
	 Then make sure A and B swap roles.
e	 Sts now role-play the same conversations, but this time, 
the person taking the part of Rob closes his / her book 
and does it from memory.
f	 Sts swap roles when they have finished.
	 You could get some pairs to perform in front of the class.
3	r IN CENTRAL PARK AGAIN
a	 e 11.26   Focus on the photo and ask Sts what’s 
happening.
	 Get Sts to focus on the question, or get them to close 
their books, and write it on the board.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through and 
then check the answer.
It’s a happy ending.
e 11.26
R = Rob, J = Jenny
R	 Jenny!
J	 Rob! I have something to tell you.
R	 I have something to tell you, too. You go first.
J	 Well, I thought again about moving to London…
R	 But you don’t need to move to London. 
J	 What?
R	 Barbara called me earlier.
J	 What about?
R	 She offered me a job. Here, in New York! 
J	 What?! Oh, that’s great news. 
R	 You don’t seem very pleased.
J	 I am. I mean, it’s great! It’s just that…
R	 What?
J	 I sent Barbara an email this morning.
R	 And?
J	 I told her I was quitting and moving to London.
R	 Don’t worry. Maybe she hasn’t read your email yet.
J	 I’ll call her.
B	 Hello, Barbara Keaton.
J	 Barbara? It’s Jenny.
B	 Oh, hi, Jenny.
J	 Um, have you read your emails recently? There’s one from me.
B	 Oh, yes. I can see it. I haven’t opened it yet.
J	 Don’t open it! Delete it! Please just delete it. I’ll explain later.
B	 OK. It’s gone. Is everything all right, Jenny?
J	 Yes, thanks. Never better.
b	 Focus on the questions and give Sts time to read them.
	 Play the video / audio once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 156@@
156
PE6
1	 They both have news.
2	 Barbara offered Rob a job in New York.
3	 She sent Barbara an email. She quit her job.
4	 Jenny asks Barbara to delete her email.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time and you are using the video, 
you could get Sts to watch again with subtitles, so they 
can see exactly what they understood / didn’t understand. 
Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Focus on the Social English phrases. In pairs, get Sts to 
see if they can remember any of the missing words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   In pairs, get Sts to complete the phrases 
before they listen.
d	 e 11.27   Play the video / audio for Sts to watch or listen 
and complete the phrases.
	 Check answers. If you know your Sts’ L1, you could get 
them to translate the phrases.
1  go    ​2  news    ​3  call    ​4  later    ​5  all right    ​6  Never
e 11.27
1	 You go first.
2	 That’s great news.
3	 I’ll call her.
4	 I’ll explain later.
5	 Is everything all right?
6	 Never better.
	 Now play the video / audio again, pausing after each 
phrase, for Sts to watch or listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
A  3    B  4    C  5    D  2    E  6    F  1
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the 
conversations.
	 Finally, focus on the CAN YOU…? questions and ask Sts 
if they feel confident they can now do these things. If 
they feel that they need more practice, tell them to go to 
Online Practice to watch the episode again and practise 
the language.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 157@@
157
 G   past perfect
 V   time expressions
 P   the letter i
Lesson plan
In this lesson the past perfect is presented through the 
context of strange but true stories from around the world. 
The lesson begins with Reading and Vocabulary, where Sts 
read three stories and sequence the events in the stories in 
the correct order. They also study time expressions in the 
stories. In Grammar, a sentence from one of the stories is 
used to present the past perfect. In Pronunciation, Sts look 
at two pronunciations of the letter i and learn some spelling 
and pronunciation rules. The lesson finishes with Speaking, 
where Sts read two more strange but true stories, and re-tell 
them to each other. 
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past perfect p.205 
Communicative  What had happened? p.250  
(instructions p.216 )
For students
Workbook  12A
Online Practice  12A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Revise irregular past participles by saying a verb from the 
Irregular verbs list on p.164 and eliciting the past simple 
and past participle.
Then ask Sts When do you use past participles? and elicit in the 
present perfect (with have) and the passive (with be). Now 
tell Sts they’re going to learn another form where the past 
participle of the verb is used.
1	READING & VOCABULARY  understanding 	
	 the order of events; time expressions
a	 Books open. Focus on the pictures and headlines, and 
elicit some ideas about the stories from the class. Don’t tell 
them if they are right. 
b	 Now tell Sts to read the stories and match them to the 
headlines. Point out the Glossary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers, making sure Sts understand the meaning of each 
headline.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the stories, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but not the time 
expressions in d.
Story 1  False alarm     
Story 2  In the post    
Story 3  Left behind
c	 Tell Sts to read the stories again and then put the events 
in each story in the correct order. Point out that the first 
one in Story 1 has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Story 1
2	 The man killed the spider.
3	 The police arrived at the apartment.
4	 The man explained what had happened.
Story 2
1	 Julie lost her cat.
2	 Julie put up posters.
3	 The cat jumped out of the box.
4	 The vet contacted Julie.
Story 3
1	 Walter went to the toilet.
2	 Claudia went into the shop.
3	 Walter got back into the car and drove off.
4	 Walter realized what had happened.
d	 Tell Sts to look at the stories and find the time expressions 
to complete sentences 1–5.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  immediately    ​2  suddenly    ​3  straight away    ​4  Meanwhile   ​
5  eventually
e	 Get Sts to match the time expressions in d with 
definitions 1–4.
	 Check answers.
1  suddenly    ​2  eventually    ​3  meanwhile    ​ 
4  immediately, straight away
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary, making sure 
especially that Sts understand notice and realize in the 
third story, as these are verbs often followed by the past 
perfect, which they are about to focus on. Model and drill 
the pronunciation of any tricky words.
	 Finally, ask Sts which of the three stories they liked best.
2	GRAMMAR  past perfect
a	 Focus on the sentence and get Sts to number the 
sentences, or do it as a whole-class activity. 
	 Check answers.
1	 Walter drove 100 kilometres.
2	 Walter realized his wife wasn’t in the car.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit answers. Some 
Sts may think that it is the contraction of would. Point 
out that this is impossible as would is followed by the 
infinitive, not the past participle. Explain that this form 
(had + past participle) is called the past perfect.
’d is a contraction of had; driven is a past participle.
	12A		 Unbelievable!
12A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 158@@
158
e	 Give Sts time to complete the five sentences with their 
own ideas. Make sure they use the past perfect.
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their sentences 
with a partner.
	 Get some Sts to read their sentences to the class.
Possible completions
1	 I’d left my passport at home.
2	 all our plants had died.
3	 I’d already seen it.
4	 hadn’t studied.
5	 where we had parked.
g	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication What had happened?, A on p.106,  
B on p.112.
	 Demonstrate the activity by writing in large letters on a 
piece of paper the following sentence:
	
I WASN’T VERY HAPPY BECAUSE MY BOYFRIEND HAD EATEN ALL THE 
BISCUITS.
	 Don’t show the piece of paper to the Sts yet. Then write 
on the board:
	
I WASN’T VERY HAPPY BECAUSE MY BOYFRIEND 
 ALL 
THE BISCUITS. +
	 Tell Sts that what’s missing is a positive form of a verb in 
the past perfect. Tell them that they must guess the exact 
sentence that you have written on the piece of paper. 
Elicit ideas. If they are wrong, say Try again, until someone 
says the correct answer. Then show them your piece of 
paper with the sentence on it.
	 Tell Sts to look at instruction a. Give them a few minutes to 
think of how to complete their sentences in a logical way, 
and remind them not to write anything yet. Explain that 
their partner has the same sentences already completed 
and the idea is to try and complete the sentences in the 
same way. Emphasize, too, that they must use a verb in 
the past perfect. Monitor and help while they are  
doing this. 
	 Now tell Sts to look at instruction b. A must read out 
his / her first sentence and B tells him / her if he / she has 
completed the sentence correctly. If not, A has to guess 
again. When the guess is correct, A writes the answer in 
the gap.
	 When A finishes, B reads his / her sentences to A, etc.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12A.
3	PRONUNCIATION  the letter i
Pronunciation notes
There are several clear spelling / pronunciation rules 
for words with the letter i, but there are a few common 
exceptions, like live (v), drive / driven, etc., which trip Sts up 
sometimes. 
a	 Focus on the box The letter i and go through it with the 
class.
	 Now focus on the activity and elicit the two sounds and 
words, bike /aɪ/ and fish /ɪ/.
	 Give Sts two minutes to put the words in the correct row.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 12.2   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
c	 Give Sts time to look for two more examples of the past 
perfect in each story. You could tell Sts that stories 2 and 
3 have a lot of examples, but they only need to underline 
two in each.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers. 
Possible answers
Story 1: 
The callers had heard a woman screaming…; The officer told the 
man that his neighbours had heard shouting and screaming…
Story 2: 
A woman in Worthing, West Sussex, got a big surprise yesterday 
when she opened a large box of DVDs she had bought on 
eBay…; The cat, called Cupcake, had got into the box eight 
days earlier…; Julie didn’t notice that Cupcake had climbed 
into the box and had fallen asleep; …the cat had survived the 
260-mile journey with no food or water; Julie had been very sad 
about losing her cat; She had put up posters and had looked for 
Cupcake for days.
Story 3: 
Claudia had been asleep in the back seat; when she came 
back outside, she found that her husband had left without her; 
Walter only realized his wife wasn’t in the car after he’d driven 
100 kilometres.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12A on p.148. 
Grammar notes
The form and use of the past perfect is not normally 
problematic for most Sts, but the concept may be difficult 
if Sts do not have the same grammatical structure in 
their L1. 
The past perfect is very common after verbs like realized, 
remembered, saw, etc., e.g. I suddenly realized that I’d 
forgotten my sister’s birthday.
	 e 12.1  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the had or would? box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 12A on p.149. Sts do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  G    2  D    3  A    4  F    5  E    6  B
b
1	 Caroline had changed a lot, and I didn’t recognize her.
2	 My friend phoned to tell me that I had left my coat in his car.
3	 When I turned on the radio, the news had already finished.
4	 She didn’t lend me the DVD because she hadn’t watched  
it yet.
5	 The bar had closed by the time we arrived.
6	 When we got home, we saw that somebody had broken the 
kitchen window.
7	 When we got up in the morning, we saw that it had snowed 
in the night.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
12A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 159@@
159
e12.2
fish /ɪ/  driven, kill, miracle, notice, signal
bike /aɪ/  alive, arrive, outside, spider, surprise, survive, while, wife
	 Now ask Sts which two words in the /ɪ/ row don’t follow 
the rules.
driven and notice are exceptions
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and repeat. 
	 Then play the audio again, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
4	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the instructions and the pictures. Make sure Sts 
know shark, waves, and a luggage belt.
	 Then either put Sts in pairs to discuss what they think the 
stories are about, or do it as a whole-class activity.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, elicit some ideas from the class. 
Don’t tell Sts if they are right.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Two more stories, A on p.107,  
B on p.112.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully. 
	 Give Sts time to read their stories and answer the 
questions. Monitor and check their answers while they 
do this, to make sure they are answering the questions 
correctly.
Student A
1	 The swimming pool was in Sydney, close to the sea; it was 
outdoors.
2	 The pool assistant shouted, ‘Get out…‘ because there was a 
shark in the pool.
3	 A large wave had carried the shark into the pool.
4	 No one was hurt. The shark was put back into the sea.
Student B
1	 The airport was in Stockholm, in Sweden.
2	 The airport workers were surprised because they saw an old 
lady on the luggage belt.
3	 She had got on the luggage belt with her suitcase because 
she was confused.
4	 She only travelled a few metres.
	 When they are ready, sit A and B face-to-face. A tells his / 
her story to B. Then B tells A his / her story.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12A.
c	 Ask the questions to the class and elicit opinions and any 
stories they may have heard.
12A
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 160@@
160
12B
 G   reported speech
 V   say or tell?
 P   double consonants
Lesson plan
This lesson provides a clear introduction to reported 
(or indirect) speech. Sts simply learn to deal with 
reported statements – reported questions are taught 
in English File Intermediate. The context for the lesson is 
the topic of gossiping. The lesson begins with Listening, 
where Sts listen to a conversation between two elderly 
women who are gossiping about a conversation one of 
them overheard between a young couple, Jack and Emma, 
who live next door. However, Sts find out later that she 
had completely misunderstood what she heard, as often 
happens! The grammar section presents reported speech by 
contrasting what Emma actually said with how the woman 
reported it to her friend. After practising the grammar, in 
Vocabulary, Sts focus on how say and tell are used, and 
in Speaking, they practise reporting what other Sts have 
said. Pronunciation focuses on how double consonants are 
pronounced, and the effect they have on the preceding 
vowel sound. The lesson finishes with a traditional story 
about the harmful effect of gossip, and Sts talk about the 
subject.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  reported (or indirect) speech p.206 
Communicative  The celebrity interview p.251  
(instructions p.216)
For students
Workbook  12B
Online Practice  12B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the word GOSSIP on the board. Elicit the meaning and 
tell Sts that it’s a noun and a verb. 
Ask Sts Who do people often gossip about? How do you feel 
when people gossip about you? Elicit ideas and opinions. You 
could also tell them what you think.
1	LISTENING
a	 Focus on the question and picture, and elicit some ideas 
from the class. 
b	 e 12.3   Focus on the instructions.
	 Now play the audio once the whole way through. Play it 
again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Jack and Emma are Rosemary’s neighbours. They have 
broken up.
e 12.3
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
I = Iris, R = Rosemary
I	 Hello, Rosemary. How are you this morning?
R	 Hello, Iris. I’m fine, thanks, but you’ll never guess what’s 
happened. Jack and Emma have broken up!
I	 No! Jack and Emma from number thirty-six? That can’t be true. 
I saw them last week and they looked really happy.
R	 No, it’s definitely true. I heard them shouting. They were having a 
terrible argument.
I	 No! When?
R	 Last night. After he came home from work.
I	 What did they say?
R	 Well, I wasn’t really listening…
I	 Of course not.
R	 But I couldn’t help hearing. She was talking so loudly, and of 
course, the walls are very thin…
I	 So what did they say?
R	 Well, she said that she was going to stay with her mum! She told 
him that she wouldn’t come back.
I	 Ooh, how awful. What about the children?
R	 She said she’d taken them to her sister's. I suppose she’ll take 
them with her in the end. And anyway, then five minutes later I 
saw her leaving the house with a suitcase! 
I	 No! Why do you think she’s leaving him? Is he seeing another 
woman? 
R	 I don’t know. Ooh, here’s my bus.
I	 I must go and tell Mrs Jones at number fourteen. She's always 
thought there was something…something strange about him.
c	 Now tell Sts they will hear the conversation again and 
they must answer questions 1–4. Give them a few minutes 
to read all the options.
	 Now play the audio the whole way through. Play it again if 
necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  c
d	 e 12.4   Now tell Sts they are going to listen to what 
Jack and Emma really said when Rosemary overheard 
them. They must listen for any differences between what 
Rosemary told Iris and what Jack and Emma really said.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through. Play it again 
if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
No, she wasn’t. She either misunderstood a lot of what she 
heard, or only heard part of the conversation. In fact, Emma isn’t 
leaving Jack; she’s going to look after her mother, who has had 
an accident.
	12B	Think before you speak
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 161@@
161
12B
	 e 12.5   Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the say or tell? box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Then focus on the exercises for 12B on p.149. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a	
1	 Ana said that she was hungry.
2	 He said he would call the doctor.
3	 Paul told us that he had bought a new phone.
4	 She said that she lived in the city centre.
5	 They said that they couldn’t do it.
6	 Julie said that she had seen a great film at the cinema.
7	 Ben told her he didn’t like dogs.
b	
1  ‘I’m studying German.’   
2  ‘My car has broken down.’   
3  ‘I’ll send you an email.’   
4  ‘We’re in a hurry.’   
5  ‘I haven’t finished my essay yet.’   
6  ‘I won’t arrive on time.’   
7  ‘I’ve just arrived in London.’
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 e 12.6   Focus on the instructions and examples. Tell Sts 
that they must begin the sentences with He said that or 
She said that, depending on whether they hear a male 
voice or a female voice. Do the first two as a class.
	 Play the audio, pausing after the direct speech sentence 
for the class to make the transformation into reported 
speech. 
e 12.6
1	 I’m in a hurry. (pause) She said that she was in a hurry.
2	 I’ll write. (pause) He said that he would write.
3	 I didn’t see it. (pause) She said that she hadn’t seen it.
4	 I’m hungry. (pause) He said that he was hungry.
5	 I’ll be late. (pause) She said that she would be late.
6	 I’ve finished. (pause) He said that he had finished.
7	 I’m coming. (pause) She said that she was coming.
8	 I’ll do it again. (pause) He said that he would do it again.
9	 I had a great time. (pause) She said that she had had a great time.
10	 I’m tired. (pause) He said that he was tired.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete the 
sentences. 
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  said    ​2  told    ​3  said    ​4  told    ​5  said    ​6  tell    ​7  say    ​
8  tell, say
e 12.4
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
J = Jack, E = Emma
J	 Hi, Emma. I’m back. Where are you?
E	 I’m upstairs in the bedroom. I’m packing.
J	 Why? Where are you going?
E	 I’m going to stay with my mum. 
J	 Your mum? Why?
E	 She’s had an accident. She fell over in the street yesterday, and 
she’s broken her leg. 
J	 How awful! Poor thing. Shall I go and make you a cup of tea?
E	 That’d be lovely. Thanks, darling.
J	 How long do you think you’ll have to stay?
E	 I won’t come back until the weekend, I don’t think.
J	 Sorry, until when?
E	 Until the weekend. I’ll have to make sure she’s OK. I’ve taken the 
children to my sister’s for the night, and she’ll take them to school 
tomorrow morning. Can you pick them up after school?
J	 Of course I can, darling. Now don’t worry about anything. We’ll be 
absolutely fine. Drink your tea, and I’ll go and get your suitcase.
E	 Thanks, darling. The taxi’ll be here in five minutes.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts some comprehension questions, 
e.g. Why was Emma packing? (to go and stay at her mother’s), 
Why was she going to her mother’s? (because her mother had 
broken her leg), etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	GRAMMAR & VOCABULARY  reported	
	 speech; say or tell?
a	 Focus on the instructions and the extracts. Give Sts time, 
in pairs, to underline the words that are different.
	 Check answers.
She said that she was going to stay with her mum.
She told him that she wouldn’t come back.
She said she’d taken them to her sister’s.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12B on p.148. 
Grammar notes
This is an introduction to reported (or indirect) speech. 
The reporting of sentences with say and tell is covered 
here, but not reported questions, e.g. He asked me if I lived 
near here.
When people report a past tense statement, they 
sometimes do not make the change to the past 
perfect, e.g.
Direct speech: ‘I saw Jack at the party.’ 
Reported speech: Jane told me she saw / had seen Jack at 
the  party.
However, this may confuse Sts, who prefer to be given 
one rule, so you may not want to highlight it at this level.
Sts tend to confuse the verbs say and tell, and may try to 
use say with a person. A typical mistake is: He said me that 
he was tired.
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 162@@
162
12B
c	 Focus on the Double consonants box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Tell Sts, in pairs, to try to pronounce the words in the 
list. Then they should look them up and find out how to 
pronounce them and what they mean.
	 Check answers.
kettle /ˈketl/ = a kitchen appliance used for boiling water
nanny /ˈnæni/ = a person who takes care of young children in 
the children’s own home
pillow /ˈpɪləʊ/ = a piece of cloth filled with soft material, e.g. 
feathers, used to rest your head on in bed
pottery /ˈpɒtəri/ = pots, dishes, etc. made with clay that is 
baked in an oven
supper /ˈsʌpə/ = the last meal of the day, either a main meal or 
a snack before you go to bed, sometimes used as an alternative 
to dinner
	 Still in pairs, Sts practise saying the words.
5	READING & SPEAKING  recognizing text type
a	 This is a traditional story which exists in slightly different 
versions in many countries. Focus on the title and make 
sure Sts know what it means. Use the illustrations to teach 
the word feather. 
	 Now tell Sts to read the text and answer the two 
questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the story the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
It’s b (a traditional story) because it starts with ‘Once upon a 
time…’, the characters have no names, and the time and place 
aren’t specific.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know the meaning 
of the noun moral (= a practical lesson that a story 
teaches you).
	 Tell Sts to read the story again. Then ask Sts what they 
think the moral of the story is. Elicit ideas, but don’t tell Sts 
if they are right. 
	 Now tell Sts to go to Communication Blowing in the 
wind on p.107. Give Sts time to read the ending of the 
story.
	 Finally, ask Sts what the message of the story is. 
The message is that gossip can’t be controlled. It can travel a 
long way and do a lot of damage – so think before you speak.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12B.
c	 Focus on the instructions and questions 1–7, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. celebrity, spread, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs to discuss the questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
3	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task. Give Sts a minute or so to think about 
their answers. Remind them that the information must be 
true, except for one answer which they must invent. 
b	 Put Sts into pairs and give them time to interview each 
other. Remind Sts that the person listening must take 
some notes.
	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
c	 Get Sts to change partners, and explain that they must 
now tell their new partner what their first partner told 
them. To do this, they must change the information into 
reported speech. 
	 Give Sts time to report their conversations to their new 
partners and to decide together which answer their 
previous partners invented. 
EXTRA IDEA   To help Sts to get the idea of the activity, begin 
by whispering a piece of real or invented gossip to one 
student. Then get the class to ask the student What did he / 
she say? Now encourage the student to report what you 
said, using reported speech.
d	 Then Sts should go back to their original partners and find 
out which answer they invented.
	 Get feedback by asking individual Sts to report one 
exchange.
4	PRONUNCIATION  double consonants
Pronunciation notes
Here Sts learn two clear rules about double consonants.
Firstly, vowel sounds are normally short before a double 
consonant. This is the reason why we double the final 
consonant before adding -er in comparatives, and -ed in 
past tenses – that is, to maintain the short vowel sound.
Secondly, double consonants (e.g. ss, rr, etc.) are usually 
pronounced exactly the same as a single consonant, 
unlike in many other languages, where they are different.
a	 Tell Sts to look at the five vowel sound pictures and to 
match each one to a group of words 1–5.
b	 e 12.7   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  /ɒ/ clock    2  /ʌ/ up    3  /ɪ/ fish    4  /æ/ cat    5  /e/ egg
e 12.7
4	 cat /æ/  happy, married, accident, rabbit, baggage 
2	 up /ʌ/  hurry, rubbish, funny, summer, butterfly
3	 fish /ɪ/  written, miss, bitten, different, middle
5	 egg /e/  letter, leggings, message, umbrella, tennis
1	 clock /ɒ/  gossip, offer, opposite, bottle, borrow
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 163@@
163
12C
 G   questions without auxiliaries
 V   revision of question words
 P   question words
Lesson plan
In this final lesson Sts learn to use questions without 
auxiliaries (Who painted this picture?, etc.) and contrast them 
with questions with auxiliaries (When did he paint it?).
The lesson begins with some revision of question words in 
Pronunciation and Vocabulary. The grammar is presented 
through a quiz which tests Sts’ memory on information that 
has come up in the book. If your Sts have only used the 
second half of English File Pre-intermediate (i.e. Multipack B), 
they should just do the second half of the quiz, i.e. questions 
8–15. Then in Speaking, Sts practise making questions with 
or without auxiliaries, and then ask and answer them with a 
partner. Finally, the lesson finishes with a video listening of a 
pub quiz, and Sts join in to answer the questions in teams.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  questions with and without auxiliaries  p.207 
Communicative  Hollywood quiz p.252  
(instructions p.216)
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Pub quiz
For students
Workbook  12C
Online Practice  12C
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask eight different Sts these questions and tell them to 
answer them. Tell the rest of the class to listen carefully and 
note down just the answers to the questions.
•	 How did you get to class today?
•	 What’s your favourite TV programme?
•	 When do you usually get up?
•	 Where would you like to go for your next holiday?
•	 Which do you prefer, coffee or tea?
•	 Who do you live with?
•	 Whose bag is that? (pointing to another student’s bag)
•	 Why are you learning English?
Then tell Sts that you asked eight questions with eight 
different question words. Tell them, in pairs, to look at the 
eight answers and try to write down the eight question 
words you used. 
Then get Sts to open their books and check in 1a.
1	PRONUNCIATION & VOCABULARY  
	 revision of question words
a	 Books open. Now focus on the activity and elicit the two 
sounds and words, witch /w/ and house /h/.
	 Give Sts two minutes to put the words in the correct row.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 12.8   Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. 
	 Check answers.
e 12.8
witch /w/  what, when, where, which, why 
house /h/  how, who, whose 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit any other words beginning with wh 
that Sts know, e.g. whale, whole, wheel, while, and ask Sts how 
they are pronounced.
c	 Give Sts time to complete the questions with the question 
words from a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  How    2  Who    3  What    4  How    5  whose    6  How    
7  where    8  When / What    9  Which    10  Why
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions in c.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	GRAMMAR  questions without auxiliaries
a	 Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that the questions 
in the quiz are based on lessons (Files 1–11) in the 
Student’s Book.
	 Put Sts in pairs and set a time limit for them to answer as 
many questions as possible from memory. Tell Sts to use 
the pictures to help them. (See Lesson plan above if you 
are using Multipack B.)
b	 When the time limit is up, ask Sts how many questions 
they could answer from memory. 
	 Now tell them that they must find the answers to the 
questions they couldn’t answer by looking back at lessons 
in Files 1–11. Tell them not to look for the answers they 
have already given.
	 Check answers. Find out which pair(s) got the most 
answers correct.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could do 2a as a competition and 
when the time limit is up, find out which pair(s) got the most 
answers correct.
1  Vermeer    ​2  In his jacket pocket    3  An owl    4  A guided 
tour when you have a stopover at an airport    5  Because 
she didn’t do the housework.    6  Helsinki    7  Murphy’s 
Law    8  O. Henry    9  Wasps and bees    10  A fear of 
butterflies    11  Janet Leigh    12  Duncan Jones    13  Adolphe 
Sax    14  Snape    15  His twin brother
	12C		 The English File quiz
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 164@@
164
12C
164
3	SPEAKING
	 Put Sts into pairs, A and B, and get them to sit face-to-face 
if possible. Tell them to go to Communication General 
knowledge quiz, A on p.107, B on p.112.
	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts are clear what 
they have to do. Remind Sts that the correct answer is the 
one in red. Highlight that all the questions in the quiz are 
questions without auxiliaries. 
	 Give Sts time to complete their questions. Monitor and 
make sure Sts are forming the questions correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could elicit the verbs first, making sure 
that Sts can pronounce the past tense forms correctly.
Student A
1  lost    ​2  starred    ​3  wrote    ​4  won    ​5  said    ​6  broke    ​
7  cut    ​8  discovered
Student B
1  became    ​2  played    ​3  became    ​4  painted    ​5  wrote    ​
6  used    ​7  refused    ​8  invented
	 Now tell Sts A to ask their questions first. Highlight that 
they should give the three alternatives each time. 
	 Then Sts swap roles.
	 Get feedback to see who got the most answers correct.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12C.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts A (and later Sts B) to 
ask their questions first without the three alternatives. If B 
gets the answer correct, he / she gets three points. If not, A 
gives him / her the three alternatives, and this time if B gets 
it correct, he / she gets one point.
4	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Tell Sts if you have ever 
been on a quiz team and whether you enjoyed it.
b	 Focus on the task and put Sts in teams of three or four.
	 Now play the video for Sts to watch or listen and answer 
the questions in their teams.
	 Check answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch or listen.
Round 1 Sports 
1	 Manchester United
2	 ten
3	 three
4	 basketball
5	 Roger Federer
Round 2 Music
1	 Chris Martin
2	 Andrea Bocelli
3	 four
4	 Stockholm
5	 Ludwig
Round 3 Geography
1	 Venice
2 	 The Amazon
3	 Istanbul
4	 Dublin
5 	 Venezuela
c	 Now tell Sts to only focus on the quiz and to answer 
questions 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  Who   
2  Stuart   
3  In question 1, painted is the past simple form with no auxiliary. 
In question 2, we use the auxiliary did + the infinitive find.   
4  Questions 6, 8, 11, 12, and 13 are similar.
	 Highlight that when the question word (usually who or 
which) is the subject of the sentence, QuASI (Question 
word, Auxiliary verb, Subject, Infinitive) does not apply 
because the question word and the subject are the same.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 12C on p.148. 
Grammar notes
Sts will already have met questions without auxiliaries, e.g. 
Who knows the answer?, etc., but until now, this type of 
question has not been focused on.
Highlight that:
•	 the vast majority of questions in the past and present 
follow the QuASI rule.
•	 the only question words which can be the subject of a 
question, and may not need an auxiliary verb, are:
	
Who…?, e.g. Who wrote the song?
	
Which…?, e.g. Which singer sang My Way?
	
What…?, e.g. What happened?
	
How many / much…?, e.g. How many students came?
•	 questions beginning with When, Why, Where, How long, 
etc. always need an auxiliary.
	 e 12.9  Focus on the example sentences and play the 
audio for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy 
the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises for 12C on p.149. Sts do the 
exercises individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  happened    2  does this word mean    ​3  came    ​4  goes    ​
5  won    6  did the teacher say    7  made
b
1	 When did Barack Obama become president of the USA?  
(in 2008)
2	 Which US state starts with the letter H? (Hawaii)
3	 Which books did George R.R. Martin write? (A Song of Ice 
and Fire, A Game of Thrones, etc.)
4	 Who won the football World Cup in Russia in 2018? (TBC)
5	 Which sport uses the lightest ball? (ping-pong / table tennis)
6	 Where did the 2016 Olympics take place? (Rio)
7	 Which company did Steve Jobs start? (Apple Inc.)
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 12C.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 165@@
165
12C
3 Which is the only city in the world that is in two separate 
continents? Istanbul.
4 What is the capital of the Republic of Ireland? Dublin.
5 Angel Falls is the world’s highest waterfall. Which country is it in? 
Venezuela.
OK, add up the scores and bring the answer sheets to me…
OK, and the winners are…
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
Pub quiz
Good evening, everyone! Welcome to this week’s quiz. I hope
you’ve got a drink and you’re feeling confident. Here are a few rules 
as always.
You'll hear each question twice. Write your answers on your answer 
sheets, and remember: you mustn't use your phone to Google any of 
the answers! We might even get a fair result that way, who knows?!
And lastly: please remember to write your team name on your 
answer sheets.
Right, everyone, round one – sports!
Question 1: Which English football team plays at Old Trafford?
[repeat]
2 How many events are there in the decathlon?
[repeat]
3 How many times did Usain Bolt win the Olympic 100 metres race?
[repeat]
4 Which is the biggest, a football, a volleyball, or a basketball?
[repeat]
5 Who won the men’s singles at Wimbledon seven times between 
2003 and 2012?
[repeat]
OK – next round…music.
Question 1: What’s the name of the lead singer in the band Coldplay?
[repeat]
2 Which Italian opera singer became blind at the age of 12 after a 
football accident?
[repeat]
3 How many strings does a violin have?
[repeat]
4 In which country did the pop group Abba form in 1972?
[repeat]
5 What was Beethoven’s first name?
[repeat]
And the final round is Geography. 
Question 1: In which European city could you visit the Doge’s Palace 
and St Mark’s Square?
[repeat]
2 Which rainforest produces over 20% of the world’s oxygen?
[repeat]
3 Which is the only city in the world that is in two separate 
continents?
[repeat]
4 What is the capital of the Republic of Ireland?
[repeat]
5 Angel Falls is the world’s highest waterfall. Which country is it in?
[repeat]
OK, time for the answers. Swap your answer sheets please.
Here are the answers for Round 1: Sport
Which English football team plays at Old Trafford? Manchester 
United.
2 How many events are there in a decathlon? Ten. 
3 How many times did Usain Bolt win the Olympic 100 metres race? 
Three.
4 Which is the biggest, a football, a volleyball, or a basketball? A 
basketball.
5 Who won the men’s singles at Wimbledon seven times between 
2003 and 2012? Roger Federer.
Music
Question 1: What’s the name of the lead singer in the band 
Coldplay? Chris Martin.
2 Which Italian opera singer became blind at the age of 12 after a 
football accident? Andrea Bocelli.
3 How many strings does a violin have? Four. 
4 In which country did the pop group Abba form in 1972? Sweden.
5 What was Beethoven’s first name? Ludwig.
And finally…Geography.
Question 1: In which European city could you visit the Doge’s Palace 
and St Mark’s Square? Venice.
2 Which rainforest produces over 20% of the world’s oxygen? The 
Amazon.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 166@@
166
Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.40.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher's Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 11&12 
Quick Test 12 
File 12 Test 
Progress Test Files 7–12 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  c    ​5  a    ​6  c    7  c    8  b    9  a    10  c    ​
11  a    ​12  c    ​13  a    ​14  c    ​15  c
VOCABULARY
a
1  invention    ​2  decision    ​3  choice    ​4  invitation    ​5  death 
b
1  literature    ​2  maths    ​3  geography    ​4  science (biology)    ​
5  history 
c
1  identical    ​2  as    ​3  similar    ​4  like    ​5  both
d
1  suddenly    ​2  Meanwhile    ​3  immediately    ​4  eventually    ​
5  straight away
e
1  Tell    ​2  say    ​3  say    ​4  say    ​5  tell
PRONUNCIATION
c	
1  maths /θ/    ​2  sure /ʊə/    ​3  neither /ð/    ​4  fear /ɪə/    ​
5  written /r/
d
1  indecisive    ​2  identical    ​3  immediately    ​4  neighbour    ​
5  accident 
CAN YOU understand this text?
a	
They both happened in / near an airport.
b	
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  F    ​6  T    ​7  T    ​8  F
r CAN YOU understand these people?
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  c
e 12.10
1
I = interviewer, M = Mark
I	 Did you like school? 
M	 I loved school actually. Um, I think I preferred senior school more 
than junior school, but yeah, um, lots of friends, lots of, sort of 
sporting activities and things, so yeah, I loved it.
I	 What were your best and worst subjects?
M	 My best subject was probably mathematics. Um, loved 
mathematics and found I was, sort of, very capable at it, so it was 
quite easy. Um, I think it’s one of those things that’s natural. But, 
um, worst subject, maybe Latin. Never very good at languages 
even though I use them every day now, but never very, I like 
languages now but I hated them at school.
2
I = interviewer, C = Caroline
I	 Did you have a favourite or least favourite teacher at school? 
C	 Um, let me think about that. Yes, I, um, liked the French teacher. 
She was probably my favourite, favourite teacher because, um, 
she was French and she taught us to speak with a very good 
French accent.
I	 Did she inspire you?
C	 She did, and I’m still learning French and go, I live in Australia, um, 
and I go to France every year and I go to French language schools.
3
I = interviewer, J = John
I	 Do you have a problem making decisions? What about? 
J	 It depends what sort of decision it is. If it’s a sort of instant 
decision, I make pretty good instant decisions, but the longer 
you think about them, then I probably decide, or try to decipher, 
which is the best decision. So, instant decisions is a better way  
for me.
4
I = interviewer, A = Alison
I	 Do you know any twins? Are they identical? 
A	 Yes, I’m a twin myself. I have a twin brother. And my sister has got 
twin boys. They’re aged 16 and they’re not identical. They don’t 
look very similar and they don’t have similar personalities either.
5
I = interviewer, K = Kathy
I	 Who do you think gossips more, men or women? Why?
K	 I think stereotypic-, stereotypically people say women gossip 
more, um, but I actually think men gossip quite a lot as well. I 
think, I think men gossip more in a factual way, whereas women 
gossip more, maybe, in more of a personal, emotional way, so 
maybe in kind of a nastier way than what men do, I would say. 
But I would say that they probably gossip the same, or in a similar 
way.
	11&12	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 167@@
167
	
	
Photocopiable activities
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
•	 When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
•	 If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
•	 These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
•	 You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
•	 All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
•	 Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
•	 change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
•	 change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
•	 change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
•	 reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
•	 There is a Grammar activity for each main (A, B, and C) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Communicative activity for each main (A, B, 
and C) lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
All the photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC). It is also available on the 
Classroom Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display 
the worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. 
This will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the 
activities, and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
•	 The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
•	 All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
235
7A COMMUNICATIVE I’m going to tell you about...
 
Choose six topics and think about what you’re going to say. Talk to a partner.  
Give and ask for more information.
what I think is the best 
way to learn a language
something I learned  
to do as a child but 
can’t do now
something I think is 
important to teach 
young children
something I often 
forget to do
why tourists choose 
to come to my country
something I need  
to buy soon
the things I do to relax 
after a hard day
something I’ve decided  
to do in the future
a sport or activity I tried  
to learn but couldn’t
something I find difficult  
to do in English
something I wanted to 
be when I was younger
what I want to do 
tonight
somebody I would like 
to meet
what I think is the best 
way to make new 
friends
something I thought 
of buying but decided 
not to
things that are important 
to do if you go for a job 
interview
the things I think are 
important to do for  
a healthy life
a film that’s good 
to watch when I’m 
feeling sad
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 168@@
168
	
11  arrived
	
12  was
	
13  were sunbathing    
	
14  were playing
	
15  were swimming
	
16  was enjoying    
	
17  put
	
18  began
	
19  shouted
	
20  couldn’t
	
21  saw   
	
22  didn’t attack
	
23  swam
	
24  didn’t stay
	
25  went
2C  time sequencers and connectors
a	 2  d; because    3  e; although    4  a; so    5  i; but    6  h; 
because
	
7  j; so    8  f; but    9  b; although    10  c; but
b	 2  when    3  although / but    4  because    5  but    
6  One evening    7  so    8  Although    9  suddenly    10  so    
11  two minutes later    	12  so    13  because    14  The next day   
15  but
3A  be going to (plans and predictions)
a	 2  Are…going to do
	
3  ’m not going to do
	
4  ’re going to visit
	
5  are…going to go
	
6  ’re going to get
	
7  ’s going to work
	
8  Is…going to have
b	 2  ’re going to crash
	
3  ’s going to make
	
4  ’s going to cry
	
5  aren’t going to win
	
6  is going to eat
	
7  ’s going to be late
	
8  ’s going to break
3B  present continuous (future arrangements)
	
3  Who’s he taking to the hospital on Tuesday? He’s taking
	
	 his mum.
	
4  When is he working? He’s working on Monday morning and 
	
	 Wednesday afternoon.
	
5  Is he having dinner with Frank on Monday? Yes, he is.
	
6  What’s he doing on Sunday morning? He’s meeting Ellie at
	
	 the station.
	
7  What’s he doing on Friday night? He’s going to Frank’s party.
	
8  When is he going to the dentist? He’s going on Friday 		
	
	 morning.
	
9  What’s he doing on Saturday morning? He’s going  
	
	 shopping / buying Ellie’s present.
 10  When is he playing tennis? He’s playing tennis on Tuesday 
	
	 afternoon.
 11  Who’s he seeing on Saturday afternoon? He’s seeing George.
 12  When is he helping his dad? He’s helping his dad on  
	
	 Thursday afternoon.
 13  Is he going to the theatre on Wednesday? Yes, he is.
 14  Is he meeting George at the museum? No, he isn’t.
 15  What’s he doing on Sunday afternoon? He’s driving to Wales
	
	 with Ellie.
1A  word order in questions
a	 2  What year were you born?
	
3  How are you today?
	
4  How many brothers and sisters do you have?
	
5  Do you live with your family?
	
6  What do your parents do?
	
7  Why are you learning English?
	
8  When did you start learning English?
	
9  Can anyone in your family speak English?
 10  What kind of films do you like?
 11  How often do you go out for dinner?
 12  Are you reading a book at the moment?
 13  Where did you go for your last holiday?
 14  Did you do any sport yesterday?
 15  Where were you at ten o’clock last night?
1B  present simple
	
2  do you see, visit
	
3  Does it snow; rains
	
4  does Sam’s new girlfriend look like; has
	
5  do you go; don’t like
	
6  Is; doesn’t eat
	
7  does your Italian class finish; finishes
	
8  looks; doesn’t talk
	
9  ’s your English teacher like; ’s
	
10  Do you always do; forget
	
11  don’t get on; Do they make
	
12  does the supermarket open; don’t know
1C  present simple or present continuous?
1	 2  want    3  don’t understand    4  play
	
5  love    6  ’m selling    7  want
2	 8  Do you need    9  ’m just looking    10  Are…looking    
11  ’m thinking    12  have    13  wear
3	 14  ’re reading    15  don’t believe    16  hate    17  need    18  ’s 
studying    19  ’s walking    20  isn’t walking    21  ’s flying
2A  past simple: regular and irregular verbs
1	 2  did…stay    3  stayed    4  booked    5  arrived    6  didn’t 
like    7  left    8  rented    9  were    10  started    11  didn’t 
finish    12  loved
2	 13  was    14  wasn’t    15  didn’t sleep    16  watched    
17  Did…like    18  was    19  had    20  met    21  didn’t want    
22  Did…take    23  took
3	 24  Did…have    25  was    26  stayed    27  thought    
28  didn’t go    29  did…do    30  Did…go    31  visited    
32  argued    33  bought    34  didn’t buy
2B  past continuous
a	 2  was travelling; met
	
3  found; were cleaning
	
4  were waiting; saw
	
5  started; were cycling
	
6  ran; was driving
b	 2  woke up
	
3  was
	
4  was shining
	
5  felt
	
6  didn’t need
	
7  decided
	
8  were working
	
9  was visiting   
	
10  went
Grammar activity answers
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 169@@
169
3C  defining relative clauses
a	 2  who cuts    3  where…borrow    4  where…sleep    
5  which…keeps    6  which changes    7  who designs    
8  where…see    9  where…look at    10  which help    
11  where…buy    12  which has    13  which opens    
14  who flies    15  who visits
b	 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15
4A  present perfect + yet, just, already
a	 2  He’s just been on holiday.
	
3  They’ve just arrived.
	
4  She’s just washed her hair.
	
5  He’s just bought a ring.
	
6  We’ve just had lunch.
b	 3  He hasn’t done the ironing yet.
	
4  He hasn’t taken out the rubbish yet.
	
5  He’s already done the shopping.
	
6  He’s already done the washing.
	
7  He hasn’t cleaned the windows yet.
	
8  He hasn’t tidied his desk yet.
	
9  He’s already laid the table.
 10  He hasn’t made his bed yet.
4B  present perfect or past simple? (1)
a	 2  I’ve never flown in a helicopter.
	
3  Has she ever been late for work?
	
4  Luke hasn’t answered my messages.
	
5  She’s met a lot of famous people.
	
6  We’ve never been to South America.
	
7  She’s won a lot of prizes for her novels.
	
8  Have you ever lost a credit card?
	
9  I’ve never worked in a shop or a restaurant.
 10  Have you ever sold something on eBay?
b	 2  have
	
3  went
	
4  ’ve…wanted
	
5  Did…enjoy
	
6  had
	
7  were
	
8  loved
	
9  Have…heard
 10  have
 11  Have…ever seen
 12  saw
 13  Was
4C  something, anything, nothing, etc.
	
2  anywhere; somewhere
	
3  anything; nowhere
	
4  nobody
	
5  something
	
6  anywhere
	
7  Somebody; anybody
	
8  anything; nothing; anything
	
9  somewhere
 10  Somebody; anything; anybody
5A  comparative adjectives and adverbs, as…as
a	 2  Belgium is hotter than France.
	
3  Surfing is more exciting than fishing.
	
4  Sophie plays tennis better than Emily.
	
5  Sydney is further / farther from London than Delhi.
	
6  Jason gets up earlier than his wife.
	
7  Claire works harder than Sally.
	
8  The traffic is worse at 8.30 than at 9.30.
	
9  Harry writes more quickly than Paul.
 10  Life in the city is more stressful than life in the country.
b	 2  France isn’t as hot as Belgium.
	
3  Fishing isn’t as exciting as surfing.
	
4  Emily doesn’t play tennis as well as Sophie.
	
5  Delhi isn’t as far from London as Sydney is.
	
6  Jason’s wife doesn’t get up as early as him.
	
7  Sally doesn’t work as hard as Claire.
	
8  The traffic at 9.30 isn’t as bad as at 8.30.
	
9  Paul doesn’t write as quickly as Harry.
 10  Life in the country isn’t as stressful as life in the city.
5B  superlatives (+ ever + present perfect)
a	 2  the cheapest
	
3  the most boring
	
4  the meanest
	
5  the most impatient
	
6  the quietest
	
7  the emptiest
	
8  the laziest
	
9  the furthest / farthest
 10  the easiest
 11  the least stressed
 12  the healthiest
b	 2  What’s the most difficult language you’ve ever learnt?
	
3  What’s the best restaurant you’ve ever eaten at?
	
4  What’s the most expensive thing you’ve ever bought?
	
5  What’s the hardest thing you’ve ever learnt to do?
	
6  What’s the longest journey you’ve ever made?
	
7  What’s the most interesting historic building you’ve  
ever visited?
	
8  What’s the most beautiful place you’ve ever been to?
	
9  What’s the most exciting film you’ve ever seen?
	 10  What’s the furthest / farthest you’ve ever run?
	 11  What’s the coldest place you’ve ever been to?
	 12  What’s the most important exam you’ve ever taken?
5C  quantifiers, too, (not) enough
	
2  a lot of    3  too    4  enough money    5  much    
6  too    7  a little    8  a few    9  much    10  patient enough    
11  Too much    12  many    13  too much    14  enough time    
15  too many    16  a few    17  well enough    18  very little    
19  a little    20  too many
6A  will / won’t (predictions)
	
2  h; won’t understand    3  g; won’t be    4  i; won’t have
	
5  a; won’t get    6  e; ’ll feel    7  k; ’ll lose    8  l; ’ll get   
	
9  d; ’ll wear    10  f; ’ll be    11  c; ’ll pass    12  j; ’ll love
6B  will / won’t / shall (other uses)
	
2  Shall…turn on    3  won’t forget    4  ’ll call    5  ’ll have    
	
6  ’ll take    7  ’ll be    8  ’ll help    9  won’t happen    10  ’ll think
	
11  ’ll ask    12  ’ll make
6C  review of verb forms: present, past,  
and future
	
2  doesn’t work; ’ll call
	
3  haven’t made
	
4  ’m going to sell
	
5  did…get; got
	
6  ’ll help
	
7  was driving
	
8  don’t drink
	
9  Have…spoken
	
10  came; weren’t; was having
	
11  won’t hurt
	
12  ’m not working
	
13  ’ve…offered
	
14  are…doing; Do…want
	
15  did…take; was walking
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 170@@
170
7A  uses of the infinitive with to
	
2  to pass    3  not to tell    4  to build    5  to use    6  to print
	
7  to turn off    8  to go    9  to be    10  to swim    
	
11  not to worry    12  to learn    13  to lock    14  to see    
	
15  to get    16  to rain    17  to make    18  to say    
	
19  to ask    20  not to remember
7B  infinitive with to or verb + -ing?
	
3  to come
	
4  not talking
	
5  to see
	
6  to earn
	
7  relaxing; not doing
	
8  to give
	
9  to learn
	
10  winning
	
11  not to hit
	
12  drinking; talking
	
13  to go
	
14  stopping
	
15  going
	
16  to be
	
17  to go
	
18  Eating
	
19  not to understand
	
20  remembering
7C  have to, don’t have to, must, mustn’t
	
2  don’t have to pay    3  must wear    4  mustn’t touch    
5  mustn’t put    6  mustn’t take    7  have to be    8  mustn’t play
	
9  don’t have to pay    10  don’t have to come    11  must drive    
	
12  must wear
8A  should / shouldn’t
	
2  should ask    3  should tell    4  should get    5  shouldn’t sit
	
6  should get up    7  shouldn’t think    8  shouldn’t go
	
9  should learn    10  should go
8B  if + present, will / won’t + infinitive  
(first conditional)
1	 3  get    4  ’ll catch    5  catch    6  won’t do    7  don’t do    
8  won’t get
2	 9  lend    10  ’ll buy    11  have    12  ’ll start    13  have    
	
14  ’ll lend    15  lend    16  ’ll be able to buy
3	 17  can’t    18  won’t go    19  don’t go    20  won’t meet
	
21  don’t meet    22  ’ll never get    23  don’t get    24  won’t have
4	 25  talk    26  ’ll miss    27  miss    28  ’ll be    29  ’m    30  will be
	
31  is    32  ’ll lose
8C  possessive pronouns
a	 2  her
	
3  your; my
	
4  ours   
	
5  My; Our   
	
6  yours; mine   
b	 2  you; My; it; It; it; me   
	
3  She; her; her   
	
4  They; their; them   
	
5  your; mine; hers   
	
6  Our; we
9A  if + past, would + infinitive (second 
conditional)
a	 2  would you say; asked; ’d say
	
3  wouldn’t have; went
	
4  knew; ’d tell
	
5  ’d cycle; lived
	
6  ’d buy; had; ’d have; didn’t go
	
7  won; would you spend; ’d buy
	
8  ’d sleep; didn’t cry
b	 3  studied
	
4  ’ll lend
	
5  weren’t / wasn’t
	
6  don’t see   
	
7  won’t say
	
8  don’t hurry up
	
9  wouldn’t go
	
10  would…do
9B  present perfect + for and since
a	 2  has…worked; ’s worked; for
	
3  have…been married; ’ve been married since
	
4  has…been; ‘s been; since
	
5  have…known; ’ve known; for
	
6  have…lived; ’ve lived; since
	
7  have…had; ’ve had; since
	
8  have…played; ’ve played; since   
9C  present perfect or past simple? (2)
a	 1  ’ve loved; was; started
	
2  Has…finished; finished; hasn’t decided
	
3  ’ve lived; lived; did…leave; retired; wanted
	
4  saw; told; Have…lived; ’ve never been; ’s visited
	
5  Have…heard; ’ve separated; thought
	
6  ’s been; met; got; were
10A  expressing movement
	
2  down    3  under    4  (a)round    5  towards    6  along    
7  through    8  up    9  into    10  across    11  out of / through    
12  down
10B  word order of phrasal verbs
a	 2  putting on    3  writing down    4  picking up    5  going away
	
6  throwing away    7  looking for    8  getting up    9  taking off
	
10  getting on
b	 2  turn it up    3  looking after them    4  call her back    5  ✓   
	
6  pick them up    7  look for them    8  pay me back   
10C  the passive: be + past participle
a	 2  was designed    3  are spoken    4  were built    5  are shown
	
6  was discovered    7  weren’t used    8  were written   
	
9  was invented    10  is played    11  was painted    12  is visited
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 171@@
12B  reported (or indirect) speech
a	 2  he didn’t like the music
	
3  he’d tidied his room
	
4  it would be expensive
	
5  she wasn’t going to the party
	
6  he’d lost the match
	
7  he loved her
	
8  she’d found his keys
b	 2  ‘It won’t hurt.’
	
3  ‘It’s my mother’s car.’
	
4  ‘I’ve finished my homework.’
	
5  ‘I can’t swim.’
	
6  ‘I’ll always love you.’
	
7  ‘We want to check out.’
	
8  ‘I’m lost.’
12C  questions with and without auxiliaries
	
2  Francis Ford Coppola
	
3  Who painted The Scream? Edvard Munch
	
4  Where do manga comics come from? Japan
	
5  Which country produces more coffee? Brazil
	
6  Which country has a blue and yellow flag? Sweden
	
7  When did the Second World War end? 1945
	
8  Which country won the most gold medals at the 2016
	
	 Olympics? USA
	
9  Which character did Ian Fleming create? James Bond
 10  How many countries belonged to the original European 	
	
	 Economic Community in 1957? 6
 11  Which company did Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger start?	
	
	 Instagram
 12  Where do people speak Yorùbá? West Africa
 13  Which film won the Oscar for best film in 2017? Moonlight
 14  Which fruit contains more sugar? Orange
11A  used to / didn’t use to
a	 3  She used to play
	
4  She used to wear
	
5  She didn’t use to have
	
6  She didn’t use to have
	
7  She didn’t use to wear
	
8  She didn’t use to play
	
9  He used to watch
	
10  He didn’t use to do
	
11  He didn’t use to wear
	
12  He used to have
	
13  He used to be
	
14  He used to wear
	
15  He didn’t use to eat
	
16  He used to have
11B  might / might not (possibility)
a	 2  might be
	
3  might like
	
4  might not go
	
5  might meet
	
6  might buy
	
7  might not have
	
8  might phone    
	
9  might go
	
10  might not tell
	
11  might be   
11C  so, neither + auxiliaries
a	 3  Neither can I
	
4  Neither am I
	
5  So have I
	
6  Neither did I
	
7  So was I
	
8  Neither do I
	
9  So am I
	
10  So do I    
	
11  Neither do I
	
12  So did I
	
13  So was I
	
14  Neither have I   
	
15  So do I
	
16  Neither will I
	
17  So am I
	
18  So would I   
	
19  So will I
	
20  So do I
12A  past perfect
	
2  was; hadn’t taken
	
3  didn’t work; hadn’t turned it on
	
4  couldn’t take; had forgotten
	
5  ’d never flown; were
	
6  arrived; hadn’t brought
	
7  wasn’t; ’d just had
	
8  had to; ’d lost
	
9  ran; hadn’t paid
	
10  arrived, had put out    
	
11  could; ’d learnt
	
12  was; ’d been
171
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 172@@
172
172
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1A  GRAMMAR  word order in questions
	
Put the words in order to make the questions.
Personal information
1	 name / your / ’s / what  What’s your name?  Luca.
2	 year / what / you / born / were
	
?	
1983.
3	 how / you / are / today
	
?	
Fine, thank you.
Family
4	 have / and / do / brothers / you / sisters / how / many
	
?	
Two brothers and one sister.
5	 with / your / do / family / you / live
	
?	
No, I live alone.
6	 your / what / do / parents / do
	
?	
My mum’s an engineer and my 
	
dad’s a teacher.
English
7	 English / why / are / learning / you
	
?	
Because I need it for my job.
8	 learning / English / did / when / start / you
	
?	
When I was 12 years old.  
9	 speak / your / anyone / in / English / can / family
	
?	
Yes, my brother speaks English 
	
really well.
Free time
10	 do / of / what / kind / like / films / you
	
?	
I love action films.
11	 do / out / go / how / dinner / you / often / for
	
?	
Once or twice a month.
12	 a / the / book / reading / are / at / moment / you
	
?	
Yes, I’m reading some short stories  
in English.
Past time
13	 your / go / holiday / did / last / where / you / for
	
?	
I went to Thailand.
14	 do / did / you / any / yesterday / sport
	
?	
Yes, I went swimming.
15	 last / you / were / where / night / ten o’clock / at
	
?	
I was at my friend’s house.
	
Cover the questions and look at the answers. Can you remember the questions?
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions.
a
b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 173@@
173
173
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
1B  GRAMMAR  present simple
	
Complete the conversations with the present simple form of the verbs in brackets.
1	 A	 Your dog is a bit overweight. (be)
	
B	 Yes, he eats too much food! (eat)
2	 A	 How often 
 your grandparents? (you / see)
	
B	 I usually 
 them twice a year. (visit)
3	 A	
 here in winter? (it / snow)
	
B	 No, but it 
 a lot. (rain)
4	 A	 What 
? (Sam’s new girlfriend / look like)
	
B	 She 
 long blonde hair and big dark brown eyes. (have)
5	 A	 How often 
 to the gym? (you / go)
	
B	 Hardly ever! I 
 doing exercise. (not like)
6	 A	
 your husband a vegetarian? (be)
	
B	 No, but he 
 much meat. (not eat)
7	 A	 What time 
? (your Italian class / finish)
	
B	 It 
 at seven o’clock. (finish)
8	 A	 Your daughter
 very shy. (look)
	
B	 Yes, she 
 much. (not talk)
9	 A	 What 
? (your English teacher / be like)
	
B	 She 
 really kind and funny. (be)
10	 A	
 your English homework? (you / always do)
	
B	 No, I sometimes 
! (forget)
11	 A	 We 
 very well with our neighbours. (not get on)
	
B	 Why not? 
 a lot of noise? (they / make)
12	 A	 What time 
? (the supermarket / open)
	
B	 I 
. Look online. (not know)
ACTIVATION
Write three sentences about what you do at the weekend, and three sentences about  
what a person in your family does. Use adverbs or expressions of frequency.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 174@@
174
174
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the present simple or  
present continuous form of the verbs in brackets.
1C  GRAMMAR  present simple or present continuous?
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
A	 You 14
 (read) a book about  
	
modern art! I 15
 (not believe) it!  
	
You 16
 (hate) modern art!
B	 I know. But now I 17
 (need) to  
learn about it.
A	 Why?
B	 Because my girlfriend 18
 (study)  
	
it at college this year, and she loves it.
A	 What’s that picture on the left? Can I see it?
B	 It’s a woman, and I think she 19
  
	
(walk) in a garden…I don’t really know.
A	 Let me see…No, she 20
 (not walk).  
	
She 21
 (fly).
B	 Oh, yes!
3
A	 Why 1are you taking (take) a photo of  
your guitar?
B	 I 2
 (want) to sell it on eBay.
A	 Why? I 3
 (not understand).  
	
You 4
 (play) your guitar every day!  
	
You 5
 (love) it!
B	 I 6
 (sell) my old one because  
	
I 7
 (want) to buy a new one.
A	 Oh, OK.
1
A	 Hi. 8
 you 
 (need)  
	
any help?
B	 No, thanks. I 9
 (just look).
A	
10
 you 
 (look) for  
	
anything in particular?
B	 Yes, I 11
 (think) of getting a  
jacket.
A	 This is one of our best-sellers. It’s real  
	
leather. I 12
 (have) it, and  
	
I 13
 (wear) it all the time.
B	 Yes, it’s lovely. Where can I try it on?
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 175@@
175
175
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the past simple form of the verbs in brackets.
2A  GRAMMAR  past simple: regular and irregular verbs
A	 Is this your first time in the UK, Anna?
B	 No, I 1had (have) a holiday in Scotland last year.
A	 Really? I love Scotland! Where 2
 you  
	
 (stay)?
B	 We 3
 (stay) in Edinburgh. We 4
 (book)  
	
a hotel online, but unfortunately when we 5
 (arrive)  
	
we 6
 (not like) it. So we 7
 (leave) that  
	
hotel and 8
 (rent) an apartment. It was great! What  
	
about you? When 9
 (be) you in Scotland?
A	 Oh, a long time ago. I 10
 (start) a university course  
	
there. I 11
 (not finish) the course, but I  
	
12
 (love) Scotland!
1
3
A	 Ruth! You’re back! 24
 you 
 (have)   
	
a good holiday?
B	 No. It 25
 (be) awful.
A	 Why? What happened?
B	 We 26
 (stay) in a horrible apartment, and Tom  
27
 (think) the city was dangerous at night, so  
we 28
 (not go) out much in the evening.
A	 What 29
 you 
 (do) during the day?  
30
 you 
 (go) sightseeing?
B	 Yes, we 31
 (visit) all the famous places. But we  
	
32
 (argue) a lot. Tom 33
 (buy) very  
	
expensive souvenirs for all his family! I 34
 (not buy)  
	
anything.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the conversations and look at the pictures.  
Try to remember what happened to Anna, Oliver, and Ruth and Tom.
A	 Hi, Oliver. Welcome home! How 13
 (be) your flight?
B	 Hi, Mum. It 14
 (not be) bad. I 15
 (not sleep)  
much, but I 16
 (watch) some good films.
A	 And 17
 you 
 (like) New Zealand? 
B	 Yes! It 18
 (be) fantastic. I 19
 (have) a great 
time. It’s a really beautiful country and I 20
 (meet)  
some amazing people. I 21
 (not want) to come home!
A	 22
 you 
 (take) many photos?
B	 Yes, I 23
 (take) a lot. I can show you when we 
get home.
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 176@@
176
176
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at the pictures and complete the sentences with the  
past simple and past continuous form of the verbs in brackets. 
2B  GRAMMAR  past continuous
1	 I was sleeping when you sent me the 
message. (sleep, send)
2	 Susan 
 around Italy when she 
 her boyfriend. (travel, meet)
3	 We 
 some old photos when 
we 
 the house. (find, clean)
4	 They 
 for the bus when they 
 the accident. (wait, see)
5	 It 
 to rain when they 
 to school. (start, cycle)
6	 A dog 
 into the road when I 
 home. (run, drive)
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a and look at the pictures. Try to remember the sentences.
	
Complete the story with the past simple or past continuous form of the verbs in brackets.
b
Last summer, I 1was living (live) in Hawaii. One Saturday  
morning, I 2
 (wake up) early, and it  
3
 (be) a beautiful day. The sun  
4
 (shine), and I 5
  
(feel) really happy. I 6
 (not need) to  
go to work that day, so I 7
 (decide)  
to go surfing. Most of my friends 8
  
(work) and my girlfriend 9
 (visit) her  
parents, so I 10
 (go) to the beach  
alone. When I 11
 (arrive), the beach  
12
 (be) already crowded. A lot of people 
13
 (sunbathe), children  
14
 (play) games and people 15
 (swim) in the sea. Everyone  
16
 (enjoy) the lovely summer day. I 17
 (put) my things  
down on the beach, and then I 18
 (begin) walking to the sea with my surfboard.  
Suddenly, a man 19
 (shout), ‘Shark! Shark! Get out of the water!’ At first, I  
20
 (not can) see anything, but then I 21
 (see) a big shark. 
Luckily, it 22
 (not attack) anyone and 23
 (swim) away quickly.  
I 24
 (not stay) at the beach after that, and I 25
 (go) home 
without going surfing!
1
2
3
 
4
5
6
a
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 177@@
177
177
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Match the sentence halves and circle the correct word: so, but, because, or although.
1	 The weather was awful,	
	
a	
so / but I invited her to dinner.
2	 I didn’t give him my phone number	
	
b	 because / although it had a happy ending.
3	 Paul came to work	
	
c	
but / so we couldn’t find the house.
4	 It was her birthday,	
	
d	 because / although I didn’t want him to call me.
5	 Jake is an intelligent student,	
	
e	 although / because he was ill.
6	 I ran to the shop	
	
f	
so / but we had a wonderful evening.
7	 They didn’t want to dance,	
	
g	 but / so we didn’t go out.
8	 We didn’t go anywhere special,	
	
h	 although / because I was in a hurry.
9	 It was a sad story	
	
i	
because / but he’s very lazy.
10	 We drove along the street very slowly,	
	
j	
so / because they left the club early.
	
Complete the story with the time sequencers and connectors from the list.
although (x2)  ​because (x3)  ​but (x2)  ​the next day  ​one evening  so (x3)  ​suddenly  ​two minutes later  ​when
a
g
b
2C  GRAMMAR  time sequencers and connectors
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with your own ideas.
Although Jack was very good looking,…
The party was really boring, so…
I enjoyed the film, but…
We decided to eat out because…
Louisa met her husband when…
I was watching TV when suddenly…
Don’t always listen  
to the satnav...
Oscar Peters never wanted a satnav 1because he 
didn’t like technology. And 2
 his 
brother gave him one as a birthday present, it 
directed him into a difficult situation.
‘My brother Jez loves gadgets and technology. 
Last year, he gave me a satnav for my birthday, 
3
 he knew I didn’t really want one. 
Jez uses his satnav all the time 4
 he 
likes listening to instructions, 5
 I 
prefer using a map.
6
, a friend of a friend phoned. 
She needed my help, 7
 I agreed to 
drive to her house. 8
 I had a map 
in the car, I decided to use the satnav to find her 
village. It was dark, and I wanted to get there as 
quickly as possible.
Everything was going fine. I was nearly there, but 
then 9
 I saw there was a small river 
on the left. I could see that there was a road which 
went through the water to the other side of the 
river. The satnav said ‘Turn left!’, 10
 
I followed the instruction and turned left into the 
water. The satnav said ‘Go straight on!’, but 
11
 my car was completely stuck in the 
mud. I had my phone with me, 12
 I 
phoned my friend and she came to the river to help. 
I felt terrible 13
 she got very cold and 
wet in the water.
14
 a tractor pulled my car out of 
the river, 15
 it was completely ruined 
by the water. I can’t believe I made such a stupid – 
and expensive – mistake!’
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 178@@
178
178
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the correct form of be going to and a verb from the list.
do  have  get  get  go  not do  visit  work
1	 A	 What are you doing?
	
B	 I 1‘m going to get a trolley. I can’t carry all these bags.
2	 A	
2
 you 
 your homework this evening?
	
B	 No, I’m not. I’m really tired. In fact, I 3
 anything – just sleep!
3	 A	 So, do you like it here in Oxford?
	
B	 Yes, we love it! But we’re only here for a short time. We 4
 lots of  
different places.
	
A	 Where 5
 you 
 next?
	
B	 Liverpool. We 6
 the train there.
4	 A	 How’s your daughter?
	
B	 She’s fine, thanks.
	
A	 Does she have any plans for the summer?
	
B	 Yes. She 7
 in a bookshop for six weeks.
	
A	
8
 she 
 a holiday?
	
B	 No, I don’t think she is.
	
What’s going to happen? Write a sentence with be going to and a verb from the list for pictures 1–8.
be late  break  crash  cry  eat  make  miss  not win
a
b
3A  GRAMMAR  be going to (plans and predictions)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1	 He’s going to miss the bus.
2	 They 
.
3	 He 
 a cake.
4	 She 
.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Practise the conversations in a with a partner. Then cover sentences 1–8 in b.  
Look at the pictures and remember the sentences.
5	 They 
 the race.
6	 The dog 
 the sausages.
7	 He 
 for work.
8	 She 
 the window.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 179@@
179
179
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at Luke’s diary. Write the questions and the answers. Use the present continuous.
3B  GRAMMAR  present continuous (future arrangements)
1	 he / meet Sam on Monday?
	
‘Is he meeting Sam on Monday?’ ‘No, he isn’t.’
2	 When / he / go to the station?
	
‘When is he going to the station?’ ‘He’s going to the station on Sunday.’
3	 Who / he / take to the hospital on Tuesday?
	
4	 When / he / work?
	
5	 he / have dinner with Frank on Monday?
	
6	 What / he / do on Sunday morning?
	
7	 What / he / do on Friday night?
	
8	 When / he / go to the dentist?
	
9	 What / he / do on Saturday morning?
	
10	 When / he / play tennis?
	
11	 Who / he / see on Saturday afternoon?
	
12	 When / he / help his dad?
	
13	 he / go to the theatre on Wednesday?
	
14	 he / meet George at the museum?
	
15	 What / he / do on Sunday afternoon?
	
ACTIVATION
Write down one arrangement that you have each day next week.  
Tell a partner. Use the present continuous.
MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
Work 
9.00–12.00 a.m.
Dinner with Frank 
8.00 p.m.
10.00 a.m. 
Take Mum to the hospital
3.00 p.m. 
Tennis
Work 
4.00–6.00 p.m.
7.30 p.m. 
Theatre with Yaz and Omar
10.00 a.m. 
Meet Sam to study
Help Dad with the garden
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
Dentist 
11.30 a.m.
Party at Frank’s!  
8.00 p.m.
9.00 a.m. 
Go shopping – buy Ellie’s 
present
4.00 p.m. 
George – Café Tivoli
10.30 a.m.
Meet Ellie at station!
5.00 p.m. 
Drive to Wales – with Ellie
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 180@@
180
180
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the definitions with who, which, or where and the correct form of a verb from the list.
borrow  build  buy  change  cut  design  fly  have  help  keep  look at  open  see  sleep  visit
a
3C  GRAMMAR  defining relative clauses
1	 A builder is a person who  builds houses.	
2	 A hairdresser is somebody 
  
 your hair.	
3	 A library is a place 
 you can read or 
 books.	
4	 A campsite is a place 
 people 
 in tents.	
5	 A fridge is something 
  
 food cold.	
6	 A remote control is something 
  
 TV channels. 	
7	 An architect is someone 
  
 buildings. 	
8	 A cinema is a place 
 you can 
 a film. 	
9	 An art gallery is a place 
 you 
 paintings.	
10	 Glasses are things 
  
 you to see well.  	
11	 A bookshop is a place 
 you 
 books. 	
12	 A giraffe is an animal 
  
 a very long neck. 	
13	 A key is something 
  
 a door. 	
14	 A pilot is a person 
  
 planes. 	
15	 A tourist is a person 
  
 another town or country.	
	
Look again at the relative pronouns in sentences 1–15 in a. Tick (✓) the sentences  
in which the relative pronouns can be replaced with that.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the definitions and look at the pictures. Can you remember the definitions?
b
3
4
5
6
g
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 181@@
181
181
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Write sentences for the pictures. Use present perfect + just.
a
4A  GRAMMAR  present perfect + yet, just, already
1	 She / make / breakfast
	
She’s just made breakfast.
2	 He / be on holiday
	
.
3	 They / arrive
	
.
4	 She / wash her hair
	
.
5	 He / buy a ring
	
.
6	 A	 Would you like a cake?
	
B	 No, thanks. We / have lunch
	
	
.
	
Write sentences for the picture. Use present perfect + yet or already.
b
1
2
4
6
3
5
1	 do / the washing-up
	
He hasn’t done the washing-up yet.
2	 clean / the floor
	
He’s already cleaned the floor.
3	 do / the ironing
	
4	 take out / the rubbish
	
5	 do / the shopping
	
6	 do / the washing
	
7	 clean / the windows
	
8	 tidy / his desk
	
9	 lay / the table
	
10	 make / his bed
	
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Look at the picture in b and ask and answer questions.
  Has he done the washing-up yet?  
No, he hasn’t.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 182@@
182
182
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Write sentences in the present perfect.
1	 you / ever eat / octopus
	
Have you ever eaten octopus?
2	 I / never fly / in a helicopter
	
.
3	 she / ever be / late for work
	
?
4	 Luke / not answer / my messages
	
.
5	 she / meet / a lot of famous people
	
.
6	 we / never be / to South America
	
.
7	 she / win / a lot of prizes for her novels
	
.
8	 you / ever lose / a credit card
	
?
9	 I / never work / in a shop or a restaurant
	
.
10	 you / ever sell / something on eBay
	
?
	
Complete the conversations with the present perfect or past simple form of the verbs in brackets.
a
b
4B  GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple? (1)
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations in b with a partner. Then ask each other questions beginning Have you ever 
been to…(place)? and Have you ever heard…(a song or a musician)? and have short conversations.
A	
1Have you ever been (ever / be) to the USA?
B	 Yes, I 2
. I 3
 (go) to  
	
New York last summer.
A	 I 4
 always 
 (want) to go to  
New York! 5
 you 
 (enjoy) it?
B	 Yes, I 6
 (have) a great time.
A	 What 7
 (be) your favourite places?
B	 I really 8
 (love) Central Park and Fifth  
	
Avenue.
A	
9
 you 
 (hear) this band?
B	 Of course I 10
! They’re my favourite  
	
band.
A	 Really? 11
 you 
 (ever / see)  
	
them in concert?
B	 Yes, I 12
 (see) them at Wembley last  
	
month.
A	 Lucky you! 13
 (be) it a good concert?
B	 It was amazing! They were fantastic.
1
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 183@@
183
183
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the words from the list. Write in the column on the right.
anybody (x2)  anything (x4)  anywhere (x2)  nobody (x2)  nothing 
nowhere  somebody (x3)  something  somewhere (x2)
4C  GRAMMAR  something, anything, nothing, etc.
1	 A	 Why are you looking out of the window?
	
B	 I think there’s 
 in the house opposite.
o msomebodyes 
	
A	 But 
 has lived there for years!
o oonobodymes 
	
B	 I know! That’s why I’m looking.
2	 A	 Are you going 
 this summer?
	
B	 We haven’t decided yet. But my wife wants to go 
 nice and hot.
3	 A	 I’m so bored. There isn’t 
 to do in this town!
	
B	 That’s not true. There are lots of things to do.
	
A	 But there’s 
 for young people to go.
4	 A	 I phoned your office at 2.00 today, but 
 answered.
	
B	 Sorry, there was a problem with the phone lines.
5	 A	 I’m hungry. I need 
 to eat.
	
B	 Well, there’s food in the fridge.
6	 A	 Where did you go last night?
	
B	 I didn’t go 
. I was too tired. I stayed in.
7	 A	
 told me that their new album is very good.
	
B	 Really? I don’t know 
 who likes it.
8	 A	 Did you buy 
 this afternoon?
	
B	 No, 
. I didn’t see 
 that I liked.
 
9	 A	 Where are my car keys?
	
B	 I think they’re 
 in the kitchen.
10	 A	
 told Eva about the party. Was it you?
	
B	 Me? No, I haven’t said 
 to 
.
 
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Work with a partner. Cover the column on the right.  
Read the conversations aloud with the missing words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 184@@
184
184
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Write sentences about the pictures using comparative adjectives and adverbs.
a
5A  GRAMMAR  comparative adjectives and adverbs, as…as
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
	
Rewrite the sentences from a using not as...as.
1	 Russian isn’t as easy as French.
2	 France 
.
3	 Fishing 
.
4	 Emily 
.
5	 Delhi 
.
6	 Jason’s wife 
.
7	 Sally 
.
8	 The traffic at 9.30 
.
9	 Paul 
.
10	 Life in the country 
.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. For each picture,  
say a sentence with a comparative adjective or adverb from a and not as...as from b.
b
1
2
1	 French / easy to learn / Russian
	
French is easier to learn than Russian.
2	 Belgium is / hot / France.
	
3	 Surfing is / exciting / fishing
	
4	 Sophie plays tennis / well / Emily
	
5	 Sydney is / far from London / Delhi
	
6	 Jason gets up / early / his wife
	
7	 Claire works / hard / Sally
	
8	 The traffic is / bad at 8.30 / at 9.30
	
9	 Harry writes / quickly / Paul
	
10	 Life in the city is / stressful / life in the country
	
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 185@@
185
185
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Write the opposite superlatives.
1	 the most unfriendly	 the friendliest 	
7	 the most crowded	
2	 the most expensive	
	
8	 the most hard working	
3	 the most exciting	
	
9	 the nearest	
4	 the most generous	
	
 10	 the most difficult	
5	 the most patient 	
	
 11	 the most stressed	
6	 the loudest 	
	
 12	 the most unhealthy	
	
Write the questions using the superlative form of the adjective + ever + present perfect.
1	 Who / generous person you / meet
	
Who’s the most generous person you’ve ever met?
2	 What / difficult language you / learn
	
?
3	 What / good restaurant you / eat at
	
?
4	 What / expensive thing you / buy
	
?
5	 What / hard thing you / learn to do
	
?
6	 What / long journey you / make
	
?
7	 What / interesting historic building you / visit
	
?
8	 What / beautiful place you / be to
	
?
9	 What / exciting film you / see
	
?
10	 What / far you / run
	
?
11	 What / cold place you / be to	
	
?
12	 What / important exam you / take
	
?
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions in b.
a
b
5B  GRAMMAR  superlatives (+ ever + present perfect)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 186@@
186
186
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Choose the correct word or phrase for each sentence. Circle the correct form.
5C  GRAMMAR  quantifiers, too, (not) enough
1	 Jackie spends too many / too much money on shoes.
2	 A good diet can prevent lot of / a lot of illnesses.
3	 ‘How was the job interview?’ ‘It was OK. I wasn’t too / enough nervous.’
4	 I think I have enough money / money enough to pay for this.
5	 How much / many fruit do you eat?
6	 Can you help me? This case is too / too much heavy.
7	 Could I have a little / a few milk, please?
8	 I’m going away on holiday for a few / a little days next week.
9	 You don’t do many / much exercise. Why don’t you come jogging with me?
10	 I can’t teach children. I’m not patient enough / enough patient.
11	 Too much / Too many chocolate isn’t good for you.
12	 How many / much hours do you work a day?
13	 I spend too much / too many time at the computer.
14	 I couldn’t finish the report because I didn’t have time enough / enough time.
15	 I have too many / too much clothes. I can never decide what to wear.
16	 We’re going to buy a little / a few things for our new flat today.
17	 Are you enough well / well enough to go to work today?
18	 I’m going to have very little / very few free time this weekend.
19	 My husband does a few / a little housework every day.
20	 We buy too many / too much vegetables. We never eat them all!
ACTIVATION
Look at the sentences and say if they are true for you. Compare with a partner.
I watch too much TV.
I don’t drink enough water.
I don’t do enough exercise.
I’m not organized enough.
I spend too much time on social media.
I have too many clothes.
I drink too much caffeine.
I don’t eat enough fruit and vegetables.
  Yes, I watch too much TV.
 
 How many hours a day?
  Maybe an hour. What about you?  
 I don’t watch much TV.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 187@@
187
187
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Read sentences 1–12 and match them to predictions a–l. Complete the predictions  
with will / won’t. Use the verbs in brackets.
6A  GRAMMAR  will / won’t (predictions)
1	 ‘The meeting starts at 2.30.’
2	 ‘John is going to see a film in  
French tonight.’
3	 ‘There’s a new drinks machine 
in the office.’
4	 ‘The teacher isn’t going to be here 
today.’
5	 ‘My brother’s going to sell his car.’
6	 ‘I’ve started going swimming  
every day.’
7	 ‘Esther’s going to buy another  
phone.’
8	 ‘My daughter has a degree in IT.’
9	 ‘My new coat was really expensive!’
10	‘I don’t believe it. I’ve broken my  
brother’s laptop.’
11	‘I’m taking my driving test tomorrow.’
12	‘We’re going to Brazil next month.’
b
a	 ‘He 
 much money for it.  
It’s very old.’ (not get)
b	 ‘Yes, and I’m sure it’ll be really boring!’ (be)
c	
‘Don’t worry. You 
 easily.’ 
(pass)
d	 ‘Yes, but you 
 it a lot.’ (wear)
e	 ‘That’s good. You 
 much 
healthier.’ (feel)
f	
‘Oh no. He 
 really angry.’ (be)
g	 ‘The coffee 
 very good.’ 
(not be)
h	 ‘He 
 anything!’  
(not understand)
i	
‘Great! We 
 the exam!’ 
(not have)
j	
‘Lucky you! You 
 the people 
and the scenery.’ (love)
k	 ‘She 
 it, just like the other 
two.’ (lose)
l	
‘She 
 a good job, I’m 
sure.’ (get)
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. A read sentences 1–12. B read the predictions. Then swap roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 188@@
188
188
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with will / won’t or shall and the correct verb from the list.
ask    be    call    have    help    make    not be    not forget    not happen    take    turn on    think
6B  GRAMMAR  will / won’t / shall (other uses)
1	 A	
What would you like for dinner tonight?
	
B	
Sorry, I won’t be home for dinner.  
I’m working late.
2	 A	
It’s hot in here.
	
B	

 I 
 the air 
conditioning? 
3	 A	
Please can you post this letter for me 
today? It’s very important.
	
B	
Don’t worry, I 
.
4	 A	
Oh, hello, Nina. I can’t talk now.  
I’m at work.
	
B	
No problem. I 
 you back 
this evening. 
5	 A	
So, a mineral water and an egg 
sandwich. Anything else?
	
B	
Yes, I 
 a packet of crisps, 
please.
6	 A	
The coffee machine you bought doesn’t 
work.
	
B	
I 
 it back tomorrow. They  
can change it.
7	 A	
Please don’t go!
	
B	
Don’t worry. I 
 back soon.
8	 A	
I’m going to paint my flat at the  
weekend.
	
B	
I 
 you if you like.
9	 A	
You’re 15 minutes late!
	
B	
I’m very sorry. It 
 again.
0	 A	
What are your plans for the summer?
	
B	
I’m going to travel around Italy. Why 
don’t you come with me?
	
A	
Maybe! I 
 about it.
1	 A	
I’m nervous about the test tomorrow.
	
B	
Don’t worry. Give me the book, and I 
 you some of the questions.
2	 A	
I’ve had a terrible day at work today.
	
B	
Sit down, and I 
 you a cup of 
tea.
1
1
1
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner.
I’m working late.
Anything else?
You’re 15 minutes late!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 189@@
189
189
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: present simple,  
present continuous, past simple, past continuous, present perfect, be going to + infinitive,  
will / won’t + infinitive.
6C  GRAMMAR  review of verb forms: present, past, and future
1	 A	
Does your sister sometimes get (get) angry with you?
	
B	
Only if I take her clothes without asking.
2	 A	
Can I speak to Anna, please?
	
B	
Sorry, she 
 (not work) on Wednesdays.
	
A	
OK, thanks. I 
 (call) back tomorrow then.
3	 A	
I 
 (not make) anything for dinner yet.
	
B	
That’s OK. I’m not very hungry.
4	 A	
Have you decided what to do with your car?
	
B	
Yes. I 
 (sell) it next month.
5	 A	
How 
 you 
 (get) home last night?
	
B	
I 
 (get) a taxi.
6	 A	
Oh dear, I’m not very good at filling in forms.
	
B	
Don’t worry. I 
 (help) you.
7	 A	
Did you hear about the election result?
	
B	
Yes, I heard it on the news when I 
 (drive) home.
8	 A	
Soft drinks aren't very good for you, you know.
	
B	
Well, I 
 (not drink) very many – just one or two cans a day.
9	 A	
 you ever 
 (speak) to your mother about the problem?
	
B	
Yes, I have. But that was a long time ago.
0	 A	
I 
 (come) to see you last night, but you 
 (not be) at home.
	
B	
No, I 
 (have) dinner at my parents’ house.
1	 A	
I’m a bit nervous about the injection, Doctor.
	
B	
Don’t worry. It 
 (not hurt).
2	 A	
Hi, can you talk now?
	
B	
Sure, I 
 (not work) at the moment.
3	 A	
You look happy!
	
B	
I am. They 
 just 
 (offer) me the job in Paris.
4	 A	
What 
 you 
 (do) tomorrow evening?
	
B	
Nothing. Why?
	
A	
 you 
 (want) to see a film?
5	 A	
Wow! This is a great photo. Where 
 you 
 (take) it?
	
B	
When I 
 (walk) in the Himalayas.
1
1
1
1
1
1
16–20 	 Excellent. You can use the past, present, and future very well.
11–15	 Quite good, but check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.136) and look 
at the exercise again.
1–10	
This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.136). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
20
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 190@@
190
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the sentences with to + a verb from the list. Write in the INFINITIVE WITH TO column.
ask  be  build  get  go  learn  leave  lock  make  not tell  pass    
print  not remember  rain  say  see  swim  turn off  use  not worry
7A  GRAMMAR  uses of the infinitive with to
	
	
1	 I was ready 
 when my phone rang.	
to leave
2	 It isn’t difficult 
 the first year exam.	
3	 Promise 
 anyone about this. It’s a secret.	
4	 They’re planning 
 a supermarket there.	
5	 Can you show me how 
 the new photocopier?	
6	 You need 
 your boarding pass before you go to the airport.	
7	 Don’t forget 
 the computer when you leave.	
8	 Does Fabio know where 
 when he arrives?	
9	 She won’t pretend 
 happy if she isn’t.	
10	 Is it safe 
 in this river?	
11	 Try 
 about your driving test. I’m sure you’ll pass.	
12	 What’s the best way 
 a new language?	
13	 Did you remember 
 the front door when you left?	
14	 It was really nice 
 you again after all this time.	
15	 I can’t decide what 
 my girlfriend for her birthday.	
16	 It started 
, so we came home early from the beach.	
17	 It’s really important 
 a good impression on your first day in a new job.	
18	 He phoned her 
 that he was sorry.	
19	 I have a problem, but I don’t know who 
 for advice.	
20	 It’s quite normal 
 your dreams.	
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the INFINITIVE WITH TO column. Read the sentences  
aloud with the missing infinitives.
INFINITIVE WITH TO
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 191@@
191
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the sentences with the -ing form or infinitive with to of the verbs in brackets.
7B  GRAMMAR  infinitive with to or verb + -ing?
1	 I can’t promise to be (be) on time.
2	
Swimming (swim) is better exercise than running.
3	 Would you like 
 (come) to a concert on Saturday?
4	 Do you mind 
 (not talk) so loudly?
5	 It was very interesting 
 (see) my old school friends again.
6	 Duncan works at weekends 
 (earn) more money.
7	 On Sundays, Emma likes 
 and 
 (relax, not do) anything.
8	 We were unhappy with the service, so the restaurant offered 
 (give) us a free dinner.
9	 Is it difficult 
 (learn) Japanese?
10	 James is very competitive. He thinks 
 (win) is the most important thing.
11	 She tried 
 (not hit) the man, but she was driving too fast.
12	 We spent all evening 
 coffee and 
 (drink, talk).
13	 Excuse me, I need 
 (go) to the bathroom.
14	 They drove without 
 (stop) for six hours.
15	 We’re thinking of 
 (go) to Mexico for our holidays next year.
16	 I’m very happy 
 (be) here again.
17	 We’ve decided 
 (go) camping this summer because it’s cheaper.
18	
 (eat) just before you go to bed can make it difficult to sleep.
19	 The man pretended 
 (not understand) the policeman.
20	 Are you good at 
 (remember) people’s names?
20
16–20	 Excellent. You can use the infinitive with to and the -ing form very well.
11–15	 Quite good, but check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.138) and look 
at the exercise again.
1–10	
This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.138). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 192@@
192
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the sentences with have to, don't have to, must, or mustn't + a verb from the list.
be  come  drive  pay (x2)  play  put  take  touch  turn off  wear (x2)
7C  GRAMMAR  have to, don’t have to, must, mustn’t
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences. Look at the signs and remember the sentences.
1	 You must turn off your phone.
2	 Children 
 
.
3	 You 
 
a jacket.
4	 You 
 
the door.
9	 You 
 
anything now.
6	 You 
 
photos.
7	 You 
 
over 18 to see this film.
8	 You 
 
football here.
5	 You 
 
your feet on the seats.
10	 You 
 
to class on Fridays.
11	 You 
 
in one direction.
12	 You 
  
sports shoes here.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 193@@
193
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at pictures 1–10. Complete the conversations with should / shouldn’t + a verb from the list.
ask  get  get up  go (x2)  learn  sit  tell  think  use
8A  GRAMMAR  should / shouldn’t
1
3
5
7
9
2
4
6
8
10
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the conversations. Look at the pictures and remember the advice.
1	 A	 What are you doing?
	
B	 I’m trying to open this packet.
	
A	 You shouldn’t use a knife! You’ll cut yourself!
2	 A	 I can’t do this exercise. It’s too difficult.
	
B	 You 
 the teacher for some help.
3	 A	 I’m really annoyed with Paula.
	
B	 Why?
	
A	 Because she’s always on the computer. She never 
talks to me!
	
B	 You 
 her how you feel. Maybe 
she doesn’t know.
4	 A	 Angela’s leaving work at the end of the month. 
She’s going to have a baby.
	
B	 We 
 her a present.
5	 A	 You 
 so near the television.
	
B	 Why not?
	
A	 It isn’t good for your eyes.
6	 A	 I miss the bus for college nearly every day.
	
B	 You 
 earlier.
7	 A	 Good luck for the match!
	
B	 Thanks, but I’m sure I’m going to lose.
	
A	 You 
 like that! Be positive! Say 
to yourself, ‘I’m going to win! I’m going to win!’
8	 A	 Come on. Get up. It’s 9.30.
	
B	 But I’m tired.
	
A	 You 
 to bed so late.
9	 A	 Can you make me an omelette, please?
	
B	 Make it yourself!
	
A	 I don’t know how to.
	
B	 You 
 how to cook then!
10	 A	 I’d love to travel round the world.
	
B	 Do you have enough money for the trip?
	
A	 Well, yes.
	
B	 Then I think you 
!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 194@@
194
194
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the stories with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
8B  GRAMMAR  if + present, will / won’t + infinitive (first conditional)
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Try to remember the situations.
1	 If you don’t take an umbrella,...	
3	 If I can’t borrow your dress,...
2	 If you lend me £3,000,...	
4	 If I talk to you now,...
If you 1don’t take an umbrella, you 2’ll get wet.  
(not take, get)
If you 3
 wet, you 4
 a cold.  
(get, catch)
If you 5
 a cold, you 6
 well  
in your exam tomorrow. (catch, not do)
If you 7
 well in your exam, you  
8
 a place at university. (not do, not get)
1
If you 9
 me £3,000, I 10
  
a good computer. (lend, buy)
If I 11
 a good computer, I 12
  
my own business. (have, start)
If I 13
 my own business, I 14
  
you some money. (have, lend)
If I 15
 you some money, you 16
  
a new car. (lend, can buy)
2
If I 17
 borrow your dress,  
I 18
 to the party. (not can, not go)
If I 19
 to the party, I 20
 
anyone. (not go, not meet)
If I 21
 anyone, I 22
 married.  
(not meet, never get)
If I 23
 married, you 24
 any  
grandchildren. (not get, not have)
3
If I 25
 to you now, I 26
  
the train. (talk, miss)
If I 27
 the train, I 28
  
late for work. (miss, be)
If I 29
 late for work, my boss  
30
 angry with me. (be, be)
If my boss 31
 angry with me,  
I 32
 my job. (be, lose)
4
Wait. It’s raining!
It’s not fair!
You want how much?!
I’ll be fine.
Just a few  
thousand pounds.
I’m sorry, but it 
is my dress.
I can’t talk to 
you now!
Why not?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 195@@
195
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Circle the correct word in the conversations.
1	 A	 Is that the neighbours’ cat?
	
B	 No, their / theirs is brown, not black.
2	 A	 Where does your girlfriend live?
	
B	 She lives in the city centre with her / hers parents. 
3	 A	 Can you move your / yours car, please?
	
B	 That’s not my / mine car.
4	 A	 Is that Bill’s camera?
	
B	 No, it’s our / ours . Why?
5	 A	 My / Mine son’s just got a new job in London.
	
B	 Oh, really? Our / Ours daughter’s working there at the moment. 
6	 A	 I love this motorbike! Is it your / yours?
	
B	 No, it’s not my / mine, unfortunately.
	
Complete the sentences with the correct subject or object pronouns 
(I, me, etc.) and possessive adjectives or pronouns (my, mine, etc.).
1	 If Andrew doesn’t leave soon, he’ll miss the train. I think you should 
tell him to hurry.
2	 A	 What are 
 looking for, Mum?
	
B	
 purse. I can’t find 
 anywhere.
	
A	
’s on the table in the dining room.
	
B	 Oh, great! Can you get 
 for 
?
3	 Do you know where Sally is? 
 isn’t at 
 desk, 
and one of the administrators is looking for 
.
4	 My brothers are very lazy. 
 spend most of 
 
free time sleeping or watching TV. My dad’s always angry 
with 
.
5	 A	 Is that 
 umbrella, Lucy?
	
B	 No, it isn’t 
. Ask Claire. I think it’s 
.
6	 My sister and I work in the same office. 
 hours are the 
same, so 
 often have lunch together.
ACTIVATION
Write four sentences that are true for you using I, me, my, and mine.
a
b
8C  GRAMMAR  possessive pronouns
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 196@@
196
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the second conditional forms of the verbs in brackets.
a
9A  GRAMMAR  if + past, would / wouldn’t + infinitive (second conditional)
	
First or second conditional? Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
1	 What will we do tomorrow if it rains (rain)?
2	 If I had a lot of money, I’d buy (buy) a horse.
3	 She’d pass her exams if she 
 (study) harder.
4	 I’m sure she 
 (lend) you the money if you ask her nicely.
5	 I’d like your dog more if he 
 (not be) so noisy!
6	 If I 
 (not see) you this evening, I’ll see you on Friday.
7	 I 
 (not say) anything to James if you don’t want me to.
8	 If you 
 (not hurry up), we’ll miss the train.
9	 If I were you, I 
 (not go) to the UK in the winter.
10	 What 
 you 
 (do) if you found a snake in your bed?
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with your own ideas.
If I could live in another country, I...
If the weather is good this weekend, I...
If I were the President, I...
If I get bored this evening, I...
b
1	 A	 Look at Hannah. She’s so lazy.
	
B	 I know. If the boss came in now, he 
wouldn’t be very happy. (come, not be).
2	 A	 What 
 if Adam 
 
you out on a date? (you say, ask)
	
B	 I think I 
 ‘yes’! (say)
3	 A	 Ouch! My tooth hurts.
	
B	 You 
 so many problems with 
your teeth if you 
 to the 
dentist more often. (not have, go)
4	 A	 Is the answer to number 5 A or B?
	
B	 If I 
 the answer,  
I 
 you. But I don’t! (know, tell)
5	 A	 Why don’t you cycle to work?
	
B	 I 
 if I 
 nearer 
the office, but I live too far away. (cycle, live)
6	 A	 Wow! Those shoes are great.  
I 
them if I 
 
more money. (buy, have)
	
B	 Well, you 
 more money if  
you 
 shopping so often.  
(have, not go)
7	 A	 If you 
 the lottery, how
 the money? (win, you spend)
	
B	 I 
 a big house in the country. 
(buy)
8	 A	 I’m so tired!
	
B	 We 
 much better if the 
neighbours’ baby 
 all night. 
(sleep, not cry)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 197@@
197
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the present perfect form of the verb + for or since if necessary.
a
9B  GRAMMAR  present perfect + for and since
 have 
1	 A	 How long have you had your cat?
	
B	 I’ve had him for two months now.
two months
four years
 work 
2	 A	 How long 
 your daughter 
 in 
New York?
	
B	 She 
 there 
four years.
she left university
 be married 
3	 A	 How long 
 you 
?
	
B	 I 
 
 1981.
1981
 be 
4	 A	 How long 
 your mum 
 a 
journalist?
	
B	 She 
 a journalist 
 she left 
university.
50 years
 know 
5	 A	 How long 
 they 
 each other?
	
B	 They 
 each other 
 50 years. 
2006
 live 
6	 A	 How long 
 you 
 here?
	
B	 We 
 here 
 2006.
 have 
7	 A	 How long 
 you 
 this phobia?
	
B	 I 
 it 
 about 2010.
about 2010
I was 17
I was 17
 play 
8	 A	 How long 
 you 
 for this team?
	
B	 I 
 for them 
 I was 17.
	
Test your memory. Cover the conversations and look at the pictures.  
Can you remember the conversations?
ACTIVATION
Write four sentences about yourself, two with the present perfect + for,  
and two with the present perfect + since.
b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 198@@
198
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with the present perfect or the  
past simple form of the verbs in brackets.
a
9C  GRAMMAR  present perfect or past simple? (2)
	
Practise the conversations with a partner.
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with information about real people (either people you know or famous people).
1	
 and 
 were married for about 
 years.
2	
 and 
 have been married since 
.
3	
 lived in 
 for about 
 years.
4	
 have / has lived in 
 for about 
 years.
b
A	
 your brother 
 (finish) university?
B	 Yes, he 
 (finish) three weeks ago.
A	 What’s he going to do now?
B	 He 
 (not decide) yet.
2
A	 Where do your parents live?
B	 In Brighton. They 
 (live) there since last year. Before that they 
 (live) in 
Birmingham.
A	 Why 
 they 
 (leave) Birmingham?
B	 Because my dad 
 (retire), and they 
 (want) to live near the sea.
3
A	 I 
 (see) Oliver yesterday. He 
 (tell) me about your plans to move to 
Australia.
B	 Yes, I’m very excited...and a bit nervous too.
A	
 you ever 
 (live) abroad before?
B	 No, never. I 
 (never be) very interested in travelling.
A	 How about your wife?
B	 Oh, Lily loves travelling! She 
 (visit) lots of different countries.
4
A	
 you 
 (hear) about Andy and Francesca?
B	 No. What?
A	 They 
 (separate).
B	 Really? That’s a pity. I 
 (think) they were very happy together.
5
A	 Is your brother married?
B	 Yes, he 
 (be) married for ages – about ten years. He 
 (meet) his wife 
Sarah when they were both at secondary school. They 
 (get) married when they 
 (be) only 18.
6
A	 How long have you played (play) the violin?
B	 Since I was (be) four. I 
 (love) music all my life.
A	 Was it a difficult instrument to learn?
B	 It 
 (be) very hard when I 
 (start).
1
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 199@@
199
199
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with a preposition of movement.
10A  GRAMMAR  expressing movement
1	 A police helicopter flew over the houses.
2	 The robber fell 
 the stairs.
3	 A bird flew 
 the bridge.
4	 They danced 
 the fire.
5	 The policeman walked 
 the car.
6	 The cat ran 
 the wall.
7	 The road goes 
 the village.
8	 The boy is climbing 
 the tree.
9	 He jumped 
 the swimming pool.
10	 The dog swam 
 the river.
11	 The rock star threw a TV 
 the 
window.
12 	 The skiers are skiing 
 the 
mountain.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Say the sentences.
1
11
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 200@@
200
200
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
What are the people doing? Complete each sentence with a phrasal verb. Use one word from 
each list.
get (x2)  go  look  pick  put  take  throw  turn  write
a
10B  GRAMMAR  word order of phrasal verbs
	
Circle the right answer. Tick (✓) if both are correct.
1	 Can I try on this jacket / try this jacket on, please? ✓
2	 I can’t hear the music. Can you turn it up / turn up it?
3	 They’re my sister’s children. I’m looking after them / looking them after.
4	 Jane called when you were out. Can you call her back / call back her?
5	 Turn off your mobiles / Turn your mobiles off before the exam begins.
6	 Your clothes are all over the floor. Please pick up them / pick them up.
7	 I can’t find my car keys. Can you help me look for them / look them for?
8	 If I lend you the money, when will you pay me back / pay back me?
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences in a. Look at the pictures and say what’s happening.
b
9	 She’s 
 
her coat.
9
10
1
2
1	 She’s turning on the TV.
2	 He’s 
 his 
shoes.
3
4
3	 They’re 
  
the questions.
4	 He’s 
 her 
books.
5	 She’s 
 for  
the weekend.
5
6
6	 He’s 
 the 
newspaper.
7	 She’s 
  
her phone.
7
8
8	 He’s 
 early.
10	 They’re 
  
well.
away (x2)  down  for  off  on (x2)  up (x2)
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 201@@
201
201
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with the present or  
past passive form of the verbs in brackets.
a
10C  GRAMMAR  the passive: be + past participle
1	 The film Jurassic Park is based on the book by Michael Crichton. (base) 
2	 The symbol of the Olympic Games 
	in 1912. (design) 
3	 Four national languages 
	 in Switzerland. (speak)
4	 The pyramids 
	nearly 5,000 years ago. (build)
5	 About 350 films 
	 at the Berlin Film Festival every year. (show)
6	 P4 is a very small new moon which 
	in 2011. (discover)
7	 Seat belts 
	in planes until the 1930s. (not use)
8	 The Hunger Games books 
	by Suzanne Collins. (write)
9	 The first smartphone 
	in 1992 by IBM. (invent)
10	 Pétanque 
	 a lot all over France. (play)
11	 The Last Supper 
	 by Leonardo da Vinci. (paint)
12	 The Eiffel Tower 
	by about seven million people a year. (visit)
	
Cover the sentences and look at the pictures. Can you remember the sentences?
ACTIVATION
1	 Write two past passive sentences about inventions or discoveries made  
by someone from your country.
2	 Write two present passive sentences about things that are produced,  
grown, or made somewhere in your country.
b
1
5
9
2
6
10
3
7
11
4
8
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 202@@
202
202
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at how Alice and Johnny have changed. For each person, write eight sentences using  
used to / didn’t use to about what they were like in the past.
11A  GRAMMAR  used to / didn’t use to
1	 She used to wear dresses.
2	 She didn’t use to ride a motorbike.
3	
 the violin.
4	
 glasses.
5	
 a tattoo on her arm.
6	
 very long hair.
7	
 jeans and T-shirts.
8	
 the guitar.
ACTIVATION
1	 Look at the pictures. Make sentences with used to and didn’t use to about Alice and Johnny.
2	 Write two sentences with used to and two sentences with didn’t use to about yourself.
9	
 TV all day.
10	
 any sport or exercise.
11	
 a suit and tie.
12	
 a beard and  
a moustache.
13	
 a bit overweight.
14	
 jeans.
15	
 healthy food.
16	
 long hair.
Alice in 2012
Alice now
Johnny in 2012
Johnny now
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 203@@
203
203
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with might / might not and a verb from the list.
be (x2)  buy  fall  go (x2)  have  like  meet  phone  tell
a
11B  GRAMMAR  might / might not (possibility)
1	 A	 Look, Mummy, I can ride a bicycle without using my hands!
	
B	 Oh, be careful! You might fall !
2	 A	 Are you going to go to the party?
	
B	 I’m not sure. My ex-husband 
 there, and I really don’t want to see him.
3	 A	 What’s this? It looks very strange.
	
B	 It’s a special dish from my country. Try it, you 
 it.
4	 A	 I 
 to class tomorrow. I think I’ll have to work late.
	
B	 OK. I’ll text you and tell you if there’s any homework.
5	 A	 Are you going to be at home this evening?
	
B	 I’m not sure. I 
 some friends for a drink.
6	 A	 I think I 
 buy this T-shirt.
	
B	 Don’t be silly. It’s much too small for you.
7	 A	 Where are you going for your holiday?
	
B	 I don’t know. I’m really busy at work, so I 
 a holiday this year.
8	 A	 Are you going to send Adam an email?
	
B	 No, I think I 
 him. It’s quicker.
9	 A	 How are you going to get there?
	
B	 I 
 by train...but maybe it’s better to drive...I don’t know...
	
A	 Come on – you need to make a decision!
10	 A	 Are you going to tell Anna about seeing Mike with that woman in the pub?
	
B	 I 
 her. I’m not sure.
11	 A	 I 
 late for class tomorrow. I’m seeing the doctor at 8.30.
	
B	 OK. Thanks for telling me.
	
Practise the conversations in a with a partner.
ACTIVATION
Write two things you might do next weekend, and two things you might not have time to do tomorrow.
b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 204@@
204
204
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Complete the conversations with so + auxiliary + I or neither + auxiliary + I.
a
11C  GRAMMAR  so, neither + auxiliaries
1	 A	 I don’t like that new building much.
	
B	 Neither do I. It looks like a spaceship.
2	 A	 I passed the exam!
	
B	 So did I! I got 92%.
3	 A	 I can’t swim, I’m afraid.
	
B	 
. Perhaps we should 
have lessons.
4	 A	 I’m not very hungry.
	
B	 
. I’ll just have  
a sandwich.
5	 A	 I’ve finished university.
	
B	 
. I’m looking for  
a job now!
6	 A	 I didn’t like the film.
	
B	
. It was too slow.
7	 A	 I was born in 1989.
	
B	 Really? 
.
8	 A	 I don’t have any brothers or sisters.
	
B	 
. But I have a lot of 
cousins.
9	 A	 I’m going to stay at home this evening.
	
B	
. I’m quite tired.
10	 A	 I have to go to work on Saturday.
	
B	 
. I hate working at 
the weekend.
11	 A	 I don’t get on with Lydia very well.
	
B	 
. We don’t really 
have much in common.
12	 A	 I got married in 2005.
	
B	 
. But I got divorced  
a year later!
13	 A	 I was working in London last year.
	
B	
. What a coincidence!
14	 A	 I haven’t been to South America.
	
B	
, but I’d love to go.
15	 A	 I want to go to the beach today.
	
B	
. It’s a beautiful day.
16	 A	 I won’t go to that restaurant again.
	
B	
. The food was awful.
17	 A	 I’m going to stop using Facebook.
	
B	 
. I spend too much 
time on it.
18	 A	 I’d like to go to New Zealand.
	
B	 
. They say it’s 
beautiful.
19	 A	 I’ll do my homework on the bus.
	
B	
. It’s very easy.
20	 A	 I have a twin sister.
	
B	
. That’s amazing!
	
Practise the conversations in a with a partner.
ACTIVATION
Write a two-line conversation with so + auxiliary + I, and another with neither + auxiliary + I.
b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 205@@
205
205
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at the pictures. Complete the sentences with the past simple  
and past perfect form of the verbs in brackets.
12A  GRAMMAR  past perfect
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1	 When they got (get) to the station the train had already left (already leave).
2	 Kate 
 (be) very cold because she 
 (not take) her coat.
3	 The printer 
 (not work) because he 
 (not turn it on).
4	 I 
 (not can) take a photo of the crocodile because I 
 (forget) 
to charge the battery.
5	 They 
 (never fly) before and they 
 (be) very nervous.
6	 When he 
 (arrive) at the pool he realized he 
 (not bring) his 
swimsuit.
7	 She 
 (not be) hungry because she 
 (just have) dinner.
8	 She 
 (have to) pay again because she 
 (lose) her ticket.
9	 The waitress 
 (run) after him because he 
 (not pay) the bill.
10	 The fire engine 
 (arrive) after the men 
 (put out) the fire.
11	 They 
 (can) speak French because they 
 (learn) it at school.
12	 She 
 (be) tired because she 
 (be) in the queue all night.
ACTIVATION
Continue these sentences with the past perfect.
I didn’t recognize him because...	
We couldn’t get a table at the restaurant because...
My father was really angry because...	
I didn’t want anything for dinner because...
When I got to work / school today I realized that...	
I didn’t want to go to the cinema because...
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 206@@
206
206
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Look at the pictures. Change the direct speech to reported speech.
a
12B  GRAMMAR  reported (or indirect) speech
I can’t see
anything.
1
I don’t like
the music.
2
I’ve tidied 
my room.
3
It’ll be
expensive.
4
I’m not going
to the party.
5
I lost
the match.
6
I love
you.
7
I’ve found
your keys.
8
1	 She said that she couldn’t see anything.
2	 He told her that 
.
3	 He told his father that 
.
4	 The man said that 
.
5	 She said that 
.
6	 He told his wife that 
.
7	 He told her that 
.
8	 She said that 
.
	
Look at the pictures. Change the reported speech to direct speech.
b
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1	 She said that she wasn’t very hungry.
	
‘I’m not very hungry.’
2	 The nurse told the man that it wouldn’t hurt.
	
3	 He told the police that it was his mother’s car.
	
4	 She said that she had finished her homework.
	
5	 He told the instructor that he couldn’t swim.
	
6	 He told her that he would always love her.
	
7	 They said that they wanted to check out.
	
8	 He told the woman that he was lost.
	
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the pictures in a and b.  
Use reported speech to say what each speaker said.
 
She said that she couldn’t say anything.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 207@@
207
207
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
	
Make questions using the present simple or past simple. Then circle the correct answer.
12C  GRAMMAR  questions with and without auxiliaries
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the questions and look at the answers. Can you remember the questions?
1	 Where / polar bears / live
	
Where do polar bears live?	
the North Pole / the South Pole
2	 Who / direct / the film The Godfather
	
Who directed the film The Godfather?	
Martin Scorsese / Francis Ford Coppola
3	 Who / paint / The Scream
	
?	 Gustav Klimt / Edvard Munch
4	 Where / manga comics / come from
	
?	 Japan / China
5	 Which country / produce / more coffee
	
?	 Brazil / Colombia
6	 Which country / have / a blue and yellow flag
	
?	 Greece / Sweden
7	 When / the Second World War / end
	
?	 1945 / 1955
8	 Which country / win / the most gold medals at the  
2016 Olympics
	
?	 China / USA
9	 Which character / Ian Fleming / create
	
?	 James Bond / Sherlock Holmes
10	 How many countries / belong to / the original  
European Economic Community in 1957
	
?	 6 / 12
11	 Which company / Kevin Systrom and  
Mike Krieger / start
	
?	 Instagram / Facebook
12	 Where / people / speak / Yorùbá
	
?	 West Africa / East Africa
13	 Which film / win / the Oscar for best film in 2017
	
?	 La La Land / Moonlight
14	 Which fruit / contain / more sugar
	
?	 a pineapple / an orange
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 208@@
208
1A	Student profile
A pairwork activity
Sts interview each other and complete a profile of their 
partner. The profile revises question forms and provides the 
teacher with useful information about Sts. Copy one sheet 
per student.
LANGUAGE
What’s your name? What do you do? Where were you 
born?, etc.
•	 Give out the sheets. Focus on the question beginnings 
in a. Give Sts, in pairs, a few minutes to decide what each 
question should be. 
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Remind Sts about the present continuous 
and its question form. Tell Sts that they need it for question 8.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the questions for Sts to 
copy the rhythm.
1	
What’s your first 
name?
2	
What’s your surname?
3	
Where are you from?
4	
Where do you live?
5	
What’s your email 
address?
6	
What do you do?
7	
Where were you 
born?
  8	 Why are you learning 
English?
  9	 What languages do you 
speak?
10	 What do you like doing in 
your free time?
11	 Which social networking 
sites do you use? / Which 
social networking sites do 
you like?
•	 Now focus on b. Demonstrate the activity by getting 
Sts to ask you the first two questions. Encourage them 
to ask you to spell your name and surname. Put Sts in 
pairs to interview each other and tell them to write the 
information in the profile. You could tell Sts that they can 
invent their address and email address if they want to.
•	 You could collect in the forms for your own reference.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to interview each other. They 
could cover the questions and ask them from memory.
1B	Ask me some questions...
A group board game
Sts practise making questions using the present simple 
tense. Make one copy for every three or four Sts. You will 
also need one dice per group, and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
What does your mother look like?  
What do you do to relax?, etc.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group a 
copy of the board game, a dice, and some counters. 
Demonstrate the activity by writing on the board WHAT 
TIME / YOU GET UP? WHERE / YOUR MOTHER WORK? Elicit the 
completed questions and write do and does in the 
missing space. Ask a few Sts the questions.
•	 In their groups, Sts take turns to roll the dice and move 
the counter. They then ask the questions to the student 
on their right.
•	 Encourage Sts to ask for and give as much information as 
possible.  
•	 When Sts have finished, get some feedback from various 
groups.
 EXTRA IDEA   If you want to make it longer, Sts can play with 
coins (heads = move 1 square, tails = move 2).
1C	What are they doing?
A class guessing activity
Sts draw on the board and the others have to guess. Copy 
and cut up one sheet per 18 Sts.
LANGUAGE
Prepositions of place, clothes 
He’s wearing a big hat.
•	 Draw a man walking in the park. Ask: What is the man 
doing? Elicit the answer and only accept A man is walking 
in the park. Give each student one card.
•	 Call Sts to the board and let them draw what they have 
on their cards. Give other Sts a minute or two to guess. Sts 
guess the sentence until someone gets it exactly right. 
Remind Sts that they must get the sentence exactly right.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Cut it in half and Sts play in pairs, 
taking turns to draw and guess.
2A	Truth or lie?
A group guessing activity
Sts create two stories, one real and one false, while practising 
the past simple. Copy and cut up one sheet per group of 
four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
Past simple
•	 Write on the board: A TIME WHEN I WAS LATE TO WORK AND A TIME 
WHEN I ARGUED WITH MY BROTHER. Tell them a short story about 
those two times and tell them one is true and one isn’t. Let 
Sts decide which one they think is true and give them the 
correct answer. Tell them they are going to tell two stories 
in their groups.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four or five. Give each group a set of 
cards and tell Sts to take two cards each. Give Sts time to 
look at their cards and think of two stories.
•	 Sts tell each other the stories and try to guess which ones 
are true and which ones are false.
•	 Get some feedback from various groups.
Communicative activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 209@@
•	 Check sentences when Sts bring them to you. If the 
sentence is correct, give them another one. If it isn’t, let 
them take it back and try to correct it. When the time limit 
is up (or when one group has completed 20 sentences), 
stop the activity. The group with the most correct 
sentences is the winner.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Put Sts in pairs and give them a 
sheet face down. Tell Sts they have to finish the sentences as 
quickly as they can in a logical and correct way. Say Go! and 
tell Sts to turn over their sheet and start writing. Set a time 
limit and monitor while Sts are writing. When the time limit is 
up or a pair has finished, stop the activity and check answers. 
The pair with the most correct sentences is the winner.
3A	A day in... 
A pairwork/group activity
Sts choose a city and plan a day using the information given. 
Copy one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
be going to
We’re going to have breakfast at New York Bagels.
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Tell them they’re going to plan a day in 
Paris or New York. Give each pair a sheet.
•	 Explain that first they should decide together whether 
they want to go to New York or Paris. Then, they can 
choose any activities from the list, or any of the shopping 
options, but they have to pay attention to the time 
they take (in brackets) and the times they have on the 
schedule. Give them a set time, e.g. ten minutes, to plan 
their day. Monitor to make sure they’re doing the activity 
correctly.
•	 Now put two pairs of Sts together. Sts have to explain 
their plan for the day to the other group using be going to 
and, where appropriate, explain why they have decided 
to do each of the things in their plan. Put an example on 
the board: WE’RE GOING TO VISIT THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART 
BECAUSE IT’S ONE OF THE BEST ART MUSEUMS IN THE WORLD. Elicit 
further questions from Sts, e.g. Where are you going to go 
after that? What are you going to do there?. Encourage them 
to ask extra questions. 
•	 Now ask Sts to talk about the plan they heard in pairs and 
decide if they would like to go on that trip or not, and 
why. Get feedback.
 EXTRA IDEA   Cut the sheet in half, so half the groups will do 
Paris and the other half New York. Get some Sts to explain 
their plan to the class.
2B	Who did it? 
A group mingle activity
Sts try to find out who is guilty by asking and answering 
questions using the past continuous. Copy and cut up one 
sheet per 12 Sts.
LANGUAGE
Past continuous 
At four o’clock, I was having a bath.
•	 Read the paragraph from the top of the sheet. Elicit the 
relevant information from Sts and write on the board. Tell 
Sts that they are all characters in this mystery and they 
have to find out who stole Sophie Hatcher’s money. Elicit 
from Sts the questions they should ask: What’s your name? 
What do you do? Why are you in the hotel?. Now tell them 
the police are interested in two times: four o’clock and 
4 .30. Elicit the question: What were you doing at...?. Leave 
the questions on the board for Sts to refer to. Tell them 
they all have to tell the truth, except for the thief.
•	 Now give out the cards. Tell Sts they mustn’t show their 
cards to other Sts! You could choose a stronger student 
to play Alex Cameron (the thief). If you have fewer than 
12 Sts, make sure one of them is Alex Cameron (the thief). 
If you have more than 12 Sts, make two big groups and 
have them work separately – make sure one student in 
each group is the thief. Give Sts a couple of minutes to 
look at their cards and think about their answers to the 
questions on the board. This also gives the thief time to 
invent one lie.
•	 Give Sts a fixed amount of time, e.g. ten minutes, to move 
around asking questions. Encourage them to write down 
the information they find out. 
•	 When the time runs out, give Sts a couple of minutes to 
decide, using their information, who stole Sophie’s money. 
•	 Find out who Sts think is the thief. Reveal who stole the 
money. If any Sts guessed correctly, they win!
2C	Sentence race
A group activity
Sts race to complete sentences. Copy and cut one sheet per 
four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
Connectors: so, because, but, although
•	 Put Sts in groups of four or five. Give each group one strip, 
face down. Put the other strips on your desk in separate 
piles for each group.
•	 Tell Sts they have to finish the sentence as quickly as they 
can in a logical and correct way and then bring it to you. 
If it is correct, they will get another one. If it isn’t, they will 
have to correct it.
•	 Say Go! and tell Sts to turn over their strip and start 
writing. 
209
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 210@@
4A	Find the response
A pairwork activity
Sts match sentences to appropriate responses. Copy one 
sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect
yet, just, already
I’ve just spoken to her. I haven’t met her yet. They’ve already 
gone home.
•	 Give out the sheets and focus on a. Point out that the first 
one (1h) has been done for them. Now get Sts to match 
1–14 to responses a–n.
•	 Check answers.
2 e    3 a    4 m    5 k    6 n    7 b    8 l    9 c    10 j    11 i    12 g    13 f    14 d
•	 Now focus on b. Elicit or teach the meaning of fold, and 
tell Sts that they should fold their sheets vertically.
•	 Put Sts in pairs A and B. Ask them to look only at the 
sentences and not to look at the responses. Read out the 
first one and see who can remember what the response 
was, e.g. Have you done your English homework? (Yes, I’ve 
just finished it.)
•	 Sts continue in pairs. Sts A read out the sentences first 
and Sts B have to remember what the responses were 
(without looking at the sheet).
•	 They then swap roles. Monitor and check pronunciation.
4B	Have you ever...?
A group activity
Sts practise making questions from prompts and describe 
events, contrasting the present perfect and the past simple. 
Copy and cut up one sheet per group of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
Have you ever + past participle...?
Past and present tense follow-up questions
Past tense + and − forms
Have you ever been to London? Yes, I have. No, I haven’t.
When did you go there?
•	 Copy the exchange in the Language box on the board 
and elicit that this is a typical exchange which begins in 
the present perfect, and then goes on to the past simple 
to ask for details.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group an 
envelope with a copy of the strips. Sts take it in turns to 
take a strip out of the envelope and ask the other Sts in 
their group the question.
•	 Demonstrate the activity first by getting a student to ask 
you the question they’ve drawn out of the envelope. 
Answer the question and elicit a follow-up question.
•	 Encourage the Sts to ask follow-up questions.
•	 Get some feedback from various groups.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Make one copy per pair and cut in 
half horizontally. Give Sts half each and get them to ask and 
answer the questions.
3B	Come fly with me!
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts complete questions and ask each other for some missing 
information. Copy one sheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Present continuous for future arrangements
Who are you flying with? How much are you taking?
Travel vocabulary
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Sit 
Sts face to face if possible. Explain that they have one 
completed boarding card and another boarding card with 
missing information.
•	 Give Sts time to read both boarding cards and deal with 
any vocabulary problems.
•	 Focus on the questions in a. Tell Sts to look at the 
boarding card with the missing information and point out 
that the first question has been done for them. They have 
to complete questions 2–7 individually using the present 
continuous to find out the missing information from their 
partner.
•	 Check all the questions before starting the activity. Write 
them on the board if necessary.
2	
Where are you flying from?
3	
Where are you flying to?
4	
When are you leaving?
5	
What time are you leaving?
6	
What time are you 
arriving?
7	
Where are you sitting?
•	 Now focus on b. A asks B his / her questions and 
completes his / her boarding card with the missing 
information. Then Sts swap roles.
 EXTRA IDEA   Fast finishers could look at the boarding cards, 
cover the questions and ask the questions from memory.
3C	Can you explain the word?
A group card game
Sts practise giving definitions using relative pronouns. Copy 
and cut up one set of cards per group of four Sts.
LANGUAGE
It’s a thing which... / a person who... It’s a kind of... It’s like...  
You do it when...
•	 If necessary, revise language for giving definitions before 
you start. Put Sts in groups of four. Give each group a set 
of cards face down or in an envelope.
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Pick up a card and describe the 
word/phrase until Sts guess it. Insist they say the exact 
word/phrase on the card with the correct pronunciation 
before showing them the card.
•	 Sts play the game, taking turns to take a card and define 
the word. Tell Sts they must not use the word on the 
card. The first student in the group who says the word or 
phrase correctly gets the card. The winner is the student 
with the most cards.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE    Copy one sheet per pair and cut in 
half. Put Sts in pairs and give them one half each. A begins by 
defining one of the words on his / her sheet. If B can say the 
word, then it’s B’s turn to give a definition.
210
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 211@@
5B	Superlative questions 
A pairwork quiz
Sts practise forming superlatives to complete questions to 
ask their partner. Copy one sheet per pair and cut into A 
and B.
LANGUAGE
Superlatives: the biggest, the heaviest, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. 
•	 Focus on a and tell Sts to complete the questions using 
the superlative form of the adjective in brackets. Explain 
that sometimes the question asks about the superlative in 
the world / history and sometimes it’s the superlative from 
the three options (Which of these...). Point out that the 
answer is in bold.
A
1 the richest    2 the most populated    3 the most dangerous
4 the largest    5 the most recent    6 the most popular
B
1 the noisiest    2 the smallest    3 the most popular
4 the largest    5 the youngest    6 the longest
•	 Sts A asks Sts B their questions, giving the three options. 
When A has finished, they swap roles. The student with 
the most correct answers wins.
5C	How much / How many...? 
A group activity
Sts read out and answer questions using How much / How 
many. Copy and cut up one sheet per group of three or four.
LANGUAGE
Quantifiers: how much / how many, too much /  
(not) enough
•	 Write on the board: HOW 
 CLASSES DO YOU TEACH A WEEK? 
Elicit the missing word (many) and ask Sts to guess. Write 
down, as they say them (a lot, quite a lot, not many, too 
many, not enough, a few). Give them the answer and write 
possible answers on the board for Sts to use as reference.
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four and give each group a 
set of cards. Each student takes a turn taking a card, asking 
the question (using much or many) to the student to 
their left. Then they ask the follow-up questions for more 
information. Sts take cards and ask questions until the 
cards or the time run out. 
6A	Positive or negative? 
A pairwork activity
Sts practise making positive predictions. Copy one sheet per 
pair or per student.
LANGUAGE
will / won’t (predictions)
It’ll be great! It won’t work.
•	 Give out one sheet per pair or per student. Go through 
sentences 1–12 in You say and The optimist says.
4C	The same or different?
A pairwork activity
Sts compare information about their lifestyle and practise 
using something, anything, nothing, etc. They agree with or 
contradict a series of statements and explain why. Copy one 
sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
something, nothing, anything, somebody / someone, 
anyone, etc.
I don’t usually watch anything on TV in the evenings.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Focus on a. 
Demonstrate the activity by completing the first sentence, 
I always have something to eat..., and writing it on the 
board.
•	 Ask Sts to complete the sentences individually or in pairs. 
Give Sts enough time to complete their sheets. 
•	 Check answers and write them on the board if necessary.
1 something    2 anywhere    3 something    4 anything    
5 anything    6 nobody / no one    7 somewhere    8 anything
9 something    10 nothing    11 nobody / no one
12 anywhere    13 anyone / anybody    14 somewhere
15 nowhere    16 anything    17 somebody / someone
18 somewhere
•	 Now focus on b. Demonstrate the activity by telling the 
class about the first statement, e.g. Sentence 1 isn’t true for 
me because I never eat anything. Encourage the class to ask 
for more information, e.g. What do you drink? When do you 
have something to eat?.
•	 Sts talk about each statement and say if it’s true or not 
true for them and why not. 
•	 Stop the activity when most pairs seem to have finished 
and get some feedback.
5A	Which do you prefer? Why?
A pairwork / group speaking activity
Sts say which of two things or activities they prefer and why. 
Personalize the activity by writing local things to compare 
on the last two cards. Copy and cut up one sheet per group 
of four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
Comparative forms
I prefer swimming in a pool because it’s cleaner.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four or five and give out a set of cards 
face down.
•	 Demonstrate the activity by asking a student to pick a 
card and ask you. Sts take turns to pick a card and ask the 
other Sts: Which do you prefer, ...or...? Why?
•	 Monitor while Sts are talking, correcting any mistakes with 
comparative forms. When Sts have finished, get feedback 
from a few pairs or groups.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Give out one uncut sheet to each 
pair or group. Get them to discuss the topics on each card 
saying which they prefer and why.
211
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 212@@
•	 Tell Sts to imagine that they are all optimists. Focus on 
sentence 1 and elicit a prediction, e.g. Don’t worry. I’m sure 
you’ll find it.
•	 Sts continue in pairs, writing positive predictions. Monitor 
and help.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to mingle (alone or 
in pairs) and read sentences from You say to another 
student/pair and listen to their answers.
•	 Get feedback. You could get Sts to tell you which answer 
they liked best or get them to volunteer their own 
answers.
 EXTRA IDEA   Repeat the activity, but ask Sts to be pessimists 
this time. Give them some alternative starts That’s not good, 
That sounds awful/boring, Oh no!, etc. Give them enough time 
to write the responses. Monitor and help. You could get Sts 
to decide which sentences (optimistic or pessimistic) they 
would use.
6B	Guess my sentence
A pairwork activity
Sts practise will / shall sentences by trying to guess the 
missing part of the sentence. Copy one sheet per pair and 
cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
will / shall + verb
I think I’ll buy them. 
Shall I call you on your mobile?
•	 Demonstrate the activity. On a piece of paper, write the 
sentence, I’m very tired. I think I’ll sit down for half an hour. 
Then write on the board the sentence: I’M VERY TIRED. I THINK 
I 
 FOR HALF AN HOUR.
•	 Tell the class they have to guess the missing phrase, which 
is a verb or a verb phrase with ’ll. Elicit a possibility, making 
sure Sts say the whole sentence. If their guess is not the 
same as you have on your piece of paper, say Try again 
until someone says your sentence. Then show them your 
piece of paper and say That’s right.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Sit A and 
B face to face if possible.
•	 Focus on the sheets and explain that half of their 
sentences have gaps, and their partner has the complete 
sentences.
•	 Give Sts a minute or so to read their sentences and 
think of possible completions, but not to write them in 
the gaps.
•	 Sts take turns to guess the missing parts of the sentences. 
Stress that Sts should say the whole sentence each time, 
not just the missing words. Their partner should help and 
prompt if necessary. When a student correctly guesses the 
exact sentence he / she writes in the missing words.
6C	Talk about it
A group board game
Sts revise past, present, and future forms. Make one copy of 
the board game for groups of three or four Sts. You also need 
one dice per group and one counter per student.
LANGUAGE
Sentence formation in past and present forms
•	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Give each group  
a copy of the board game and a dice.
 !   If you don’t have a dice, give each group a coin. Sts toss 
the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Explain the rules of the game. Sts throw a dice and move 
the corresponding number of circles on the board. When 
they land on a circle, they must talk for 30 seconds about 
the topic. Then each of the other Sts in the group must 
ask them a question about the topic.
•	 Sts play the game in their groups. The game finishes when 
someone reaches the Finish square.
7A	I’m going to tell you about...
A pairwork discussion activity
Sts choose six topics to discuss with a partner. Copy one 
sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Verbs + to
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets.
•	 Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts to choose six topics they 
want to talk about with a partner. Tell them to think about 
what they want to say. Set a time limit.
•	 Tell Sts to discuss the topics, taking turns to choose 
the topic. Encourage Sts to ask for and give as much 
information as possible.
•	 Monitor and help where necessary, particularly with the 
verb forms.
•	 When Sts have finished, get feedback on some of the 
topics.
7B	Questions with gerunds
A pairwork question and answer 
activity
Sts complete the questions and then ask a partner. Copy one 
sheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Verb + -ing
Do you enjoy reading in bed? Are you good at cooking?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets.
•	 Focus on a. Give Sts time to complete their questions with 
verbs from the list in the gerund. Then check answers.
A
1 getting up    2 flying    3 waiting    4 going    5 reading     
6 cooking    7 doing    8 doing
B
1 walking    2 doing    3 going    4 going    5 playing    6 eating
7 getting    8 being
•	 Elicit that the answer to the question Do you mind...?  
is either No, I don’t mind or Yes, I hate it.
•	 Focus on b. Sts take turns asking their questions and 
asking for more information.
212
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 213@@
7C	In the UK
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts decide if sentences about laws in the UK are true or false, 
and then talk about the situation in their own country. Copy 
one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
You have to... You don’t have to... / You mustn’t... You must...
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets.
•	 Focus on a and give Sts a few minutes to read all the 
sentences and make sure they understand them. Set 
a time limit, e.g. ten minutes, for pairs to discuss each 
sentence and decide if it is true or not true.
•	 Now focus on b and elicit ideas. Find out if any pair 
identified all the false sentences.
1 F    2 F (The age limit is 18.)    3 T    4 F    5 F (Nobody has to do 
military service.)    6 F (You can ride a 50cc motorbike at 16.)     
7 T    8 F    9 T    10 F    11 F (You have to be 18.)    12 T    13 F    14 F    15 T   
16 T    17 F    18 T
•	 Finally, focus on c. Tell Sts to go through each law and say 
if the laws are the same or different in their country, and 
which ones they’d like to have in their country.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
8A	I need some advice 
A group speaking activity
Sts practise giving advice to each other. Copy and cut up 
one sheet per group of four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
What should I do? I think you should... You shouldn’t...
•	 Put Sts in groups of four or five. Give each group a set of 
cards, face down.
•	 Sts take turns reading the situations. Each student in the 
group has to give a different piece of advice. The person 
who the reader thinks gave the best advice keeps the 
card. Demonstrate by picking up a card and reading the 
problem. Let Sts give you advice, get as many to talk 
as possible. Then choose one of the options and say I’ll 
do that.
•	 Sts continue until the cards are finished. The student with 
the most cards is the winner. 
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one sheet per pair and cut it in 
half. Put Sts in pairs and give them half each. They alternate 
reading their problems and giving advice.
8B	Conditionals race
A pairwork activity
Sts complete first conditional sentences as fast as they can 
and then compare them with a different pair. Copy one 
sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
First conditional
If we win, we’ll go out and celebrate.
•	 Write on the board: IF I GIVE YOU AN EXERCISE,... and elicit 
different answers (e.g. we’ll do it / we won’t know how to  
do it / we won’t have a break).
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a copy of the sheet. Sts then 
try to complete the sentences in a as fast as they can. 
Declare the first pair to finish the winners (but make sure 
you give an extra minute or so for all the pairs to finish). 
•	 Now focus on b and put two pairs together. Get them to 
compare their sentences and choose the ones they like 
best. Get some feedback.
•	 Finally, in c, get the pairs to cover the second part of the 
conditional and try to remember their sentences.
 EXTRA IDEA    Make this into a group activity by cutting up 
the sentences and giving each group one sentence at a time. 
When they complete a sentence they have to bring it to you 
and, if it’s correct, get another sentence. The first group to 
complete all the sentences are the winners.
8C	Reading questionnaire
A pairwork activity
Sts answer questions about their reading habits. Copy one 
sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Talking about reading tastes / habits
Do you read online? Are you a fast or a slow reader?
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give out the sheets and focus on the 
pictures. Ask What / Who can you see?.
•	 Give Sts a time limit to read the questions. Help with any 
vocabulary problems.
•	 Get one student to ask you the main question, Do you 
like reading books? Answer Yes, I do or No, I don’t. Then get 
Sts to ask you the first question (depending on what you 
said). Answer the question giving as much information as 
possible and encourage Sts to ask follow-up questions.
•	 Sts A ask the main question and then ask all the questions 
in the Yes or No column to Sts B with follow-up questions, 
if possible. They then swap roles.
•	 Get feedback from the class.
9A	I think you’d...
A pairwork activity
Sts practise second conditional sentences by trying to 
complete sentences about their partner. Copy one sheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Second conditional
If you bought a new car today, I think you’d buy a...
•	 Demonstrate the activity by writing on the board: 
IF SOMEBODY OFFERED YOU A DRINK NOW, I THINK YOU’D 
ORDER A 
.
•	 Elicit that you need to complete the sentence with  
a noun. Then tell Sts to guess which drink you’d order. 
Elicit answers and then tell the class which drink you really 
would order.
213
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 214@@
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, face to face if possible, and 
give out the sheets. Focus on a and tell Sts to complete 
the sentences, trying to guess how their partner would 
complete each one. They must not look at what their 
partner writes. Monitor and check that they are using the 
right words.
•	 Now focus on b and tell Sts to take turns to read their 
completed sentences to their partner, who tells them if 
they have guessed correctly or not. Encourage them to 
react by contradicting what their partner has said, and 
then giving the real answer if the guess is wrong, e.g. No,  
I wouldn’t. I don’t like cats! But I love dogs.
•	 Get feedback from various pairs and find out who in the 
pair had more correct guesses.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE    If you want to give more practice, get Sts 
to repeat the activity, but swapping roles A and B.
9B	Famous phobias
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts practise using the present perfect simple + for or since by 
reading about famous people and their phobias. Copy one 
sheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Present perfect simple + for or since
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Tell Sts 
not to look at each other’s sheets.
•	 Set a time limit for Sts to read about the famous 
people and their phobias. Monitor and help with any 
comprehension or pronunciation problems.
•	 Now get A to tell B about his / her three people. 
Encourage Sts to improvise and only look at their sheet 
if absolutely necessary. Then A and B decide together 
which two phobias are true.
•	 Sts then swap roles.
•	 Get feedback to find out which ones they think are true.
They are all true.
9C	Like father, like son
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts question each other to discover missing biographical 
information about a famous father and son using the 
present perfect simple and past simple. Copy one sheet per 
pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Past simple and present perfect
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Tell 
them not to look at each other’s sheets. Explain that they 
have one complete biography and one with missing 
information.
•	 Give Sts time to read both biographies. Monitor and deal 
with any vocabulary problems.
•	 Focus on the questions in b. Tell Sts A and B to read 
the first biography they have again and to complete 
questions 1–7. Set a time limit. Monitor and check that Sts 
are writing the correct questions.
•	 Now focus on c and get Sts to ask and answer their 
questions to complete their biographies.
Bob Dylan
1 When was he born?    2 Where did he go to in 1961?
3 What was his real surname?    4 How did Joan Baez help him 
become famous?    5 How many albums has he recorded?
6 What kind of books has he written?    7 What prize did he win / 
receive in 2016?
Jakob Dylan
1 What does he do?    2 When was he born?    3 How many 
brothers and sisters does he have?    4 How many albums have 
The Wallflowers released?    5 Which David Bowie song have  
they recorded?    6 Who has Jakob Dylan composed music for?    
7 How long has he been married?
10A	The race
A pairwork activity
Sts practise giving instructions using prepositions of 
movement. Copy one sheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Prepositions of movement: into, over, through, past, etc.
•	 Put Sts into pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. If 
possible, put Sts face to face.
•	 Focus on the instructions in a. Tell Sts that they have  
a map with a route on it. Their routes are different. They 
have to describe it to each other and draw it on their 
second map. 
•	 Give Sts time to plan how to describe the route.
•	 Sts take it in turns to describe their route to their partner, 
who draws it in the blank map. Monitor and help.
•	 When they have finished, get Sts to compare routes to see 
if they drew them correctly.
 EXTRA IDEA    Get Sts to use pencil when they draw. They can 
then erase the route on the blank map and draw their own 
routes.
10B	Phrasal verb conversations
A pairwork activity
Sts practise using phrasal verbs by choosing the correct 
response to a situation. Copy one sheet per pair and cut into 
A and B.
LANGUAGE
Phrasal verbs: fill in, take off, take back, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Tell them to look at sentences 1–8 
and especially the phrasal verb sentences. Give them  
a minute or two.
•	 Sts A start by reading the first sentence. Sts B choose an 
answer from the speech bubbles. They both decide if 
they think it’s right or wrong. Student A reads all his / her 
sentences and then they swap roles. Monitor to make sure 
Sts are doing the activity correctly. 
214
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 215@@
A reads, B responds
1 OK, I’ll pick it up.    2 Sorry, I’ll give it back tomorrow.    3 Sorry. I’ll 
turn it down.    4 Look it up in the dictionary!    5 Sorry, I threw it 
away.    6 The film will be over in ten minutes, I promise!    7 Don’t 
worry. I’ll look after him.    8 Why don’t you take it back?
B reads, A responds
1 I think you should give it up.    2 Don’t worry, I’ll take them off.
3 Yes, I get on very well with her.    4 We’ve run out.    5 Yes, I’m 
really looking forward to it.    6 I’ll help you look for it.    7 OK, I’ll 
put them away.    8 Sorry, I’ll fill it in now.
•	 Now focus on c. Sts A read their sentences again and this 
time Sts B respond without looking at their sheet. Then 
they swap roles.
10C	General knowledge quiz
A pairwork general knowledge quiz
Sts practise using the present simple passive and past simple 
passive by asking and answering questions. Copy one sheet 
per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Questions in the present simple passive and past simple 
passive
Which month is named after a Roman emperor?
In which city was the Titanic built?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Get them to sit face to face and 
make sure that they can’t see each other’s questions.
•	 Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes, for Sts to read their 
questions. Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Sts A start. Highlight that they should give the three 
alternatives each time and note down which answers B 
gets right. (The correct answers are in bold on the sheet.) 
Sts then swap roles.
•	 Get feedback to see who got the most correct answers.
11A	My past
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts complete some boxes and then use the information to 
talk about past habits using used to and didn’t use to. Copy 
one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
I used to listen to Justin Bieber, but I don’t now.
I didn’t use to like cabbage, but now I love it.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Sit them so they 
can’t see each other’s sheets. Focus on a. Go through 
phrases 1–14 and make sure Sts know what they have  
to do. Demonstrate by giving some personal examples  
for 1–3. Make it clear that Sts only have to do this with  
words or phrases, e.g. spiders, a Barbie doll, Justin Bieber, 
and not complete sentences.
•	 Give Sts time to write something in as many boxes as 
they can (sometimes they may not be able to think of 
anything). Monitor and help.
•	 Focus on b. Sts use what they have written in the boxes  
to tell their partner about their past habits using I used to / 
I didn’t use to. Again, demonstrate the activity yourself and 
give more information, e.g. I used to have a cat. He was 
black, and his name was Max. If necessary, remind Sts of 
the pronunciation of used to / didn’t use to.
•	 Sts work together, talking about their past habits.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
11B	I might...but I might not
A board game activity
Sts practise using might and might not by completing 
sentences. Copy one sheet per group of three or four Sts. 
You will also need one counter per student and a dice per 
group.
LANGUAGE
He might lose his job. We might not find it.
•	 Write the first sentence on the board: THE WEATHER IS REALLY 
NICE TODAY. WE... and ask Sts to complete it using might. 
Choose an answer and write it on the board. Now ask Sts 
to complete the sentence using might not. Choose an 
answer and write it on the board. 
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give out the sheets and 
tell Sts to take turns to roll the dice and then create two 
sentences for each prompt, one with might and one with 
might not. If they can’t make two sentences, they go back 
to their previous square. Monitor and help.
Possible answers
  1	 might go to the beach. / might not need a jacket.
  2	 might forget it. / might not remember it.
  3	 might stay at home more. / might not go out very much.
  4	 might be angry with me. / might not have her phone.
  5	 might get hungry. / might not find a restaurant.
  6	 might go to Spain. / might not go abroad.
  7	 might win. / might not lose.
  8	 might see the new Star Wars film. / might not go.
  9	 might wear the black dress. / might not wear the pink dress.
10	 might stay in bed. / might not go to work tomorrow.
11	 might order a takeaway. / might not have dinner.
12	 might record it. / might not watch it today.
13	 might throw it away. / might not tell her I don’t like it.
14	 might go to the park. / might not go out.
15	 might take it back. / might not read it.
•	 Sts play until one of them finishes or time runs out.
11C	So do I!
A class mingle activity
Sts practise agreeing using So do I / Neither do I and 
disagreeing. Copy and cut up one sheet per group of six Sts.
LANGUAGE
So can I. / Neither have I.
•	 Give each student a card. Ask them to fill in the gaps with 
things that are true for them. 
•	 Write I LIKE... and complete the sentence with an animal. 
Get Sts to agree or disagree with you. Elicit So do I. / I don’t. 
Now write I DIDN’T GO OUT YESTERDAY. Elicit Neither did I. / 
I did.
•	 Get Sts to stand up and mingle, reading their sentences to 
each other and agreeing or disagreeing. Monitor and help.
•	 Get feedback about things Sts agreed / disagreed with.
215
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 216@@
12B	The celebrity interview
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts practise using reported speech by interviewing their 
partner and then telling another student about the 
interview. Copy one sheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Reported statements
Jay-Z said that his best work had been his album, 4:44.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Focus on 
the instructions and tell Sts to choose a famous person. 
They will then give an interview as that famous person.
•	 Give Sts some time to read the questions and imagine the 
answers their famous person would give.
•	 Sts B start by asking Sts A the questions and writing down 
the answers. Then they swap roles.
•	 Make Sts swap partners. They now talk about their 
interview using the answers their first partner gave and 
putting them in reported speech. Monitor and help.
•	 You could get confident Sts to report their interview to 
the class.
 EXTRA IDEA    Ask Sts to write an article about their partner’s 
celebrity using the information they have and reported 
speech.
12C	Hollywood quiz
A pairwork information gap activity
Sts practise forming past simple and subject and object quiz 
questions to ask their partner. Copy one sheet per pair and 
cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Past simple and subject and object questions 
Which actor appeared in most of Hitchcock’s films?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the sheets. Give Sts 
time to complete the questions. 
•	 Check answers, but don’t write them on the board.
Student A
1 lived / lives    2 did / does an actor say    3 did Walt Disney win    
4 appeared / appears    5 did / does Marty McFly go    6 did / 
does Tony fall    7 played / plays    8 does Batman have
Student B
1 did Peter Jackson film    2 appeared / appears    3 does an Oscar 
weigh    4 played / plays    5 won    6 played / plays    7 did / does 
Arnold Schwarzenegger say    8 directed
•	 Sts A start by asking Sts B the questions, without giving 
the three options (the option in bold is the correct 
answer). If B can answer correctly, he / she gets two 
points. If B can’t answer, A gives him / her the three 
options. If B gets the correct answer, he / she gets one 
point. 
•	 A asks all of his / her questions first. Sts then swap roles.
•	 Find out who scored the most points in the class.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE    Cut the sheet in half and put Sts 
in pairs. Give each student half a sheet and ask them to 
complete the sentences. They can then read the sentences 
to their partner and agree / disagree with their choices.
12A	What had happened?
A group activity
Sts practise using the past perfect by giving reasons for 
situations they read on cards. Copy and cut up one sheet for 
groups of four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
Past perfect
We couldn’t use our car because someone had stolen it.
•	 Write on the board I WENT TO SEE MY BROTHER YESTERDAY. HE 
WAS SAD BECAUSE... and try to elicit answers using the past 
perfect (e.g. his football team had lost / his dog had died). 
Now put Sts in groups of four or five and give them a set 
of cards, face down.
•	 Sts take turns taking a card, reading the situation and 
completing the sentence. Remind Sts that they must 
use the past perfect. The rest of the group decide if the 
sentence is correct and think of alternatives. Monitor 
and help.
•	 Sts repeat the activity until they run out of cards. Sts then 
decide in their groups who was the best at inventing 
reasons.
Possible answers
  1	 I left the house in a hurry, and when I got to the airport,  
I suddenly remembered that I had forgotten my passport.
  2	 I was angry with my husband because he hadn’t taken out 
the rubbish.
  3	 When I looked at my phone, I realized that Sarah had called 
me ten times.
  4	 I couldn’t read the menu because I had left my glasses at 
home.
  5	 I didn’t do well in my exam because I hadn’t studied very 
hard.
  6	 I couldn’t use my credit card because I had forgotten my pin.
  7	 The burglars got into our house while we were on holiday 
because we had left the door open.
  8	 The police got to the bank very quickly, but the robbers had 
already left.
  9	 My dad was very happy when he arrived because his team 
had won the match.
10	 I went back to the shop to buy you that shirt you liked, but it 
had gone.
11	 When we got to Joe and Hannah’s house we were very 
surprised because they hadn’t got up yet.
12	 We decided not to go to the London Eye that day because 
we had heard it wasn’t very good.
13	 I was incredibly tired that day because I had watched TV 
until really late.
14	 The moment I pressed ‘send’ I realized that I had sent the text 
message to the wrong person.
15	 When I saw Mary at the school reunion, I didn’t recognize 
her because she had lost weight.
216
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 217@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
217
1A  COMMUNICATIVE  Student profile
	
Complete the questions you need to ask to fill in the form.
1	 What 
 ?
2	 What 
 ?
3	 Where 
 ?
4	 Where 
 ?
5	 What 
 ?
6	 What 
 ?
7	 Where 
 ?
8	 Why 
 ?
9	 What languages 
 ?
10	 What 
 in your free time?
11	 Which social 
 ?
	
Interview a partner and complete the form. Ask him / her to spell names and places if necessary.
a
b
STUDENT PROFILE
  1	 First name
  2	 Surname
  3	 Nationality
  4	 Address
  5	 Email address
  6	 Occupation
  7	 Place of birth
  8	 Reason for learning English
  9	 Languages
10	 Interests
11	 Social networking sites
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 218@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
218
1B  COMMUNICATIVE  Ask me some questions…
218
/ you have a 
best friend? 
What / he or she do?
/ you have any brothers 
or sisters? 
How old / they?
/ you often stressed?
What / you do to relax?
How often / you listen 
to music? 
What kind of music 
/ you like?
What / your mother  
look like? 
/ you look like her?
How often / you 
eat out? 
/ you prefer 
cooking or going to 
a restaurant?
/ you have a favourite 
aunt or uncle? 
Where / he or she live?
/ you like doing exercise  
or sport? 
What / do?  
How often / you do it?
What / your parents  
do in their free time? 
/ you have similar 
hobbies?
What phone / you have? 
How / you usually 
communicate with your 
friends?
/ you watch films at 
home or in the cinema?
What kind of films / 
you like?
How many people  
/ you live with? 
/ your house big  
or small?
Where / you usually go 
with your friends? 
What / you do there?
DO
DOES
IS
ARE
START
What / you usually have  
for breakfast? 
/ you have breakfast  
with other people?
How / you come to class? 
/ you often use 
public transport?
 What kind? / 
you use
FINISH
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 219@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
219
1C  COMMUNICATIVE  What are they doing?
A man is reading 
the newspaper.
A baby is crying.
A woman is wearing  
a long dress.
An old woman is  
carrying a bag.
A girl is looking at  
a painting.
A boy is standing next  
to a girl.
A man is sitting behind  
a desk.
A man is eating  
an apple.
A man is buying a tie.
A girl is cleaning 
her shoes.
A dog is drinking 
under a table.
A cat is sleeping 
on a sofa.
A man is wearing socks  
and sandals.
A woman is dancing in  
the kitchen.
A baby is sitting 
in the garden.
A woman is opening 
a window.
A man is wearing 
a big hat.
A boy is waiting 
for a bus.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 220@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
220
A time when I lost my phone…
•  When?
•  How did you lose it?
•  Did you find it?
A time when I sent an email or text  
message to the wrong person…
•  Who did you send it to?
•  Who did you want to send it to? 
•  What happened? 
•  When was this?
A time when I bought something and  
then decided that I didn’t like it…
•  When?
•  What was it? 
•  Where did you buy it?
•  What did you do with it?
A time when I found something  
in the street…
•  What did you find?
•  When?
•  Where?
•  What did you do with it?
A time when I broke something  
really valuable…
•  How old were you?
•  What did you break?
•  What happened?
A time when I won  
a prize / competition…
•  What did you win?
•  How did you win it?
•  What did you do with  
what you won?
A time when I forgot an  
important date…
•  When? 
•  What date did you forget?
•  What happened?
A time when I lent something to a 
friend and he / she didn’t give it back…
•  When?
•  What was it?
•  Who did you lend it to?
•  What happened in the end?
A time when I found a large  
insect in my house…
•  What was it?
•  How did you feel?
•  What did you do? 
A time when I ate something  
really horrible…
•  When?
•  Where?
•  What did you eat?
•  Why did you eat it?
2A  COMMUNICATIVE  Truth or lie?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 221@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
221
You’re all staying at the Empire City Hotel. Sophie Hatcher, a famous model, is staying there too.  
At 3.55 p.m., Sophie left her room. She didn’t close the door. She came back at 4.45 p.m. and her purse 
with all her money and credit cards wasn’t there! She called the manager of the hotel and he has put  
everyone who is staying in the hotel in this meeting room. One of you stole Sophie Hatcher’s money!  
Help the police find out who it was.
John Snow
You’re a photographer. 
You’re married to Cath 
Snow and you’re on 
holiday together, but 
you aren’t very happy.
4.00 p.m. – (argue) with 
your wife in your hotel room.
4.30 p.m. – (call) your 
mother on your mobile in the 
hotel lobby.
Cath Snow
You’re a teacher. You’re 
married to John Snow 
and you’re on holiday 
together, but you aren’t 
very happy.
4.00 p.m. – (argue) with 
your husband in your hotel 
room.
4.30 p.m. – (cry) in the hotel 
bar. Ella Chandler, a friend of 
Sophie’s, was there too.
Eric Pyke
You’re an architect. You 
are Sophie Hatcher’s 
boyfriend. You’re on 
holiday with her and 
her friend Ella Chandler.
4.00 p.m. – (listen) to music 
in your hotel room.
4.30 p.m. – (talk) to Jane 
Smith, a woman you met in 
the hotel, on the terrace.
Jane Smith
You’re a flight 
attendant. You’re 
staying in the hotel for 
work. 
4.00 p.m. – (play) games on 
your phone in your room.
4.30 p.m. – (talk) to Eric 
Pyke, Sophie’s boyfriend, on 
the terrace.
Mary Rivers
You’re a singer.
You’re in the hotel to 
write some songs.
4.00 p.m. – (play) the piano 
in the dining room.
4.30 p.m. – (drink) coffee in 
the dining room with Edward 
Strong, a journalist.
Emily Davies
You’re a police officer. 
You’re on holiday with 
your friend Lydia Brown.
4.00 p.m. – (do) exercise in 
the gym with Lydia Brown.
4.30 p.m. – (watch) a film in 
your room.
Ella Chandler
You're an artist. You are 
Sophie Hatcher’s best 
friend. You’re on holiday 
with her and her 
boyfriend, Eric Pyke.
4.00 p.m. – (do) yoga in 
your room.
4.30 p.m. – (dance) in the 
hotel bar. Cath Snow,  
a teacher, was there.
Edward Strong
You're a journalist. 
You’re in the hotel 
because you want to 
write an article about 
Sophie and her life. 
4.00 p.m. – (write) some 
notes in your room.
4.30 p.m. – (drink) coffee in 
the dining room with Mary 
Rivers, a singer.
David Hill
You’re a security guard. 
You're on holiday in the 
hotel.
4.00 p.m. – (give) Peter 
Stone, a lawyer, advice about 
security cameras in the hotel 
lobby.
4.30 p.m. – (talk) with 
the receptionist in the hotel 
lobby.
Lydia Brown
You’re an engineer. 
You’re on holiday 
with your friend Emily 
Davies.
4.00 p.m. – (do) exercise in 
the gym with Emily Davies.
4. 30 p.m. – (swim) in the 
pool with Alex Cameron, a 
man you met in the hotel.
Peter Stone
You’re a lawyer. You’re 
on holiday at the hotel. 
4.00 p.m. – (ask) David Hill, 
a security guard, for advice 
about security cameras in the 
hotel lobby.
4.30 p.m. – (write) an email 
in your room.
Alex Cameron
You’re a car salesman. 
You’re on holiday and 
staying at the hotel. You 
sold Sophie Hatcher a 
car but she hasn’t paid 
you. You stole her purse!
4.00 p.m. – (steal) Sophie 
Hatcher’s purse from her room.
4.30 p.m. – (swim) in the 
pool with Lydia Brown, a 
woman you met in the hotel.
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  Who did it?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 222@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
222
1
I’m a vegetarian, so…
2
I’m really happy today because…
3
My friend invited me to dinner, but…
4
Although my job isn’t very well paid,…
5
Nora felt really ill, so…
6
My brother doesn’t go to his English class very often, so…
7
Although her written English is excellent,…
8
Maria didn’t buy the jeans because…
9
Paul has a lot of money, but…
10
It was really sunny yesterday, so…
11
Jack is a bit overweight because…
12
Although Katie is very attractive,…
13
It’s a great restaurant although…
14
The match was really boring, so…
15
We enjoyed our holiday although…
16
They live together, but…
17
I can’t go to the party tonight because…
18
It isn’t a great film, but…
19
I live with my parents because…
20
I didn’t like David when I first met him, but…
2C  COMMUNICATIVE  Sentence race
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 223@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
223
3A  COMMUNICATIVE  A day in…
Schedule for tomorrow:
Breakfast
10 a.m.
 
11.30 a.m.
 
Lunch
 
3.30 p.m.
 
6 p.m.
 
Dinner
 
Schedule for tomorrow:
Breakfast
10 a.m.
 
11.30 a.m.
 
Lunch
 
3.30 p.m.
 
6 p.m.
 
Dinner
 
Sightseeing:
Statue of Liberty (1h 30), Museum of Modern Art (1h), 
Central Park (1h), Museum of Natural History (1h), 
NYC bus tour (1h 30), New York Library (30 mins), 
Empire State Building (30 mins), Bronx Zoo (1h), 
see a musical (The Lion King) (2h 30), Yankee Baseball 
Stadium (1h), Chinatown (1h)
Shopping:
•	 SoHo (small independent shops, some souvenirs)
•	 Fifth Avenue (famous luxury shops, 
	
lots of souvenirs)
Places to eat:
•	 Delmonico’s (American food, burgers)
•	 Lombardi’s Pizza (Italian food)
•	 Red Farm (Chinese food)
•	 New York Bagels (sandwiches, breakfast and lunch)
•	 Café Blossom (has vegetarian food)
Sightseeing:
Louvre Museum (1h 30), Boat trip on River Seine (1h),
Arc de Triomphe (30 mins), Notre-Dame cathedral (1h),
Eiffel Tower (1h 30), Orsay Museum of Art (1h),
Paris bus tour (1h), Latin Quarter (1h),
Luxembourg Gardens (30 mins), 
Versailles Palace (2h 30), Picasso Museum (1h)
Shopping:
•	 Rue Saint Honoré (luxury shops)
•	 Marché Aux Puces (outdoors, lots of small shops)
•	 The Marais (shopping streets, souvenirs, 
	
international shops)
•	 Galleries Lafayette (big department store)
Places to eat:
•	 Taste Eat (Vietnamese food)
•	 Midi 12 (French food)
•	 Pizza Julia (Italian food)
•	 Breton (crêpes, breakfast and lunch)
•	 My Kitchen (café, has vegetarian food) 
A DAY IN
New York!
A DAY IN
Paris!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 224@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
224
3B  COMMUNICATIVE  Come fly with me!
Student A
Student B
FLIGHT INFORMATION A
FLIGHT INFORMATION B
	
Look at the missing information on boarding card B. Write the questions you need to ask B to 
complete boarding card B.
1	 Who are you flying     with? (fly)
2	 Where 
 from? (fly)
3	 Where 
 to? (fly)
4	 When 
 ? (leave)
5	 What time 
 ? (leave)
6	 What time 
 ? (arrive)
7	 Where 
 ? (sit)
	
Ask B the questions and complete boarding card B.
	
Now B will ask you for the information on boarding card A. Answer his / her questions.
a
b
c
FLIGHT INFORMATION A
FLIGHT INFORMATION B
	
Look at the missing information on boarding card A. Write the questions you need to ask A to 
complete boarding card A.
1	 Who are you flying      with? (fly)
2	 Where 
 from? (fly)
3	 Where 
 to? (fly)
4	 When 
 ? (leave)
5	 What time 
 ? (leave)
6	 What time 
 ? (arrive)
7	 Where 
 ? (sit)
	
A will ask you for the information on boarding card B. Answer his / her questions.
	
Now ask A the questions and complete boarding card A.
a
b
c
PASSENGER
Brad Washington
AIRLINE
American Airlines
FROM
London Gatwick
TO
New York JFK
BOARDING CARD
•
PASSENGER 
David Smith
AIRLINE 
FROM 
TO 
BOARDING CARD
•
PASSENGER 
Brad Washington
AIRLINE 
FROM 
TO 
BOARDING CARD
•
PASSENGER 
David Smith
AIRLINE 
British Airways
FROM 
London Heathrow
TO 
Paris Orly
BOARDING CARD
•
DATE 09 SEP
FLIGHT  AA6149
DEPARTURE TIME
16.40
ARRIVAL TIME
19.30
SEAT NUMBER  15D
DATE 
FLIGHT  BA334
DEPARTURE TIME
ARRIVAL TIME
SEAT NUMBER 
DATE 
FLIGHT  AA6149
DEPARTURE TIME
ARRIVAL TIME
SEAT NUMBER 
DATE  03 MAR
FLIGHT  BA334
DEPARTURE TIME
11.55
ARRIVAL TIME
14.20
SEAT NUMBER  5E
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 225@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
225
3C  COMMUNICATIVE  Can you explain the word?
bald
a beard
a moustache
talkative
slim
a skirt
a tracksuit
trainers
tights
a necklace
a ring
overweight
noisy
a cap
go surfing
go camping
comfortable
crowded
foggy
go sightseeing
take photos
baggage reclaim
a trolley
fall in love
 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 226@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
226
4A  COMMUNICATIVE  Find the response
	
Match the sentences with the responses and then check your answers with your teacher.
a
	
Fold the paper in half. A say sentences 1–14. B can you remember the responses? Then swap roles.
b
FOLD
  1
Have you done your English 
homework?	
a
She’s already left.
  2
Do you want to come and see the  
new Ben Affleck film?	
b
No, not yet. I’m going to tidy it later.
  3
What time’s your mother leaving?	
c
Thanks. I’ve just bought them.
  4
Would you like a cup of coffee?	
d
You’re too late. They’ve already 
gone home.
  5
Have you booked your flight?	
e
I’ve already seen it.
  6
What’s his new girlfriend like?	
f
Don’t worry! I’ve already been to the 
supermarket.
  7
Have you tidied your room yet?	
g
Yes, I know. I’ve just got up.
  8
What’s your English course like?	
h
Yes, I’ve just finished it.
  9
I love your shoes!	
i
I can’t. I haven’t been to the cashpoint yet.
10
Your hair looks nice.	
j
Thanks. I’ve just washed it.
11
Can you lend me some money?	
k
No, not yet. I’m going to do it tonight.
12
You look really sleepy.	
l
I haven’t started it yet. It starts tomorrow.
13
Don’t forget to buy some milk!	
m
No, thanks. I’ve just had one.
14
Where are Pete and Andrew?	
n
I don’t know. I haven’t met her yet.
h
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 227@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
227
4B  COMMUNICATIVE  Have you ever...?
1
/ ever speak English to somebody outside class?  
Who / speak to? What about?
2
/ ever break your arm or your leg? How / break it?
3
/ ever do an extreme sport? Which one / do?
4
/ ever be to an English speaking country?  
Which country / go to? / speak English there?
5
/ ever live abroad? Where / live? Why / live there?
6
/ ever do volunteer work? What / do? How long / do it for?
7
/ ever sing or play an instrument in public? What / do? How / feel? 
8
/ ever run a marathon or a half marathon? When / run it? / finish it?
9
/ ever post a selfie online? Where / post it? Where / take the photo?
10
/ ever complain in a hotel or restaurant? Why / complain?
11
/ ever sleep outside all night? Where / sleep? / sleep well?
12
/ ever speak in public? What / speak about? How / feel?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 228@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
228
4C  COMMUNICATIVE  The same or different?
	
Complete the sentences with something, anywhere, nobody, etc.
a
1	 I always have 
 to eat before I go to work / school.
2	 I never have problems sleeping on buses or planes. I can sleep 
.
3	 I usually watch 
 on TV in the evening.
4	 When I watch films in English, I don’t usually understand 
.
5	 I don’t usually do 
 interesting at weekends.
6	 In my family, 
 speaks any English except me!
7	 I went 
 really exciting last weekend.
8	 I never read 
 in English except my coursebook.
9	 There’s 
 I really want to buy at the moment, but I don’t have any money.
10	 I love doing 
 on Sunday mornings, just staying in bed late.
11	 I hate smoking, and luckily 
 in my family smokes.
12	 I don’t want to go 
 this weekend. I just want to stay at home.
13	 I don’t know 
 in this class very well.
14	 There’s 
 I really want to go on holiday.
15	 In my town, there’s 
 for young people to go at night. It’s really boring here.
16	 I never say 
 in English in class. I’m worried about making mistakes.
17	 I met 
 very interesting last weekend.
18	 I always go 
 quiet when I want to study.
	
Talk to a partner. Tell him / her if the sentences are true or not true for you, and why.
b
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 229@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
229
5A  COMMUNICATIVE  Which do you prefer? Why?
swimming in the sea
OR
swimming in a pool
a holiday with your family
OR
a holiday with friends
watching a film in your language
OR
watching a film with subtitles
watching a film at the cinema
OR
watching a film at home
texting
OR
messaging
watching sport
OR
doing sport
doing English homework
OR
doing housework
reading a traditional book
OR
reading a book on screen
eating in a restaurant
OR
eating at home
buying things in a shop
OR
buying things online
going on holiday in your country
OR
going on holiday abroad
listening to music with headphones
OR
listening to music without headphones
going clothes shopping alone
OR
going clothes shopping with  
another person
studying during the day
OR
studying at night
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 230@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
230
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Superlative questions
	
Complete the questions with the superlative form of the adjective in brackets.
1	 Which of these people is 
? (rich)
	
a Michael Bloomberg, founder of Bloomberg    b Amancio Ortega, the founder of Zara	
 
c Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook
	
Amancio Ortega has a fortune of over 80 billion dollars.
2	 Which of these is 
 city? (populated)
	
a Tokyo in Japan    b New Delhi in India    c Mexico City in Mexico
	
Over 37 million people live in Tokyo’s metropolitan area.
3	 Where is 
 road in the world? (dangerous)
	
a Russia    b Australia    c Bolivia
	
Thousands of people have died on the Camino de la Muerte (Death Road) in Bolivia.
4	 Which is 
 lake in the world? (large)
	
a Lake Superior in North America    b Lake Baikal in Russia    c Lake Victoria in Africa
	
Lake Superior has an area of 82,100 square km.
5	 Which of these inventions is 
? (recent)
	
a glasses    b the microscope    c the telescope
	
The telescope was invented by Galileo Galilei in 1609.
6	 Which of these cities is 
 with tourists? (popular)
	
a Istanbul in Turkey    b New York in the USA    c Bangkok in Thailand
	
More than 20 million people visit Bangkok every year.
	
Ask B your questions, reading the three options. Tell B if he / she is right or wrong (the correct 
answer is in bold) and give the extra information. Then try to answer B’s questions.
a
b
	
Complete the questions with the superlative form of the adjective given.
1	 Which is 
 city in the world? (noisy)
	
a Madrid in Spain    b Cairo in Egypt    c Mumbai in India
	
The noise in Mumbai is often over 100 decibels. That’s as loud as a plane flying near you.
2	 Which of these is 
 planet? (small)
	
a Mercury    b Venus    c Mars
	
Mercury has a radius of 2440 km.
3	 Which of these videogames is 
? (popular)
	
a Super Mario Bros    b Minecraft    c Tetris
	
Tetris has sold 495 million copies.
4	 Which is 
 museum in the world? (large)
	
a The National Gallery in London  b The National Museum of China  c The Louvre in Paris
	
The Louvre has an area of 72,735 square metres.
5	 Who is 
 person to win a Nobel Prize? (young)
	
a Guglielmo Marconi for inventing the telegraph    b Malala Yousafzai for fighting for 
women’s right to education    c Marie Curie for discovering radioactivity
	
Malala Yousafzai won the Nobel Peace Prize when she was 17 years old.
6	 Which was 
 film to win an Oscar for Best Film? (long)
	
a Lord of the Rings: Return of the King    b Gone with the Wind    c Titanic
	
Gone with the Wind lasts 3 hours and 58 minutes.
	
Try to answer A’s questions. Then ask A your questions, reading the three options. Tell A if he /  
she is right or wrong (the correct answer is in bold) and give the extra information.
a
b
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 231@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
231
5C  COMMUNICATIVE  How much / How many...?
How 
 people are there in your 
(workplace / class)?
•	 Do you think it’s a good number?
•	 Is it a big place or is it small? 
•	 Do you enjoy working / studying there?
•	 How many of your colleagues / classmates do  
you know well?
How 
 time do you spend in front of  
a computer every day?
•	 Is it for work or for pleasure?
•	 What kind of things do you normally do on your 
computer?
•	 Do you enjoy doing them?
•	 Do you think you’re good with computers? Why (not)?
How 
 different drinks do you  
have a day?
•	 What’s your favourite drink?
•	 How often do you have it?
•	 When you go out with your friends, what do you 
normally drink? 
•	 What do you normally drink for breakfast?
How 
 fast food do you eat?
•	 What’s your favourite fast food restaurant?
•	 What things do you normally order?
•	 How long do you have to wait for it?
•	 How much money do you normally spend when  
you eat there?
How 
 times a week do you see  
your friends?
•	 How many friends do you normally meet with?
•	 Where do you normally go?
•	 What do you normally do? 
How 
 luggage do you usually take  
on holiday?
•	 Is it usually enough or too much?
•	 Do you often forget to take something?
•	 Do you buy a lot of things when you are on holiday? 
•	 What kind of things do you buy?
How 
 music do you listen to in a day?
•	 What do you normally use to listen to music  
(your phone / the radio, etc.)?
•	 What is your favourite song at the moment?
•	 How often do you listen to it? 
•	 Do you have a favourite band? 
How 
 does the cinema cost in your 
town / city?
•	 Do you think it’s expensive?
•	 How often do you go to the cinema?
•	 What was the last film you saw at the cinema?
•	 Did you enjoy it? Why (not)?
How 
 hours a week do you spend 
doing housework?
•	 What housework do you usually do?
•	 Do you live alone or with other people? 
•	 How much of the housework do they do?
•	 What housework do you hate doing?
How 
 time do you have for yourself 
every day?
•	 Do you think it’s enough?
•	 What do you like doing when you have free time?
•	 Do you think you’re going to have more or less free 
time in the future? Why?
How 
 times do you use social media  
in a day?
•	 Do you like social media? Why (not)?
•	 What social media sites / apps do you use?
•	 What do you use them for?
•	 Do you have a lot of friends or followers?
How 
 do you travel during the year?
•	 Would you like to travel more?
•	 What places would you like to visit? Why?
•	 How do you prefer to travel?
•	 Do you ever travel for your work / studies?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 232@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
232
1
I lost my wallet in the 
street yesterday.
Don’t worry. 
I’ve just broken up with my 
partner.
Cheer up! I’m sure 
We just bought a dog – a 
Labrador!
Congratulations! 
I have a really difficult 
exam tomorrow.
Good luck! I’m sure 
We’re going to see the 
new Star Wars film!
Fantastic! 
I’m going to start going to 
the gym next week!
That’s great! 
I have a date tonight. I’m 
really nervous!
Don’t worry. I’m sure 
I’m going to study in the 
UK next year.
That’s really good. 
My team are playing an 
important match today.
That’s fantastic! 
I’m going to Mary’s party 
tonight.
Great! I’m sure 
I’ve just lost my job.
Cheer up! 
My plane leaves in ten 
minutes. I can’t find my 
passport!
Don’t worry. 
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  Positive or negative?
YOU SAY
THE OPTIMIST SAYS
	
Complete THE OPTIMIST SAYS column with positive predictions.
a
	
Talk to other students. Read a YOU SAY sentence and listen to their THE OPTIMIST SAYS prediction.
b
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 233@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
233
6B  COMMUNICATIVE  Guess my sentence
1	 I like these shoes. I think I 
 them.
2	 I’ll pick you up at eight o’clock. Shall I call you before I leave home?
3	 Please don’t worry, Mum. I 
 you when I get to Paris.
4	 Your suitcase looks really heavy. Shall I carry it?
5	 I 
 you the money for Maria’s present tomorrow.
6	 I’ll help you with your English homework. I can see you’re having problems.
7	 It’s really hot in here. 
 I 
 the air conditioning?
8	 There’s somebody at the door. I’ll go and see who it is.
9	 I 
 for lunch today. You paid last time.
10	 Don’t worry! I’ll remember to phone the bank tomorrow. I have a good memory.
11	 The phone’s ringing. 
 I 
 it?
12	 Have you forgotten your book? Don’t worry. I’ll lend you mine.
13	 I need to go now. I 
 you tomorrow.
14	 You do the cooking and I’ll do the washing-up.
Student A
1	 I like these shoes. I think I’ll buy them.
2	 I’ll pick you up at eight o’clock. 
 I 
 you before I leave home?
3	 Please don’t worry, Mum. I’ll text you when I get to Paris.
4	 Your suitcase looks really heavy. 
 I 
 it?
5	 I’ll give you the money for Maria’s present tomorrow.
6	 I 
 you with your English homework. I can see you’re having problems.
7	 It’s really hot in here. Shall I turn on the air conditioning?
8	 There’s somebody at the door. I 
 and see who it is.
9	 I’ll pay for lunch today. You paid last time.
10	 Don’t worry! I 
 to phone the bank tomorrow. I have a good memory.
11	 The phone’s ringing. Shall I answer it?
12	 Have you forgotten your book? Don’t worry. I 
 you mine.
13	 I need to go now. I’ll see you tomorrow.
14	 You do the cooking and I 
 the washing-up.
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 234@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
234
6C  COMMUNICATIVE  Talk about it
Music that 
I like / don’t 
like
A person I 
admire
My next 
holiday
My house / flat
A concert or 
show I went to 
recently
My hobbies
The best 
holiday I’ve 
ever had
Something 
I want to 
buy soon
My plans for 
the weekend
A favourite 
relative
How I 
celebrate my 
birthday
Clothes 
shopping
My favourite 
food
A city I love
Is my lifestyle 
healthy?
A painting or 
photo I like
My favourite 
day of 
the week
Things that 
make me 
stressed
Am I an 
optimist or a 
pessimist?
A restaurant  
I like
START
FINISH
    Talk 
about it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 235@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
235
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  I’m going to tell you about...
	
Choose six topics and think about what you’re going to say. Talk to a partner.  
Give and ask for more information.
what I think is the best 
way to learn a language
something I learned  
to do as a child but 
can’t do now
something I think is 
important to teach 
young children
something I often 
forget to do
why tourists choose 
to come to my country
something I need  
to buy soon
the things I do to relax 
after a hard day
something I’ve decided  
to do in the future
a sport or activity I tried  
to learn but couldn’t
something I find difficult  
to do in English
something I wanted to 
be when I was younger
what I want to do 
tonight
somebody I would like 
to meet
what I think is the best 
way to make new 
friends
something I thought 
of buying but decided 
not to
things that are important 
to do if you go for a job 
interview
the things I think are 
important to do for  
a healthy life
a film that’s good 
to watch when I’m 
feeling sad
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 236@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
236
7B  COMMUNICATIVE  Questions with gerunds
	
Complete the questions with the -ing form  
of the verbs from the list.
cook  do (x2)  fly  get up  go  read  wait
1	 Do you like 
 early?
2	 Are you afraid of 
?
3	 Do you mind 
 for people 
who are late?
4	 Did you hate 
 to school 
when you were younger?
5	 Do you enjoy 
 in bed?
6	 Are you good at 
?
7	 Have you started 
 a  
new activity recently?
8	 Do you think 
 exercise  
is boring?
	
Ask B your questions. Ask for more 
information.
a
b
Student A
	
Complete the questions with the -ing form of 
the verbs from the list.
be  do  eat  get  go (x2)  play  walk
1	 Do you spend much time 
 in the country?
2	 Have you stopped 
 an 
activity recently?
3	 Do you enjoy 
 to the 
cinema alone?
4	 Do you feel like 
 out 
tonight?
5	 Do you think 
 computer 
games teaches you anything?
6	 Did you like 
 fruit and 
vegetables when you were a child?
7	 Are you thinking of 
 a 
new haircut soon?
8	 Do you dream of 
 
famous?
	
Ask A your questions. Ask for more 
information.
a
b
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 237@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
237
7C  COMMUNICATIVE  In the UK
	
Work in pairs. Read the sentences about the UK and decide if they are true or false.
True    False
1
You mustn’t cycle in bus lanes.
       
2
You have to be 21 to buy alcohol.
       
3
You don’t have to pay to use motorways.
       
4
All dogs and cats must have a microchip with the name and 
address of their owner.
       
5
Everybody has to do six months military service.
       
6
You have to be 18 to ride a 50cc motorbike.
       
7
You don’t have to have an ID card.
       
8
All shops must close on Sundays.
       
9
You mustn’t leave a child under 12 alone at home.
       
10
You mustn’t play loud music in your house after 9.00 p.m.
       
11
You have to be 17 years old to vote in a general election.
       
12
You don’t have to vote in a general election.
       
13
You have to be over 16 to have a Facebook or Twitter account.
       
14
If you have a dog, you must have a special licence.
       
15
TV programmes before 9.00 p.m. mustn’t include bad language.
       
16
You don’t have to study a foreign language at secondary school.
       
17
You don’t have to wear seat belts in the back of the car.
       
18
Parents don’t have to send their children to school. They can 
educate them at home.
       
a
	
Check your answers with your teacher.
	
Work with a partner. Are the laws the same or different in your country? } 
Which of these rules would you like to have in your country?
b
c
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 238@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
238
8A  COMMUNICATIVE  I need some advice
I have a job interview in English next week. I really 
want the job.
How should I prepare for it?
I want to be fitter, but I don’t really like going to 
the gym.
What should I do?
Some friends are coming to dinner and I don’t 
have time to cook.
What should I do?
Another company has offered me a job. The salary 
is lower than my present job, but the work is much 
more interesting. 
What should I do?
I had an argument with my best friend yesterday.  
It was my fault. Now she’s not talking to me.
What should I do?
I don’t like my brother’s new girlfriend, but he is 
very happy with her.
What should I say to him?
I want to buy a present for my grandmother. She’s 
90 and she likes reading, travelling and classical 
music.
What should I buy?
I want to learn another foreign language so I can get 
a good job.
Which one should I learn?
I’d like to learn to play a musical instrument.
Which one should I choose?
My family wants to get a pet. We have a small house 
and we’re all very busy.
What kind of pet should we get?
I have two tickets for a concert. My dad and my 
sister really like the band and want to come 
with me.
Who should I take to the concert?
I’m really bad with money. I always spend more than 
I have, especially when I go out.
What should I do?
My friend wants to be a singer, but I don’t think he 
sings very well.
What should I say to him?
My partner’s mother doesn’t like me very much.
What should I do?
I can’t sleep at night.
What should I do?
I want to go on holiday to a really beautiful place 
this summer. I love the beach.
Where should I go?
I want to become a vegetarian, but my family really 
loves meat.
What should I do?
My cousin is coming to visit me. He’s allergic to cats 
and I have a cat.
What should I do?
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 239@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
239
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  Conditionals race
	
Complete the conditional sentences.
a
	
Compare your answers with another pair. Who do you think wrote more interesting sentences?
	
Fold the paper and look at the first part of the sentences. Try to remember what you wrote.
b
c
1
We’re playing really well, it’s 3–1. 
If we win, 
2
The film starts at 6.30. 
If we don’t leave now, 
3
There are a lot of things I want to buy! 
If I don’t have enough money, 
4
We don't have any sandwiches for the trip. 
If we’re hungry later, 
5
We really need a holiday. 
If we can get a cheap flight, 
6
It’s getting really late. 
If we don’t go to the supermarket now, 
7
It’s going to be really cold tomorrow.
If it snows, 
8
I can’t see my car keys anywhere. 
If I don’t find them, 
9
That exam was really hard. 
If I don’t pass it, 
10
You look tired. 
If you don’t want to go out this evening, 
11
My girlfriend is working late today. 
If she doesn’t finish work before 9.00, 
12
We’re at the station, waiting for Dave. 
If he doesn’t come soon, 
13
I’ve bought a lot of food for the party. 
If we don’t eat it all, 
14
The teacher has just told us the date of  
the exam. 
If you don’t write it down, 
15
I know you don’t like Anne, but I don’t  
think she’s coming to the party. 
If she comes, 
FOLD
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 240@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
240
8C  COMMUNICATIVE  Reading questionnaire
Do you like  
reading books?
1	 Do you have a favourite place or time 
of day to read? Why do you like it?
2	 What kind of books do you like 
reading?
3	 Do you have a favourite author? 
How many of his / her books have 
you read?
4	 Do you prefer to read traditional 
books or e-books? Why?
5	 What was the last book you bought? 
Where did you buy it?
6	 Are you a fast reader or a slow 
reader?
7	 Do you sometimes read more than 
one book at a time?
8	 Is there a book everyone liked but 
you hated? Which one?
9	 Have you ever started reading a book 
but not finished it? Why not?
10	 Whose advice on books do you 
always listen to?
11	 How do you choose books to read /  
buy?
12	 Do you ever read books more 
than once?
1	 Do you read any magazines or 
newspapers? Which ones?
2	 Do you read online? What do you 
read?
3	 How do you find out about the news?
4	 Did your parents read to you when you 
were a child? What kind of books did 
they read?
5	 Did you read comics when you were a 
child? Which ones?
6	 Is there anybody in your family who 
likes reading? Who?
7	 Have you ever written a blog? Do you 
like reading blogs? Why?
8	 Do you think women like reading more 
than men? Why?
9	 If somebody gives you a book as a 
present, what do you do?
10	 Did you have a favourite book when 
you were a child?
11	 Do you think that people today read 
more or less than 20 years ago? Why?
12	 Do you follow many people on social 
media? Do you like reading what they 
post?
YES
NO
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 241@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
241
9A  COMMUNICATIVE  I think you’d...
	
Complete the sentences about B.
a
	
Read your sentences to B. Were you right?
	
Listen to B’s sentences about you. Tell him / her if they are right or wrong, and why.
b
c
1	 If you could be anywhere in the world right now, I think you’d choose to be in 
.
2	 If you bought a new car today, I think you’d buy a 
.
3	 If you didn’t study English, I think you’d like to study 
.
4	 If we had lunch together, I think we’d go to 
.
5	 If you could go to a concert tonight, I think you’d go and see 
.
6	 If you could go to an English-speaking country, I think you’d go to 
.
7	 If you could choose your ideal job, I think you’d like to be a / an 
.
8	 If you did a new sport / hobby, I think you’d like to 
.
9	 If you bought a new flat or house, I think you’d buy one in 
.
10	 If you got a new pet, I think you’d get a 
.
Student A
	
Complete the sentences about A.
a
	
Listen to A’s sentences about you. Tell him / her if they are right or wrong, and why.
	
Read your sentences to A. Were you right?
b
c
1	 If you had a big problem, I think you’d speak to 
.
2	 If you could be an animal, I think you’d like to be a / an 
.
3	 If you went to a karaoke bar, I think you’d sing 
.
4	 If you had enough money, I think you’d buy a 
.
5	 If somebody wanted to buy you a present, I think you’d love a / some 
.
6	 If you could change one thing in your house or flat, I think you’d 
.
7	 If you could learn to play a musical instrument well, I think you’d choose 
.
8	 If someone invited you to a very expensive restaurant, I think you’d order 
.
9	 If you could appear on a TV programme, I think you’d appear on 
.
10	 If you could meet a famous person, I think you’d like to meet 
.
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 242@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
242
9B  COMMUNICATIVE  Famous phobias
Scarlett Johansson  This famous 
American actress has katsaridaphobia, 
which means she’s afraid of 
cockroaches. She’s had the phobia 
since she was a child, but it got worse 
when she lived in New York at the 
beginning of her career. Once, she 
woke up with a cockroach on her face 
and another one in her shoe! Since 
then, she’s absolutely hated them. 
She’s also quite afraid of birds, which 
was a bit of a problem for her while 
filming We Bought A Zoo.
True or false?
Orlando Bloom  Have you seen 
Pirates of the Caribbean? If you 
have, then you’ll probably remember 
this actor who appears in the film. 
But this ‘brave’ actor has a serious 
phobia which is swinophobia. This 
means that he is afraid of pigs. He 
has been afraid of them since he was 
a teenager. Although this phobia isn’t 
very common, it’s had a direct effect 
on his career. A director asked him 
to be in the film Animal Farm but 
Orlando said no because it meant 
that he had to work with a pig.
True or false?
Oprah Winfrey  This American 
talk show host and producer is one 
of the most influential women in the 
world. However, she suffers from 
chiclephobia, which means she has 
a fear of chewing gum. Apparently, 
she has banned people from chewing 
gum at her production studio. She 
has had the phobia since she was 
a child. It started when she saw her 
grandmother putting her chewing 
gum in the kitchen cupboards.
True or false?
Student A
Justin Timberlake  This singer 
and actor is from the USA. He has to 
travel a lot because of his job, and 
sometimes the arachnophobia he 
suffers from is a problem for him. He’s 
been afraid of spiders for a long time. 
He thinks his phobia started at the 
age of seven or eight when he found 
a spider in his bed. Last year, he was 
staying in a hotel and saw a spider in 
the bathroom. He couldn’t kill it, so 
he asked the receptionist to come 
and kill it for him!
True or false?
Rihanna  This famous singer and 
actress comes from the island of 
Barbados. So perhaps it’s strange 
that she has ichthyophobia – she is 
afraid of fish and other sea animals. 
She’s had this phobia for a long 
time. Once, she was on a beach 
in Barbados and she went in the 
water. She could see lots of small fish 
swimming around her feet. She was 
so afraid that a man had to take her 
out of the water. Since then, she’s 
been really afraid of them.
True or false?
Robert De Niro  This 
Hollywood mega-star is probably 
one of the greatest actors of all 
time. However, many of us have 
something in common with him. He 
has dentophobia, which means he’s 
afraid of the dentist. He has suffered 
from it since he made the film Cape 
Fear. Before filming, he paid a 
dentist $5,000 to make his teeth look 
bad enough for the role of Max Cady 
in the film. Then, after filming, he 
paid a dentist $20,000 to repair his 
teeth. That’s dedication to his job!
True or false?
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 243@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
243
9C  COMMUNICATIVE  Like father, like son
Bob Dylan is a singer and songwriter who 
was born in Minnesota in 1
. 
In 1961, he left university, and he went to  
2
. His real surname was  
3
, but he changed it to  
Dylan in 1962 after the famous Welsh poet Dylan  
Thomas. He became very famous in the 60s  
with songs like The Times They are a-Changin’ and Blowing in the  
Wind, which inspired people to protest against war and injustice.  
The folk singer Joan Baez helped him become famous because  
4
. In 1965, he married Sara 
Lownds and they had five children, but they divorced in 1977. He 
has recorded 5
 albums, and he still writes 
music and plays in concerts. He’s also an artist; he has produced 
seven books of 6
. In 2016, he received the  
7
.
Jakob Dylan is a singer and songwriter. 
He was born in New York in 1969. His father 
is the famous musician Bob Dylan. He has two 
brothers and two sisters. When he was in high 
school, Jakob played the guitar in several bands. 
In 1988, he moved to New York to study Art, but 
he started writing songs instead. He formed a 
band, The Wallflowers, and they have released six albums and 
won two Grammy awards. They also recorded a version of David 
Bowie’s song Heroes for the soundtrack of the film Godzilla. 
Jakob has composed some music for TV shows and other 
musicians. He has also recorded two solo albums. He’s been 
married to his wife Paige since 1992, and they have four children.
Bob Dylan is a singer and songwriter who 
was born in Minnesota in 1941. In 1961, he 
left university and he went to New York. His real 
surname was Zimmerman, but he changed it to 
Dylan in 1962 after the famous Welsh poet Dylan 
Thomas. He became very famous in the 60s with 
songs like The Times They are a-Changin’ and 
Blowing in the Wind, which inspired people to protest against the 
government. The folk singer Joan Baez helped him become famous 
because she sang his songs and made them popular. In 1965, he 
married Sara Lownds and they had five children, but they divorced 
in 1977. He has recorded more than 35 albums, and he still writes 
music and plays in concerts. He’s also an artist; he has produced 
seven books of paintings and drawings. In 2016, he received the 
Nobel Prize in Literature.
Jakob Dylan is a 1
.  
He was born in New York in  
2
. His father is  
the famous musician Bob Dylan. He has  
3
 brothers and  
 sisters. When he was in  
high school, Jakob played the guitar in several 
bands. In 1988, he moved to New York to study Art, but he started 
writing songs instead. He formed a band, The Wallflowers, and 
they have released 4
 albums and won two 
Grammy awards. They also recorded a version of David Bowie’s song 
5
 for the soundtrack of the film Godzilla. Jakob 
has composed some music for 6
. He has also 
recorded two solo albums. He’s been married to his wife Paige since 
7
 and they have four children together.
	
Read the biographies.
a
	
Read the biographies.
a
1	 What 
 do?
2	 When 
 born?
3	 How many brothers and sisters 
?
4	 How many albums 
?
5	
Which David Bowie song 
?
6	
Who 
 music for?
7	
How long 
 married?
	
Complete the questions you need to ask A to find out the missing information about Jakob Dylan.
b
	
Answer A’s questions about Bob Dylan. Ask A the questions and complete Jakob Dylan’s biography. 
What do the father and son have in common?
c
Student A
Student B
1	 When 
 born?
2	 Where 
 to in 1961?
3	
 his real surname?
4	 How 
 him become 
famous?
5	
How many albums 
?
6	
What kind of books 
?
7	
What prize 
 in 2016?
	
Complete the questions you need to ask B to find out the missing information about Bob Dylan.
b
	
Ask B the questions and complete Bob Dylan’s biography. Answer B’s questions about Jakob Dylan. 
What do the father and son have in common?
c
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 244@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
244
10A  COMMUNICATIVE  The race
	
You are going to run an extreme race! You can climb, run, or swim.  
Describe the route on the MY RACE map to B.
	
Listen to B describe a route and draw it on your second map. 
	
Compare your maps with B’s. Did you draw the route correctly? Did B?
a
b
c
	
Listen to A describe a route and draw it on your second map.
	
You are going to run an extreme race! You can climb, run, or swim.  
Describe the route on the MY RACE map to A. 
	
Compare your maps with A’s. Did you draw the route correctly? Did A?
a
b
c
Student A
Student B
MY RACE
MY RACE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 245@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
245
10B  COMMUNICATIVE  Phrasal verb conversations
	
Listen to A’s situations and answer them using one of the phrasal verb sentences below.
a
Student B
	
Now read these sentences to A and listen to his / her answers. Do they go together? 
1	 I think I drink too much coffee.
2	 Don’t come in here in those dirty boots!
3	 Do you like your boss? 
4	 I can’t find any eggs in the fridge. 
5	 Are you excited about going to Rome?
6	 I can’t find my phone!
7	 You’ve left all your clothes on the bed!
8	 You forgot to complete this form.
	
Now repeat the activity, but try to remember (not read) the phrasal verb sentences.  
Can you both remember your answers?
b
c
The film will be over in ten minutes, I promise!
Sorry, I threw it away.
Why don’t you take it back?
OK, I’ll pick it up.
Sorry, I’ll turn it down.
Don’t worry, I’ll look after him.
Sorry, I’ll give it back tomorrow.
Look it up in the dictionary!
Student A
	
Read these sentences to B and listen to his / her answers. Do they go together?
1	 You’ve left your towel on the floor again. 
2	 I really need the book that you borrowed from me.
3	 The music is too loud!
4	 I don’t know what this word means.
5	 Where is that letter from the bank?
6	 Are you watching a film? I want to watch the news!
7	 I don’t want to leave my dog alone this weekend.
8	 This T-shirt that I bought doesn’t fit.
	
Listen to B’s situations and answer them using one of the phrasal verb sentences below.
a
b
	
Now repeat the activity, but try to remember (not read) the phrasal verb sentences.  
Can you both remember your answers?
c
I think you should give it up.
Sorry, I’ll fill it in now.
We’ve run out.
Yes, I’m really looking forward to it.
Yes, I get on very well with her.
Don’t worry, I’ll take them off. 
I’ll help you look for it.
OK, I’ll put them away.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 246@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
246
10C  COMMUNICATIVE  General knowledge quiz
1	 Which month is named after a Roman emperor?
	
a August	
b July	
c January
2	 What sport is played at Flushing Meadows, USA?
	
a basketball	
b baseball	
c tennis
3	 Where are polar bears found?
	
a the South Pole	
b Alaska	
c Antarctica
4	 What is the Greek goddess of victory called?
	
a Adidas	
b Reebok	
c Nike
5	 On a computer keyboard, which letter is found between Z and C?
	
a V	
b P	
c X
6	 What was the first song sung in space?
	
a Happy Birthday to You	 b Space Oddity	
c We Are the Champions
7	 In which European city is the Nobel Peace Prize given?
	
a Stockholm	
b Paris	
c Oslo
8	 What is tofu made of?
	
a goat’s milk	
b soya milk	
c cow’s milk
9	 What drink was created by The Coca-Cola Company in Germany during World War II?
	
a Coca-Cola	
b Dr Pepper	
c Fanta
10	 In which country was golf first played?
	
a England	
b Scotland	
c the USA
1	 In which city was the Titanic built?
	
a Belfast	
b New York	
c Portsmouth
2	 Who was the ball point pen invented by?
	
a Jacques Bic	
b László Biró	
c Frank Parker
3	 On which day is Thanksgiving celebrated in the USA?
	
a the fourth Thursday in November        b the second Thursday in July	
 
c the first Thursday in December
4	 Which toy was invented in Denmark in 1949?
	
a the Barbie doll	
b the Rubik’s Cube	
c Lego
5	 Which style of music was created by Antônio Carlos Jobim and João Gilberto in Brazil?
	
a salsa	
b bossa nova	
c samba
6	 In which film was the word ‘supercalifragilisticexpialidocious’ used?
	
a Mary Poppins	
b Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire	
c E.T.
7	 Who was the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel painted by?
	
a Tintoretto	
b da Vinci	
c Michelangelo
8	 The Canary Islands are named after which animal?
	
a a canary	
b a cat	
c a dog
9	 How many squares are there on a chess board?
	
a 144	
b 96	
c 64
10	 Which is the most visited tourist attraction in the world?
	
a the Taj Mahal	
b the Eiffel Tower	
c the Empire State Building
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 247@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
247
11A  COMMUNICATIVE  My past
	
How have you changed? Write a name or phrase in as many boxes as you can.
aa
	
Compare your boxes with a partner’s. Ask for and give more information  
about how and why you’ve changed.
b
1	 Something you used to be afraid of
2	 A favourite toy you used to have
3	 A singer or band you used to listen to
4	 A kind of food or drink you didn’t use to like
5	 Something you used to collect
6	 A game you used to play a lot
7	 A pet you used to have
8	 A place where you used to go to on holiday 
with your family
9	 A friend you used to have at school
10	 A subject you used to be very bad at
11	 A TV programme you used to love
12	 A teacher at school you didn’t use to like
13	 A house / flat you used to live in
14	 An instrument you used to play
1
2
3
4
5
14
6
13
7
12
8
11
10
9
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 248@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
248
might… 
might not…
11B  COMMUNICATIVE  I might...but I might not
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
The weather 
is really nice 
today. We...
It’s going to be 
a difficult match 
but we...
We haven’t 
made dinner yet 
and it’s late. I...
My mother-in-law 
gave me a really 
ugly painting. I...
It’s quite  
cold, but it’s 
sunny. We...
I’ve bought a 
new book, but my 
friend says it’s 
boring. I...
There’s an 
interesting 
programme on TV 
tonight, but I’m 
really tired. I...
I don’t feel very 
well. I...
I don’t know 
what to wear to 
the party. I...
We can’t 
decide which film 
to watch at the 
cinema. I think we...
I must write 
this down.  
If I don’t...
I don’t have a 
lot of money 
this month. I...
We should 
take some 
sandwiches for 
our trip. We...
We haven’t 
decided where 
to go on holiday, 
but we...
Laura hasn’t 
answered my 
texts. She...
Start
Finish
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 249@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
249
11C  COMMUNICATIVE  So do I!
I love 
. (a kind of food or drink)
I wouldn’t like to 
. (an activity)
I can’t 
 very well. (a skill)
Who else?
I’m a big fan of 
. (an actor / actress)
I often watch 
. (a TV programme)
I haven’t been to 
. (a city or country)
Who else?
I’m really good at 
. (an activity)
I didn’t go out last 
. (a day of the week)
I’ve always wanted to try 
. (an activity)
Who else?
I can’t play 
. (a musical instrument)
I like reading 
. (a kind of book / magazine)
I’d like to go to 
. (a country)
Who else?
I haven’t seen 
. (a famous film)
I can 
 very fast. (an action)
I’m not interested in 
. (a sport)
Who else?
I went to 
 last weekend. (a place)
I don’t like travelling by 
. (a kind of 
transport)
I’m going to have 
 for dinner today.  
(a kind of food)
Who else?
 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 250@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
250
12A  COMMUNICATIVE  What had happened?
1
I left the house in a hurry, and when I got to the airport, I suddenly remembered 
that…
2
I was angry with my husband / wife because…
3
When I looked at my phone, I realized that…
4
I couldn’t read the menu because…
5
I didn’t do well in my exam because…
6
I couldn’t use my credit card because…
7
The burglars got into our house while we were on holiday because we…
8
The police got to the bank very quickly, but…
9
My dad was very happy when he arrived because his team…
10
I went back to the shop to buy you that shirt you liked, but…
11
When we got to Joe and Hannah’s house, we were very surprised because they…
12
We decided not to go to the London Eye that day because…
13
I was incredibly tired that day because I…
14
The moment I pressed ‘send’ I realized that…
15
When I saw Mary at the school reunion, I didn’t recognize her because she…
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 251@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
251
12B  COMMUNICATIVE  The celebrity interview
	
Imagine that you are a famous person (e.g. an actor, musician, etc.). You are going to be interviewed 
on TV. Look at the questions. Try to imagine how the famous person you chose would answer.
1	 Where are you living at the moment?
2	 What countries have you been to?
3	 What’s the most interesting thing you’ve ever done?
4	 What’s the most expensive thing  
you’ve ever bought?
5	 What do you like doing in your free time?
6	 What are you going to do next?
7	 What do you like best about your career?
8	 What are you preparing for at the moment?
9	 What’s your ambition?
10	 What do you do to relax?
	
Tell B who you are. Now answer B’s questions.
	
Ask B your questions and write down his / her answers.
	
Now change partners. Tell them about B’s answers and listen to theirs.
aa
b
I’m Katy Perry.
Hi, Katy! Thank you for agreeing to this interview.
c
d
Katy Perry said that what she liked best about her 
career was travelling around the world.
	
Imagine that you are a famous person (e.g. an actor, musician, etc.). You are going to be interviewed 
on TV. Look at the questions. Try to imagine how the famous person you chose would answer.
1	 Where are you living at the moment?
2	 What countries have you been to?
3	 What’s the most interesting thing you’ve ever done?
4	 What’s the most expensive thing you’ve 
ever bought?
5	 What do you like doing in your free time?
6	 What are you going to do next?
7	 What do you like best about your career?
8	 What are you preparing for at the moment?
9	 What’s your ambition?
10	 What do you do to relax?
	
Ask A your questions and write down his / her answers.
	
Tell A who you are. Now answer A’s questions.
	
Now change partners. Tell them about A’s answers and listen to theirs.
aa
b
I’m Ryan Gosling.
Hi, Ryan! Thank you for agreeing to this interview.
c
d
Ryan Gosling said that what he liked best about his 
career was travelling around the world.
Student A
Student B
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 252@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
252
12C  COMMUNICATIVE  Hollywood quiz
Student A
Student B
1	 Which fictional family 
 at 
4 Privet Drive? (live)
	
a The Dursleys    b The Griffins    c The Simpsons
2	 In which film series 
 ‘May the 
force be with you’? (an actor / say)
	
a Star Trek    b Back to the Future    c Star Wars
3	 How many Oscars 
 in his 
life? (Walt Disney / win)
	
a 2    b 12    c 22
4	 Who 
 in all the Marvel superhero films? (appear)
	
a Robert Downey Jr	 b Stan Lee    c Chris Evans
5	 What year 
 to in Back to the Future? (Marty McFly / go)
	
a 1955    b 1975    c 1985
6	 In which film 
 in love with Maria? (Tony / fall)
	
a West Side Story    b PS: I Love You    c Love Actually
7	 Who 
 Indiana Jones’ father in Indiana Jones and the  
Last Crusade? (play)
	
a Michael Caine    b Michael Douglas    c Sean Connery
8	 What superpower 
? (Batman / have)
	
a immortality    b none    c invisibility
1	 In which country 
 The Lord  
of the Rings trilogy? (Peter Jackson / film)
	
a England    b Australia    c New Zealand
2	 Which of these actors 
 in  
most of Hitchcock’s films? (appear)
	
a Alfred Hitchcock    b James Stewart    c Cary Grant
3	 How much 
?  
(an Oscar / weigh)
	
a 2.5 kilos    b 4 kilos    c 7 kilos
4	 Which actor 
 James Bond in more films? (play)
	
a Sean Connery    b Roger Moore    c Pierce Brosnan
5	 Which series of films 
 more Oscars? (win)
	
a The Lord of the Rings    b Star Wars    c The Godfather
6	 Which actress 
 the part of Belle in the Disney film Beauty and 
the Beast? (play)
	
a Scarlett Johansson    b Natalie Portman    c Emma Watson
7	 In which film 
 ‘Hasta la vista, baby’? (Arnold Schwarzenegger / say)
	
a Terminator 2    b The Terminator    c Terminator 3
8	 Who 
 Alien? (direct)
	
a Ridley Scott    b Steven Spielberg    c JJ Abrams
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 253@@
253
1B	Describing people
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts look at photos and definitions and complete the missing 
words. Copy one sheet per pair or one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Appearance and personality adjectives
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Tell Sts to read the 
definitions, look at the photos and write as many words as 
they can within a time limit. The lines indicate how many 
letters are in each word. Set the time limit.
•	 The first pair to complete all the words correctly is the 
winner. Check answers.
1 moustache   2 funny   3 slim   4 bald   5 mean    
6 medium-height   7 blonde   8 beard   9 clever    
10 hard-working   11 overweight   12 curly   13 dark    
14 quiet   15 nice
•	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the words 
on the right and say the words.
1C	Things you wear
A pairwork brainstorm activity
Sts think of one, two, or three words connected to clothes. 
Copy one sheet per pair or one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Clothes
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Don’t go through 
all the questions, but demonstrate the activity, eliciting 
the answer to the first question (gloves).
•	 Set a time limit, and tell Sts to start. Give more time if you 
can see that Sts need it. 
•	 When the time limit is up, check answers and find out 
which pair has the most correct answers.
1 gloves   2 jumper   3 hat, cap   4 sandals, boots, shoes, socks   
5 trousers, jeans   6 scarf, tie   7 leggings, tights   8 necklace, 
bracelet, ring   9 T-shirt, shorts, trainers, tracksuit   10 hat, 
jacket, sweater   
•	 Now focus on Activation and point out the example. 
Give Sts time to write five sentences about what they are 
wearing. Make sure they include colours. 
•	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to read their 
sentences to each other.
2A	Holidays
A gapfill activity
Sts complete three texts connected to holidays. Copy one 
sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Holiday verbs and phrases
•	 Give out the sheets. Tell Sts to complete the texts with an 
appropriate word or verb in the correct form. Point out 
that the first letter(s) is given to help them.
•	 Set a time limit for Sts to complete the task.
•	 Get Sts to compare with a partner and then check 
answers.
Story 1	 1 away   2 go   3 stay   4 book   5 camping
Story 2	 1 skiing   2 hired   3 rent   4 had
Story 3	 1 sightseeing   2 swimming   3 sunbathe    
4 spend   5 take
•	 Now focus on Activation and give Sts time to write about 
their last holiday.
•	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to read their texts to 
each other. You could get some Sts to read their text in 
front of the class.
2B	Prepositions at, in, on
A preposition gapfill activity
Sts complete sentences which have missing prepositions. 
Copy one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Prepositions of time and place
•	 Give out the sheets. Tell Sts to write the correct 
preposition in the PREPOSITION column. They should 
complete as many sentences as they can. Set a time limit.
•	 Check answers.
1 in  2 in   3 at   4 at   5 on   6 in   7 in   8 on   9 at   10 in   11 at    
12 in   13 on   14 at   15 at   16 on   17 at   18 in   19 at   20 in
•	 Now focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the 
PREPOSITION column and say the sentences.
Vocabulary activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 254@@
254
4B	Shopping
A crossword puzzle activity
Sts read clues and complete the crossword. Copy one sheet 
per student or one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Shopping and online shopping
•	 Explain to Sts that they are going to complete a 
crossword. Make sure Sts understand across and down.
•	 Either give each student a sheet or put Sts in pairs and 
give each pair a sheet. Tell Sts to write the words in the 
crossword. Point out that the first one (shelf) has been 
done for them. 
•	 Give Sts time to complete the crossword.
•	 Check answers.
ACROSS   3 basket   8 shop assistant   10 size   11 receipt    
12 checkout   13 account   14 customer
DOWN   1 suit   2 fit   5 trolley   6 changing room   7 sales 
9 take...back
•	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the 
crossword and read the clues. Can they remember the 
answers? You could put Sts in pairs. A reads a clue from 
the sheet and B (not looking at the sheet) guesses the 
word. Make sure they swap roles.
5B	Describing a town or city
A gapfill activity
Sts read the blog posts and complete the missing words. 
Copy one sheet per student or one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Adjectives and nouns connected to towns and cities
•	 Either give each student a sheet or put Sts in pairs and 
give each pair a sheet. Tell Sts to complete the blog posts 
with the correct words. The first letter is given and the 
lines indicate how many letters are in each word. Set  
a time limit.
•	 Check answers.
Valencia:   1 coast   2 medium-sized   3 crowded   4 noisy    
5 historic   6 town hall   7 Cathedral 
Shanghai:   8 south   9 modern   10 Temple   11 Museum    
12 exciting   13 market   14 harbour
St Petersburg:   15 Palace   16 lake   17 department store    
18 centre   19 Bridge
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs to discuss 
the questions.
•	 With a show of hands, find out which city Sts would most 
like to visit. Ask a few Sts to say why.
3B	What’s the preposition?
An error correction activity
Sts correct preposition mistakes. Copy one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Prepositions
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Point out that the 
first two have been done for them.
•	 Sts continue in pairs. Check answers.
  3	 ✓
  4	 ✓
  5	 ✗ Can you ask the teacher for...?
  6	 ✗ When I arrive at...
  7	 ✓
  8	 ✓
  9	 ✗ He worries about...
10	 ✗ Does this coat belong to...?
11	 ✓
12	 ✗ How often do you speak to...?
13	 ✗ Maria’s invited me to...
14	 ✗ She’s fallen in love with...
15	 ✗ He depends on...
•	 Now focus on Activation and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. arguments. Give Sts time to complete the 
five sentences.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences to 
each other. Find out if any pairs completed a sentence in 
the same way.
4A	Housework, make or do?
A gapfill revision activity
Sts complete sentences with the correct form of the verb. 
Copy one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Housework phrases, make or do
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Make sure Sts 
know they have to use the right form of the verb. Elicit 
the answer to 1 (make).
•	 Tell Sts to complete as many sentences as they can. 
•	 Check answers.
1 make   2 puts   3 doing   4 does   5 made   6 do   7 lay   8 do    
9 made   10 doing   11 make   12 making   13 tidy   14 put / 
take   15 did   16 pick   17 make   18 do  19 do   20 made
•	 Now focus on Activation and give Sts time to write their 
sentences. 
•	 Finally, put Sts in pairs and get them to read their 
sentences to each other.
•	 Find out if any Sts do or don’t do the same housework  
jobs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 255@@
255
8A	get
A sentence completion activity
Sts complete sentences with the correct form of get and  
a word from the list. Copy one sheet per student or one 
sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
get + its different collocations, e.g. get divorced, get 
colder, get a job, get up, get home, get a text message
•	 Give out the sheets. In pairs or individually, Sts choose the 
correct word from the list and the correct form of get to 
complete the sentences.
•	 If Sts did the activity individually, get them to compare 
answers.
•	 Check answers.
1 get fit   2 got divorced   3 get...present   4 get home    
5 getting up   6 get tickets   7 get lost   8 get married    
9 get on   10 get...nervous   11 Get better   12 get...newspaper    
13 gets colder   14 get to   15 getting worse   16 get...job    
17 got...message   18 gets...angry
•	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to discuss the 
questions in pairs.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
8B	Confusing verbs
A vocabulary discrimination activity
Sts circle the correct verb. Copy one sheet per student or 
one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Verbs with similar meanings
•	 Either give each student a sheet or put Sts in pairs and 
give each pair a sheet. Give Sts time to circle the verbs.
•	 If Sts did the activity individually, get them to compare 
answers.
•	 Check answers.
1 won   2 wearing   3 met   4 watching   5 bring   6 looks like    
7 found   8 telling   9 take   10 lend   11 hope   12 missed    
13 known   14 looking at   15 earn   16 look   17 looking for    
18 carrying   19 said   20 waiting   21 borrow   22 lose    
23 hear   24 expect
•	 Now focus on Activation and give Sts time to write their 
six sentences. 
•	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read their sentences to 
each other.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6A	Opposite verbs
A memory activity
Sts read the sentences and write the opposite of the verb in 
bold. Copy one sheet per student or one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
High frequency verbs and their opposites
•	 Either give each student a sheet or put Sts in pairs and 
give each pair a sheet. Elicit the answer to 1 (lent...to).  
Point out that the verb must be in the correct form.
•	 Give Sts time to complete the task.
•	 Check answers.
1 lent...to   2 failed   3 lose   4 pull   5 forgets   6 got / received...
from   7 arrive   8 finishes   9 teach   10 sell   11 Turn on   12 lost  
13 fixing   14 miss   15 drop...off   16 upload
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs to test 
each other. A reads a sentence or just says a verb from 
the sheet to B, who (not looking at the sheet) says the 
opposite verb. Make sure they swap roles.
7B	Verbs + infinitive to and verbs 
+ -ing 
A sentence completion activity 
Sts complete the sentences in conversations with the 
correct form of the verb. Copy one sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
Verbs + infinitive with to and verbs + -ing: like, want, etc.
•	 Give out the sheets. Tell Sts to complete the conversations 
with the verbs from the list. Point out that these verbs are 
either followed by an infinitive or a gerund. Point out that 
the first one (started) has been done for them.
•	 Give Sts time to complete the task.
•	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2 stop   3 want   4 like   5 try   6 mind   7 Remember   8 forget    
9 promise   10 spend   11 feel like   12 need   13 hoping    
14 offer   15 go on   16 wants
•	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to practise the 
conversations in pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 256@@
256
10B	Phrasal verbs
A vocabulary discrimination activity
Sts circle the correct phrasal verb. Copy one sheet per 
student or one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Phrasal verbs
•	 Either give each student a sheet or put Sts in pairs and 
give each pair a sheet. Point out that the first one (look 
after) has been done for them. Set a time limit for Sts to 
circle the phrasal verbs.
•	 If they did the activity individually, get them to compare 
answers with a partner. 
•	 Check answers. 
2 set off   3 throw it away   4 turn the music down   5 give it up 
6 fill in   7 try it on   8 run out of   9 look after    
10 looking forward to   11 turn up   12 find out   13 go off    
14 go on   15 put on   16 send it back   17 drop you off    
18 write down   19 looking for   20 looked it up
•	 Now focus on Activation and give Sts time to think of 
their answers.
•	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other their 
answers.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
9A	Animal quiz
A pairwork vocabulary quiz
Sts read a series of definitions and write the words. Copy 
one sheet per student or one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Animals
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Tell Sts that they 
have to write as many words as they can. Set a time limit.
•	 Check answers.
1 kangaroo   2 bee   3 dolphin   4 camel   5 rabbit   6 jellyfish    
7 giraffe   8 cows / goats   9 sheep   10 mosquito   11 mouse    
12 crocodile   13 elephant   14 snake  15 horse   16 lion    
17 tiger   18 pig   19 bull   20 bat
•	 Now focus on Activation and get them to cover the 
ANIMAL column and read the definitions. They can test 
themselves or a partner.
10A	Expressing movement
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts race to think of 1, 2, or 3 answers to questions containing 
a preposition of movement. Copy one sheet per student or 
one sheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
Expressing movement
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the sheets. Tell Sts to read the 
questions and write down the answers. Set a time limit, 
but give Sts more time if you see they need it.
•	 Check answers.
Possible answers
  1	 river, swimming pool
  2	 stairs, hill, mountain
  3	 a road, a room
  4	 tennis, badminton, volleyball
  5	 a lipstick, keys, phone
  6	 a (white) rabbit
  7	 cinema, theatre
  8	 bus, train
  9	 marathon
10	tree, umbrella
11	The London Eye, St Paul’s Cathedral
12	waiter, driver
13	Formula 1, athletics
14	monkey, cat, bear
15	chess
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs. A asks  
a question about something on the sheet to B, who  
(not looking at the sheet) answers. Elicit an example.  
Make sure they swap roles.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 257@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
257
1B  VOCABULARY  Describing people
	
Work with a partner. Look at the pictures and the definitions. Write the words.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the words on the right and look at the pictures and the definitions.  
How many words can you remember?
1	 picture 1	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2	 a person who can make other  
people laugh	
 
 
 
 
 
3	 another way of saying thin	
 
 
 
 
4	 picture 2	
 
 
 
 
5	 an adjective to describe someone  
who doesn’t like spending money	
 
 
 
 
6	 not tall, not short	
 
 
 
 
 
 – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7	 another word for fair	
 
 
 
 
 
 
8	 picture 3	
 
 
 
 
 
9	 a synonym of intelligent	
 
 
 
 
 
 
10	 the opposite of lazy	
 
 
 
 – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11	 heavier than is healthy	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12	 picture 4	
 
 
 
 
 (hair)
13	 the opposite of light brown hair	
 
 
 
 
14	 somebody who doesn’t talk a lot	
 
 
 
 
 
15	 a person who’s friendly and kind	
 
 
 
 
1
2
3
4
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 258@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
258
1C  VOCABULARY  Things you wear
1	 one  thing you wear on your hands in winter
	
	
2	 one  synonym for sweater
	
	
3	 two  things you can wear on your head
	
	
 
	
	
4	 two  things you wear on your feet
	
	
	
	
5	 two  things which men or women wear on their legs
	
	
	
	
6	 two  accessories you can wear around your neck
	
	
	
	
7	 two  things which women wear on their legs under a skirt or dress
	
	
	
	
8	 three  pieces of jewellery
	
	
	
	
	
	
9	 three  things you wear to do sport
	
	
	
	
	
	
10	 three  things you can wear if you’re cold
	
	
	
	
	
	
Can you think of...?
ACTIVATION
Write down five things you are wearing with their colours.
 
I’m wearing a blue shirt.
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 259@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
259
2A  VOCABULARY  Holidays
	
Complete the texts with one word in each gap. 
ACTIVATION
Write a short text describing your last holiday.
 I love going 1 a 
 for the 
weekend with my friends. We usually  
2 g 
 by car to a town or  
village and 3 st 
 in a hotel.  
We don’t have much money, so we always  
4 b 
 our hotel months 
before, as sometimes it’s cheaper that way. 
We never go 5 c 
 because 
we want to be comfortable, and we don’t 
like sleeping in tents.
 
Last winter, my best friend and I decided  
to go 1 sk 
 in the  
Alps. I didn’t have any skis, so I  
2 h 
 some when I got  
there. We decided to 3 r 
  
a small apartment near the ski slopes, and 
we 4 h 
 a very good time. 
We’ll definitely go back there next year.
 If you like the beach and big cities, go 
to Barcelona! In the mornings, you can  
go 1 s 
 and see all  
the museums and monuments.  
In the afternoons, you can go  
2 sw 
 in the sea or  
simply 3 s 
 on the beach. 
You don’t have to 4 sp 
  
a lot of money as everything is very cheap. 
Make sure you 5 t 
 a lot  
of photos!
1
2
3
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 260@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
260
2B  VOCABULARY  Prepositions at, in, on
	
Complete each sentence with the correct preposition. Write in the PREPOSITION column.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the PREPOSITION column and say the sentences.  
Can you remember the prepositions?
1	 The children are playing 
 the park.	
2	 I love sunbathing 
 the garden.	
3	 He’s studying physics 
 university.	
4	 Let’s meet 
 the bus stop.	
5	 Look! That’s a Picasso 
 the wall.	
6	 The course starts 
 May.	
7	 My grandfather died 
 2012.	
8	 I was born 
 25th October.	
9	 We have lunch 
 work.	
10	 Do you go skiing 
 winter?	
11	 Will you be 
 home tonight?	
12	 Do you have a big meal 
 the evening?	
13	 My English classes are 
 Tuesdays and Thursdays.	
14	 My son usually does his homework 
 night.	
15	 The flight leaves 
 7.00 a.m.	
16	 They got married 
 Valentine’s Day. How romantic!	
17	 We usually go away 
 Christmas.	
18	 I think you left your bag 
 the kitchen.	
19	 I’m always very busy 
 the weekend.	
20	 I live 
 the centre of London.	
PREPOSITION
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 261@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
261
3B  VOCABULARY  What’s the preposition?
	
Are the prepositions in bold right (✓) or wrong (✗)? Correct the wrong ones.
1	 What time did your plane arrive in Madrid?	 	
	
2	 It’s your birthday. I’ll pay to dinner tonight.	 	
	
3	 Sally waited 30 minutes for the bus.	 	
 	
	
4	 I completely agree with you. 		
	
	
	
5	 Can you ask the teacher to a photocopy? 	
	
	
6	 When I arrived to the museum, it was closed. 	
	
7	 Do you spend a lot of money on clothes?	
	
	
8	 She writes to him every day. 	 	
	
	
	
9	 He worries with not passing the exam.	
	
	
10	 Does this coat belong with you?	
	
	
	
11	 I can’t think about anybody except Pete at the moment! 	
12	 How often do you speak at your sister on Skype? 	
	
13	 Maria’s invited me for a concert, but I don’t want to go. 	
14	 She’s fallen in love to her sister’s boyfriend!	 	
	
15	 Sometimes I walk to work, but it depends on the weather.	
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with a preposition and your own ideas.
Before going on holiday, I often worry...about finishing all of my work.
When we have family arguments, I usually agree...
We were really happy when we arrived...
If I don’t like the food in a restaurant, I usually speak...
How I usually spend my holiday depends...
✓
for
✗
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 262@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
262
4A  VOCABULARY  Housework, make or do?
	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of a verb (e.g. put, do, make).
1	 Shhh, don’t 
 a noise. The baby’s asleep.
2	 She’s very untidy. She never 
 away her clothes.
3	 I don’t like 
 the ironing.
4	 My mother 
 the washing on 
Mondays.
5	 When I was little, I always 
 my 
bed before I went to school.
6	 Can you 
 the shopping for 
me, please?
7	 Please 
 the table! We’re 
eating in five minutes.
8	 How often do you 
 exercise?
9	 My children have 
 a lot of friends at their new school.
10	 I broke a glass while I was 
 the washing-up.
11	 Can I use your phone? I need to 
 a call. 
12	 Do you like 
 plans for the future?
13	 Please 
 your room. There are books and clothes all over the floor.
14	 It’s my job to 
 out the rubbish at night.
15	 When was the last time you 
 an exam?
16	 You’ve left your towel on the floor. Please 
 it up.
17	 I don’t have time to 
 lunch. Let’s eat out.
18	 Did you 
 anything exciting at the weekend?
19	 Please can you 
 exercise 1 on page 46?
20	 I 
 the mistake of telling her my secret.
ACTIVATION
Write six sentences about:
•	
one housework task you do at home
•	
two housework tasks you never do
•	
three things you often make
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 263@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
263
4B  VOCABULARY  Shopping
	
Look at the clues and complete the crossword. You can write two words if you need to, with no spaces.
DOWN 
1	 Those shoes really 
 you!  
They look great. 
2	 These trousers don’t 
 me. 
They’re too big.
4	 ‘Excuse me, where’s the cereal?’ ‘It’s on 
the 
.’
5	 It has four wheels and you push it in the 
supermarket.
6	 You go into the 
 
 
to try things on.
7	 When shops reduce the price of items.
9	 If you’re not happy with something you 
bought, you 
 it 
 
to the shop.
ACROSS 
3	 You put things you want to buy in it when 
you shop online or in a supermarket.
8	 A person who helps you in a shop when you 
want to buy something.
10	 If a T-shirt is too big or too small for you, it’s 
not your 
.
11	 The piece of paper which they give you in a 
shop after you pay for something. 
12	 When you’re ready to pay for your items 
online you proceed to 
.
13	 If you want to buy things online, you usually 
have to create an 
 with your 
personal details.
14	 The person who buys things in a shop.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the crossword and look at the clues again. Can you remember the answers?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
S
H
E
L
F
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 264@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
264
5B  VOCABULARY  Describing a town or city
	
Complete the blog posts with the missing words. The first letters are given.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Which of the three cities would you like to visit most? Why?
Travelling Jo
Travelling Jo
Join | Login | Contact | Blog | Search
About me
Hi! My name’s Jo. I love travelling and discovering new places! I created my blog to share 
all my adventures with you. I hope you enjoy reading about all the cities I visit! xxx
VALENCIA  is a city on the east 1 c 
 
 
 
 of Spain. It’s a 
2m 
 
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 
 city. It isn’t as big as Madrid or Barcelona, 
but it isn’t small. It has a festival called Fallas, which takes place in March. During Fallas, 
Valencia is very 3cr 
 
 
 
 
 because lots of people visit the city. It’s also very 
4n 
 
 
 
 because there’s music and fireworks in the street until very late at night. 
Valencia has many new buildings, but it has some 5h 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 buildings 
in the city centre, for example, the post office and the 6t 
 
 
 h 
 
  
.  
It has some really old religious buildings, too! There are some beautiful churches, especially 
the 7C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.
SHANGHAI  is a very large city in China. It’s 1,200 km 1s 
 
 
 
 of  
Beijing on the Yangtze river. Shanghai’s a really 2m 
 
 
 
 
 city with lots  
of very tall buildings. It has many beautiful things to see, for example, the City God  
3T
 
 
 
 
 and the Yu Yuan Gardens. There is also the China Art  
4M 
 
 
 
 
, which is the largest in Asia. Shanghai is an  
5e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 city – there are so many things happening and so much 
to see… and eat! Go to an outdoor 6m 
 
 
 
 
 and try some of the delicious 
street food, like noodles, rice balls, and pancakes. For the best views in the city, take a walk 
around the beautiful 7h 
 
 
 
 
 
 and enjoy looking at the boats and the 
lovely tall buildings!
ST PETERSBURG  is one of the largest cities in Russia. Apart from the world-
famous Hermitage Museum, it has many interesting things to see. If you want to visit 
an amazing building, go to see Gatchina 1P
 
 
 
 
, which was a summer 
residence for the Russian tsars. It’s full of interesting art, and you can then walk around 
Gatchina Park and enjoy the 2l 
 
 
 and its beautiful clear water. When you get 
back to St Petersburg, you can go shopping, for souvenirs in Svetlanovsky  
3d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 st
 
 
. If you want more shopping, you 
can visit the Galleria shopping 4c 
 
 
 
 
, which also has a cinema and a 
lot of different restaurants. To complete a fabulous day, go for a walk to the mysterious 
Egyptian 5Br 
 
 
 
 over the Fontanka river and take photos of the amazing 
Egyptian statues on it!
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 265@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
265
6A  VOCABULARY  Opposite verbs
	
In each sentence, change the verb in bold to the opposite verb in the same form.  
Write in the OPPOSITE column.
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the sentences and look at the OPPOSITE column.  
How many verbs can you remember from the sentences?
1	 Have you ever borrowed money from a friend?	
2	 I passed my final exams last week.	
3	 Do you think Liverpool are going to win the match?	
4	 You need to push the door to open it.	
5	 Emma always remembers people’s names.	
6	 I sent an email to my sister yesterday.	
7	 What time does the plane leave?	
8	 The concert starts at 9.00 p.m.	
9	 This summer I’m going to learn French in Paris.	
10	 eBay’s a good website if you want to buy something.	
11	 Turn off your computer!	
12	 I found my car keys in the garden.	
13	 Maria’s very good at breaking things.	
14	 Do you think I’ll catch the five o’clock train if I leave now?	
15	 I’ll pick Tom up at the airport at six o’clock.	
16	 This video is taking ages to download.	
OPPOSITE
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 266@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
266
7B  VOCABULARY  Verbs + infinitive to and verbs + -ing
	
Complete the conversations using the correct form of the verbs in the list.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Practise the conversations.
like  mind  start  stop  try  want
Amy 	 I 1started going to the gym last week. I hate it!
Janet	 You have to 2 
 being negative! Do you  
3
 me to go with you?
Amy 	
The problem is I don’t 4
 doing exercise  
there. It’s really boring!
Janet 	 I agree that gyms are boring! Why don’t we  
5
 to do something different together?  
There’s a swimming pool near my house…
Amy	
Oh, that’s a good idea! I don’t 6
 swimming.
1
go on  hope  need  offer  want
Harry	 I really 12
 to make some money this  
summer. I’m 13
 to go on a trip around  
Europe before I go to university next year.
Sam	
Wow. What kind of job are you thinking of?
Harry	 Well, I thought I could 14
 to walk dogs  
for people. And I sometimes help a friend with his  
bar in the evenings. I can probably 15
  
doing that for the summer. But I need another  
small job…
Sam	
I have an idea! My dad really 16
 to  
learn Italian. He loves the language, and they  
often go there on holiday. You can speak Italian,  
right? You could teach him for a couple of hours  
every day. 
Harry	 That’s a great idea! 
3
feel like  forget  promise  remember  spend
Mother	
OK, I’m leaving. 7
 to load the 
dishwasher, please.
Boy	
Yes, Mum.
Mother	
And don’t 8
 to call me if 
anything happens. And you 9
 
to take out the rubbish, don’t you?
Girl	
Yes, Mum!
Mother	
And you won’t 10
 all evening 
playing video games, right?
Boy	
No, Mum.
Mother	
You know, maybe I don’t 11
 
going to this party…
Boy / Girl	 MUM!
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 267@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
267
8A  VOCABULARY  get
	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of get and a word from the list.
angry  better  colder  divorced  fit  home  job  lost  married    
message  nervous  newspaper  on  present  tickets  to  up  worse
1	 What’s the best way to 
? Yoga or aerobics?
2	 They were married for 20 years, but they 
 last year.
3	 It’s Diana’s birthday next week. Shall we 
 her a 
?
4	 How long does it take you to 
 after work?
5	 I don’t like 
 early on Sunday mornings.
6	 You need to 
 for the concert soon. They say it’s going to sell out quickly.
7	 We’ve been to your house before, so we won’t 
.
8	 In the UK, you can 
 in a church or in a registry office.
9	 Do you 
 well with your parents?
10	 Most people 
 really 
 before doing an exam.
11	
 soon! And don’t come back to work till you feel 100%.
12	 I didn’t 
 a 
 yesterday, so I read the news online.
13	 It 
 after 6 p.m. Temperatures go down to –10ºC.
14	 What time do you usually 
 school?
15	 I think the unemployment situation in my country is 
 and not better.
16	 How did the interview go? Did you 
 the 
?
17	 I 
 a 
 from Pete to say he’s going to be late.
18	 Lucy 
 very 
 when people park in her parking space.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Can you think of a time when…?
•	
you got angry with a friend	
•	
you got a present you didn’t like
•	
you got to school / work really late
•	
you got lost 
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 268@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
268
8B  VOCABULARY  Confusing verbs
	
Circle the correct verb to complete each sentence.
1	 Have you ever won / earned a prize or cup for something?
2	 I love those shoes you’re wearing / carrying.
3	 Mark and Charlotte met / knew at a party last year.
4	 Can you help me or are you watching / looking at the news on TV?
5	 Did you bring / take me anything back from New York?
6	 She looks / looks like her mother. They have the same eyes.
7	 Alba’s looked for / found a new job. She starts next week.
8	 I’m not very good at saying / telling jokes.
9	 It’s going to rain later, so I’ll bring / take an umbrella with me.
10	 Would you lend / borrow a lot of money to a good friend?
11	 I hope / wait the weather is good tomorrow.
12	 We got to the airport late, so we missed / lost the plane.
13	 I’ve known / met my best friend for ten years.
14	 Do you like watching / looking at photos of yourself?
15	 How much money do you win / earn a month?
16	 You look / look like really sad. What’s wrong?
17	 Can you help me? I’m looking for / finding my keys.
18	 She’s wearing / carrying a really heavy bag.
19	 Nicky said / told that she was sorry for what happened.
20	 Do you mind hoping / waiting for a few minutes? I’m not ready yet.
21	 We had to lend / borrow money from the bank to buy our new car.
22	 I always miss / lose my glasses.
23	 Did you listen to / hear that noise? I think it was a car crash.
24	 Paul is always late. I expect / hope he’ll be late again today.
ACTIVATION
Write six true sentences about you using the verbs in the list.
borrow    earn    hope    lend    wait    win
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 269@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
269
9A  VOCABULARY  Animal quiz
ACTIVATION
Test your memory. Cover the ANIMAL column and look at the definitions 1–20.  
Can you remember the animals?
	
Read the definitions and write the animals in the ANIMAL column.
1	 This animal lives in Australia and carries its baby in a pocket.
2	 It’s an insect which makes honey. It’s yellow and black.
3	 This animal lives in the sea and is very clever.
4	 It’s an animal which can live for two weeks with no water.
5	 The cartoon character Bugs Bunny is one of these.
6	 They’re soft round sea animals. If one touches you, it really hurts!
7	 This animal has a very long neck and lives in Africa.
8	 These animals give milk which people drink.
9	 This animal has a very warm, white coat.
10	 It’s a very small insect which bites people at night.
11	 The plural of this animal is mice.
12	 This animal lives in rivers. It’s green or grey and has a lot of teeth.
13	 It’s a very big, grey animal from Africa or India.
14	 This animal is a long, thin reptile, and many people are scared of it.
15	 People rode this animal before they had cars.
16	 This animal is ‘the king of the jungle’.
17	 It’s a very big, orange and black cat.
18	 This animal lives on a farm and has a curly tail.
19	 People say this animal will attack you if you’re wearing something red.
20	 This animal comes out at night. It can fly, but it isn’t a bird.
ANIMAL
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 270@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
270
10A  VOCABULARY  Expressing movement
ACTIVATION
Test your partner.
 
Can you remember...?
	
Work with a partner. Read the questions and write the words.
Can you think of...?
1	
 two  things you can swim across
	
	
 
  
2	
 two  things you can go up
	
	
 
  
3	
 two  places you can walk across
	
	
 
  
4	
 three  sports where you hit something over a net
	
	
 
 
 
5	
 three  objects you sometimes put into your pocket
	
	
 
 
 
6	
 something  a magician takes out of a hat
	
	
 
7	
 two  places you can’t go into without a ticket
	
	
 
  
8	
 two  forms of transport you can get on or get off
	
	
 
  
9	
 one  Olympic sport where you run around a city
	
	
  
 
10	
 two  things you can stand under if it’s raining
	
	
 
 
 
11	
 two  things you might see if you fly over London
	
	
 
  
 
12	
 two  jobs where people take things from one place to another
	
	
 
  
 
13	
 two  sports where you go round and round a track
	
	
 
  
 
14	
 two  animals which can climb up trees
	
	
 
  
 
15	
 one  game where you move pieces across a board
	
	
  
© Copyright Oxford University Press

@@PAGE 271@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Pre-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2019
271
10B  VOCABULARY  Phrasal verbs
	
Circle the correct phrasal verb to complete each sentence.
1	 Can you look after our cat? We’re going away / going out.
2	 We have to be over / set off at 6.00 if we want to get to the cinema in time.
3	 I really can’t cook. I tried to make a cake last week, but we had to throw it away / give it up.
4	 Could you turn the music down / turn the music up? I’m trying to sleep!
5	 I think I drink too much coffee. I should give it up / look it up.
6	 To get a passport you have to write down / fill in two forms.
7	 A  That’s a really nice shirt.
	
	 B  They have it in your size. Why don’t you turn it on / try it on?
8	 Could you go to the supermarket? We’ve run out of / put on eggs and oil.
9	 I had to look for / look after my mother last week because she was ill.
10	 A  When’s your birthday?
	
	 B  Next Saturday! I’m really looking forward to / looking round it because I’m having a big party.
11	 I can’t hear what they’re saying on the news! Could you turn up / turn off the volume?
12	 Can you send me a link to that travel blog? I want to find out / set off things to do in Valencia.
13	 The alarm will go off / be over at 7.00 tomorrow morning because I need to be at work by 8.00. 
Sorry!
14	 I don’t like this book very much, but Martin says I should go on / get off reading it because  
it gets better.
15	 It’s snowing! Are you going outside? You should put on / take off a warm jacket.
16	 I bought this skirt online, but I don’t like it. I think I’m going to give it back / send it back.
17	 Do you want to go home now? I’m leaving and I could drop you off / take you out on the way.
18	 I need to write down / look up his phone number or I’ll forget it!
19	 Nicola is looking for / looking up a new flat. She doesn’t like where she’s living now.
20	 I didn’t know how to pronounce ‘quiet’ until I looked it up / turned it up in the dictionary.
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Can you think of two things you can...?
•	
turn up or down
•	
run out of
•	
look after
•	
put on or take off
© Copyright Oxford University Press
