@@PAGE 1@@
English File
fourth
edition
Christina Latham-Koenig 
Clive Oxenden
Kate Chomacki
with Anna Lowy 
Krysia Mabbott
3
WITH TEACHER’S RESOURCE CENTRE 
Upper-intermediate
Teacher’s Guide
@@PAGE 2@@
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade  
mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2020
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published in 2020 
2024  2023  2022  2021  2020
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly 
permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford 
University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose  
this same condition on any acquirer
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for 
information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work
Photocopying
The Publisher grants permission for the photocopying of those pages marked 
‘photocopiable’ according to the following conditions. Individual purchasers 
may make copies for their own use or for use by classes that they teach. 
School purchasers may make copies for use by staff and students, but this 
permission does not extend to additional schools or branches
Under no circumstances may any part of this book be photocopied for resale
isbn: 978 0 19 403981 9
Printed in China
This book is printed on paper from certified and well-managed sources
acknowledgements
Back cover photograph: Oxford University Press building/David Fisher
The authors would like to thank all the teachers and students round the world 
whose feedback has helped us to shape English File.
The authors would also like to thank: all those at Oxford University Press (both 
in Oxford and around the world) and the design team who have contributed 
their skills and ideas to producing this course.
Finally very special thanks from Clive to Maria Angeles, Lucia, and Eric, and 
from Christina to Cristina, for all their support and encouragement. Christina 
would also like to thank her children Joaquin, Marco, and Krysia for their 
constant inspiration.
We would also like to thank the following for permission to reproduce the following 
photographs: Alamy pp.163 (Kiwi bird/Alamy Stock Photo), 172 (couple smiling/
PhotoAlto), 176 (police officer/Cultura Creative), 181 (Mont Blanc, Damiano 
Lavati), 195 (stethoscope/Michael Willis), 200 (black bear/FLPA), (rioting on 
the streets, Belfast/Michel Phillipot), (great white shark/Fuse), 206 (frightened 
couple/Aleksandr Davydov), 207 (fruit and vegetables/Image Source Plus), 
212 (Lake Como/Ingold Pompe 93), Astronaut Buzz Aldrin/NASA Archive), 
221 (woman eating chocolates/Blend Images); 227 (stack of newspapers/
Johnny Greig), Frasers Autographs p.193 (Leo Tolstoy, Shulz, Charles Dickens, 
Elijah Wood, Damien Hirst); Getty pp.161 (mother and daughter/Image 
Source), 163 (man in suit/Goodluz); Shutterstock 163 (man in suit/Goodluz), 
172 (smiling woman/dibrova, man), 180 (children in science lab), 181 (Moscow 
church), 193 (Wireimage/Britney Spears, Lindsay Lohan, PCA/Paris Hilton), 
(Barack Obama, Startraks Photo/Paris Hilton, Sipa Press/Usain Bolt, Peter 
Brooker/Paul McCartney, Ken McKay/Sean Connery), 200 (quicksand/Daniel 
Lee Nutley), (fire/Julia Senkevich), 206 (upset family/Iakov Filimonov), (sad 
boy/wavebreakmedia), (man and woman with laptop), 207 (muzzled dog/
lightpoet), 208 (microphone/beau lark), Shutterstock pp.207 (man driving car/
Minerva Studio, Swedish town), 218 (blood pressure monitor/romiri, pills/
Mega Pixel, plaster/Copter Pixel), 222 (tropical storm/Marc Serota); Oxford 
University Press pp.163 (penguin/Photodisc) 200 (Brazillian snake/Photodisc).
Illustrations by: Meiklejohn/Gavin Reece p.179; Roger Penwill pp.162, 166–168, 
182, 196–198; John Haslam pp.164, 171, 174–175; Bess Harding p.170.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 3@@
3
p.4
Syllabus checklist
p.8
Course overview
●
Introduction
●
What do Upper-intermediate students need?
●
For students
Student’s Book
Online Practice 
Workbook
●
For teachers
Teacher’s Guide
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Classroom Presentation Tool
Class audio
Video
p.12
Lesson plans
p.12
File 1 A–B	
Colloquial English  Episode 1
p.28
File 2 A–B	
1&2 Revise and Check
p.43
File 3 A–B	
Colloquial English  Episode 2
p.60
File 4 A–B	
3&4 Revise and Check
p.72
File 5 A–B	
Colloquial English  Episode 3
p.88
File 6 A–B	
5&6 Revise and Check
p.101
File 7 A–B	
Colloquial English  Episode 4
p.117
File 8 A–B	
7&8 Revise and Check
p.129
File 9 A–B	
Colloquial English  Episode 5
p.145
File 10 A–B	
9&10 Revise and Check
p.158
Photocopiable activities
p.158
Introduction
p.159
Grammar activity answers
p.161
Grammar activity masters
p.183
Communicative activity instructions
p.190
Communicative activity masters
p.214
Vocabulary activity instructions
p.218
Vocabulary activity masters
Contents
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 4@@
4
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
1
6
A	Questions and answers
question formation
working out meaning 
from context
intonation: showing 
interest
10
B	 It’s a mystery
auxiliary verbs, the…, the… 
+ comparatives
compound adjectives, 
modifiers
intonation and sentence 
rhythm
14
Colloquial English Episode 1  talking about…getting a job
2
16
A	Doctor, doctor!
present perfect simple 
and continuous
illnesses and injuries
/ʃ/, /dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /k/
20
B	 Act your age
using adjectives as nouns, 
adjective order
clothes and fashion
vowel sounds
24
Revise and Check 1&2
3
26
A	Fasten your seat belts
narrative tenses, past 
perfect continuous,
so / such…that
air travel
irregular past forms, 
sentence rhythm
30
B	 A really good ending?
the position of adverbs 
and adverbial phrases
adverbs and 
adverbial phrases
word stress and 
intonation
34
Colloquial English Episode 2  talking about…books
4
36
A	Stormy weather
future perfect and future 
continuous
the environment, weather
vowel sounds
40
B	 A risky business
zero and first conditionals, 
future time clauses
expressions with take
linked phrases
44
Revise and Check 3&4
5
46
A	I’m a survivor
unreal conditionals
feelings
word stress in three- or 
four-syllable adjectives
50
B	 Wish you were here
wish for present / future, 
wish for past regrets
expressing feelings with 
verbs or -ed / -ing adjectives
sentence rhythm
and intonation
54
Colloquial English Episode 3  talking about…waste
Syllabus checklist
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 5@@
5
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
politely refusing to answer a 
question, reacting to what 
someone says, tough questions
understanding the stages of 
a short interview
understanding questions, working 
out meaning from context
reacting to a story about something 
strange, You’re psychic, aren’t you?
following instructions
understanding facts vs theories
Doctor, doctor, health
understanding an anecdote
reading and summarizing
The joy of the age-gap friendship, 
managing discussions, politely 
disagreeing
understanding a discussion – opinions, 
explanations, examples
scanning several texts
Flight stories, telling an anecdote
understanding formal language 
in announcements
using a diagram to understand a text
reading habits
reading for pleasure
the environment,
climate change
understanding examples
scanning for examples
risk-taking
focusing on the main points
summarizing an argument
emergency situations
understanding mood and feelings
recognizing positive and
negative experiences
ways of talking about 
how we feel, wishes
understanding a poem
checking hypotheses
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 6@@
6
GRAMMAR
VOCABULARY
PRONUNCIATION
6
56
A	Night night
used to, be used to, 
get used to
sleep
/s/ and /z/
60
B	 Music to my ears
gerunds and infinitives
music
words from 
other languages
64
Revise and Check 5&6
7
66
A	Let’s not argue
past modals: must have, 
etc., would rather
verbs often confused
weak form of have
70
B	 It’s all an act
verbs of the senses
the body
silent consonants
74
Colloquial English Episode 6&7  talking about…performances
8
76
A	Cutting crime
the passive (all forms); 
have something done; 
it is said that…, he is 
thought to…, etc.
crime and punishment
the letter u
80
B	 Fake news
reporting verbs
the media
word stress
84
Revise and Check 7&8
9
86
A	Good business?
clauses of contrast 
and purpose
advertising, business
changing stress on 
nouns and verbs
90
B	 Super cities
uncountable and 
plural nouns
word building: prefixes 
and suffixes
word stress with prefixes 
and suffixes
94
Colloquial English Episode 8&9  talking about…advertising
10
96
A	Science fact, 
science-fiction
quantifiers: all, every, 
both, etc.
science
stress in word families
100
B	 Free speech
articles
collocation: word pairs
pausing and 
sentence stress
104
Revise and Check 9&10
106
Communication
115
Writing
122
Listening
132
Grammar Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 7@@
7
SPEAKING
LISTENING
READING
sleep
understanding reasons
using contextual clues
music
understanding a talk
scanning across several texts
role-playing an argument
understanding advice
identifying solutions to problems
Guess what it is, describing photos
understanding instructions
understanding the principle 
of an experiment
Beat the burglar, crime
using your knowledge of the 
world to help you understand 
formal advice
understanding truth and lies
Strange but true, the media
identifying the main 
events in news stories
using heading to understand 
the main point of a paragraph
Misleading ads, advertising, business 
understanding explanations
dealing with an authentic text
cities
understanding place names
identifying advantages 
and disadvantages
science, talking about 
future possibilities
understanding specific explanations
understanding the language 
of speculation
public speaking 
identifying dos and don’ts
understanding context
152
Vocabulary Bank
164
Appendix
165
Irregular verbs
166
Sound Bank
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 8@@
8
	 	
Course overview
Vocabulary
•	 Systematic expansion of topic-based lexical areas
•	 Increase the range and variety of their vocabulary
•	 Opportunities to put new vocabulary into practice
At this level, expanding students’ vocabulary is the most 
visible and motivating measure of their progress. Many 
lessons are linked to the Vocabulary Banks which help 
present and practise the vocabulary in class, give an audio 
model of each word, and provide a clear reference so 
students can revise and test themselves in their own time. 
Students can review the meaning and the pronunciation of 
new vocabulary on Online Practice, and find further practice 
in the Workbook.
Pronunciation
•	 ‘Fine-tuning’ of pronunciation of difficult sounds
•	 Continue to develop their instinct for rules and patterns
•	 The ability to use appropriate rhythm and intonation
Clear, intelligible pronunciation (not perfection) should be the 
goal of students at this level. There is a pronunciation focus 
in every lesson, which integrates clear pronunciation into 
grammar and vocabulary practice. There is an emphasis on 
the sounds most useful for communication, on word stress, 
and on sentence rhythm. Online Practice contains the 
Sound Bank videos which show students the mouth positions 
to make English vowels and consonants. They can also review 
the pronunciation from the lesson at their own speed.  There 
is more practice of pronunciation in the Workbook, with 
audio, which can be found on Online Practice.
Speaking
•	 Up-to-date, stimulating topics to get them talking and 
exchanging opinions
•	 The key words and phrases necessary to discuss a topic
•	 Practice in more extended speaking
•	 Improvement in accuracy as well as further development 
of their fluency
We believe that a good topic or text is very important in 
motivating students to speak in class. Every lesson in English 
File Upper-intermediate has a speaking activity which enables 
students to contribute their own knowledge, opinions, or 
experience. 
Introduction 
Our aim with English File fourth edition has been to make 
every lesson better and to make the package more student- 
and teacher-friendly. As well as the main A and B Student’s 
Book lessons, there is a range of material that you can 
use according to your students’ needs, and the time and 
resources you have available. Don’t forget:
•	 videos that can be used in class in every File: Colloquial 
English, Video Listening, and Can you understand  
these people?
•	 Quick Tests and File tests for every File, as well as Progress 
Tests, an End-of-course Test, and an Entry Test, which you 
can use at the beginning of the course
•	 photocopiable Grammar and Communicative activities for 
every A and B lesson, and a Vocabulary activity for every 
Vocabulary Bank
Online Practice and the Workbook provide review, 
support, and practice for students outside the class.
The Teacher’s Guide suggests different ways of exploiting 
the Student’s Book depending on the level of your class. We 
very much hope you enjoy using English File fourth edition.
What do Upper-intermediate 
students need? 
Upper-intermediate students rightly feel that they are now 
quite high-level learners of English, and are ready to ‘push 
on’ to become very proficient users of the language. To 
achieve this they need motivating materials and challenging 
tasks. They need clear objectives to focus on taking their 
skills to a higher level, as well as dealing with more complex 
language input. Finally, they need classes to be as fun and 
dynamic as they were at lower levels: there is no reason why 
higher-level lessons should become dry and over-serious. 
Students still want to enjoy their English classes – role-plays, 
language games, challenges, and quizzes are still as valuable 
pedagogically as ever, and can often be exploited more 
effectively at this level.
 Grammar
•	 Improve their control of main structures
•	 Learn more complex grammar structures
•	 Opportunities to use and test their language instinct
English File fourth edition Upper-intermediate puts an 
emphasis on consolidating and putting into practice known 
grammar as well as learning new structures. It provides 
contexts for new language that will engage students, using 
real-life stories and situations, humour, and suspense. The 
Grammar Banks give students a single, easy-to-access 
grammar reference section, with example sentences on 
audio, clear rules, and common errors to avoid. There are 
at least two practice exercises for each grammar point. 
Students can look again at the grammar presented in the 
lesson on Online Practice. The Workbook provides a 
variety of practice exercises and the opportunity for students 
to use the new grammar to express their own ideas.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 9@@
9
It is often difficult to motivate students to write at this 
level. In English File Upper-intermediate each guided writing 
activity flows out of a main lesson to ensure that students 
have plenty of ideas to start with and focuses on key areas of 
language, style, and organization to help break the writing 
process down into a series of achievable tasks.
Students can use Online Practice to develop their 
writing skills further. The Discussion board also provides 
opportunities for informal written interaction.
Colloquial English
•	 Get used to listening to authentic colloquial speech
•	 The ability to deal with different speeds and accents
•	 Exposure to high-frequency colloquial phrases and idioms
•	 Techniques and strategies for participating in a 
conversation
The five Colloquial English lessons focus on an unscripted 
interview with a person who is an expert in his / her field 
and a spontaneous conversation between three people 
answering a question related to the lesson topic. There is 
also a ‘Looking at Language’ focus, which looks at a particular 
aspect of functional language as used by the speaker. On 
Online Practice, students can use the interactive video to 
record themselves and hear their own voice as part of the 
conversation. The Workbook provides practice of all the 
language from the Colloquial English lessons.
Revision
•	 Regular review
•	 Motivating reference and practice material
•	 A sense of progress
Students will usually only assimilate and remember new 
language if they have the chance to see it and use it several 
times. Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation are recycled 
throughout the course. After every two Files there is a  
two-page Revise & Check section. The left-hand page revises 
the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of each File. The 
right-hand page provides a series of skills-based challenges, 
including street interviews, and helps students to measure 
their progress in terms of competence. These pages are 
designed to be used flexibly according to the needs of your 
students. On Online Practice, for 
each File, there are three Check 
your progress activities. The first 
is a multiple choice activity for 
students to test themselves on the 
Grammar and Vocabulary from 
the File. The second is a dictation 
related to the topic and the 
language of the File for students 
to practise the new language 
in context. Finally, there is a 
Challenge activity, which involves 
a mini-research project based on 
a topic from the File. After every 
two Files, the Workbook contains 
a Can you remember...? page, which 
provides a cumulative review of 
language students have covered in 
the Student’s Book.
Listening
•	 Motivating, integrated listening material
•	 Achievable tasks but with an increasing level of challenge
•	 Exposure to longer listenings and a wide variety of 
accents
•	 Exposure to authentic and colloquial spoken language
For most students, listening is still the hardest skill and it is 
vital that listening material is both interesting and provides 
the right level of challenge. English File Upper-intermediate 
introduces some unscripted authentic listening alongside 
more controlled material in the main lessons to provide 
challenge and support appropriate to the level. These expose 
students to a wider variety of language, accent and speed of 
speech with achievable but challenging tasks. The Colloquial 
English lessons give students practice in listening to 
unscripted authentic speech. On Online Practice, for each 
File students can find further listening practice related to the 
topic. They can also access the listening activities from every 
lesson, to practise in their own time, and to read the script to 
check anything that they have found difficult.
Reading
•	 Engaging topics and stimulating material
•	 Exposure to a wide variety of authentic text types
•	 Challenging tasks which help them read more skillfully
Many students need to read in English for their work 
or studies, and reading is also important in helping to 
build vocabulary and to consolidate grammar. The key to 
encouraging students to read is to provide material where 
they feel there is a reason to read and tasks which help them 
to get the most out of a text. This level contains a variety 
of readings from real sources (the British press, magazines, 
websites, forums, infographics) and have been chosen for 
their intrinsic interest and potential to generate a reaction. The 
opinions expressed in these texts do not necessarily reflect the 
view of the English File authors or of Oxford University Press.
Writing
•	 Practice in planning, organizing, writing, and checking
•	 An awareness of register, structure, and fixed phrases
•	 A focus on ‘micro’ writing skills
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 10@@
10
	 	
Course overview
Workbook 
For language practice after class.
•	 All the Grammar, Vocabulary, and  
Colloquial English
•	 Pronunciation exercises with audio.  
The audio can be accessed  
on Online Practice
•	 Can you remember...? exercises for  
students to check their progress
•	 Available with or without key 
For students 
Student’s Book 
The Student’s Book has 10 Files. Each File is organized like this:
A and B lessons
Each File contains two four-page lessons which present and practise 
Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation with a balance of reading and 
listening activities, and lots of opportunities for speaking. Every two Files 
(starting from File 2), the B lesson ends with a Video Listening section. All 
lessons have clear references to the Grammar Bank, Vocabulary Bank, and 
where relevant, to the Sound Bank at the back of the book.
Colloquial English
Every two Files (starting from File 1) there is a two-page lesson where 
students develop their ability to listen to authentic English and look at 
elements of natural language. Integrated into every Colloquial English lesson 
is an interview with an expert in his / her field, and a conversation.
Revise & Check
Every two Files (starting from File 2) there is a two-page section revising 
the Grammar, Vocabulary, and Pronunciation of each File and providing 
Reading, Listening, and Speaking. The ‘Can you…?’ section challenges 
students with engaging reading texts and street interview videos, which 
give students exposure to real-life English.
The back of the Student’s Book
The lessons contain references to these 
sections: Communication, Writing, 
Listening, Grammar Bank, Vocabulary 
Bank, and Sound Bank.
The Student’s Book is also 
available as an eBook.
Online Practice
For students to practise and develop their language and skills or catch up on a 
class they have missed.
•	 Look again: students can review the language from every lesson.
•	 Practice: students can develop their skills with extra Reading, Writing, 
Listening, and Speaking practice.
•	 Check your progress: students can test themselves on the main language 
from the lesson and get instant feedback, and try an extra challenge.
•	 Interactive video to practise the language from the Colloquial English 
lessons.
•	 Sound Bank videos to learn and practise pronunciation of  
English sounds.
•	 Resources: All Student’s Book audio, video, scripts, wordlists, dyslexia-friendly 
texts, and CEFR Language Portfolio.
Say It: English pronunciation app
For students to learn  
and practise the  
sounds of English
•	 Individual sounds
•	 Sounds in key words
•	 Speak and record  
functionality
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 11@@
11
For teachers 
Teacher’s Guide
Step-by-step procedural notes for all 
the lessons including:
•	 an optional ‘books-closed’ lead-in 
for every lesson.
•	 Extra challenge suggestions 
for ways of exploiting the 
Student’s Book material in a more 
challenging way if you have a 
stronger class.
•	 Extra support suggestions for 
ways of adapting activities or exercises to make them 
work with weaker students.
•	 Extra ideas for optional activities.
All lesson plans include answer keys and audio scripts.
Over 50 pages of photocopiable activities.
Grammar
see pp. 159– 182
•	 An activity for every Grammar Bank, which can be used in 
class or for self-study extra practice
Communicative
see pp.183 – 213
•	 Extra speaking practice for every A and B lesson
Vocabulary
see pp. 214– 230
•	 An activity for every Vocabulary Bank, which can be used 
in class or for self-study extra practice
There is more information on page 158 of this Teacher’s 
Guide about the photocopiable worksheets and tips on how 
best to use them.
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
•	 All the Student’s Book audio/video files and scripts
•	 Detailed lesson plans from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 Answer keys
•	 All the photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide, 
including customisable versions
•	 All the Workbook audio files and scripts
•	 Tests and assessment material, including: an Entry Test; 
Progress Tests; an End-of-course Test; a Quick Test for every 
File; and complete test for every File. There are A and B 
versions of all the main tests and audio files for all the 
Listening tests
•	 CEFR documents
 Classroom Presentation Tool
•	 The complete Student’s Book
•	 Photocopiable activities from the Teacher’s Guide
•	 All class audio and video, with interactive scripts
•	 Answer keys for exercises in the Student’s Book and 
photocopiable activities
•	 Dyslexia-friendly texts
•	 The Workbook is also available as a Classroom 
Presentation Tool.
  Class audio
All the listening materials for the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class Audio CDs.
  Video
Video listening
•	 Short documentaries for 
students at the end of even-
numbered B lessons (2B, 4B, 
6B, etc.)
Colloquial English
•	 Interviews and conversations 
that go with the Colloquial 
English lessons in the 
Student’s Book
Revise & Check video
•	 Street interviews filmed 
in London, New York, and 
Oxford to accompany the  
Revise & Check section
All the video materials for 
the Student’s Book can be 
found on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre, Classroom 
Presentation Tool, Online Practice, Student’s eBook, and 
the Class DVD.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 12@@
1A
12
	1A	 Questions and answers
 G   question formation
 V   working out meaning from context
 P   intonation: showing interest
Lesson plan
The topic and the grammar focus of this first lesson is 
questions. Even at Upper-intermediate level, many Sts still 
have problems forming questions correctly. This lesson aims 
to revise all aspects of question formation, including indirect 
questions, negative questions, and questions which end 
with a preposition. By the end of the lesson, Sts should be 
forming questions more accurately and more confidently, 
and we suggest that from then onwards you insist on 
questions always being formed correctly.
The lesson has two distinct halves. In the first half, Sts read 
two interviews from Q&A, a regular feature in The Guardian 
newspaper, with the singer Florence Welch and the actor 
Dan Stevens. They then focus on the grammar of question 
formation and this is followed by Pronunciation, which 
revises how to use intonation in questions to show interest.
In the second half, the topic is job interviews and Sts read 
an article about the kind of  ‘extreme’ questions which some 
companies now use. The vocabulary focus is on working 
out the meaning of new words in a text from context. This 
is followed by a listening where Sts hear four speakers talk 
about strange questions they have been asked in interviews. 
The lesson ends with Speaking, where Sts role-play extreme 
interviews and write a question of their own.
If you would like to begin the first lesson without the book, 
there are two photocopiable ‘first day’ activities on p.161 and 
pp.190–191 (instructions p.183).
There is an Entry Test on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, which 
you can give Sts before starting the course.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables  
Grammar  introduction p.161 
                    question formation p.162 
Communicative  Tell me about it pp.190–191  
(instructions p.183) 
	
Ask me a question p.192  
(instructions p.183)
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Entry test
For students
Workbook  1A
Online Practice  1A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.6 on the board and the name 
of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their books and 
read it.
You could point out / elicit that Oscar Wilde (1854–1900), 
a playwright and poet, is famous in particular for his novel 
The Picture of Dorian Gray and play The Importance of Being 
Earnest. Elicit / Explain what indiscreet means.
Get Sts to discuss what they think it means. Do they agree 
with the quote?
1	READING & SPEAKING  understanding 
questions
a	 Focus on the photos and ask Sts if they know anything 
about the two people. Elicit as much information as you 
can. If they don’t know them at all, tell Sts that they are 
both very well known in the UK, and that after reading 
about them, they may want to listen to Florence’s music 
and / or watch some of Dan’s TV series or films.
	 Give Sts time to read about who they are.
	 Elicit answers to the two questions and tell Sts if you know 
them and what you think of them.
b	 Focus on the two interviews and ask Sts what the title 
Q&A means (= Questions and Answers).
	 Then give Sts time to read the interviews and complete 
the questions. Point out the Glossary. You may also want 
to elicit / explain wallpaper (= the background pattern or 
picture you choose to have on the screen of your phone, 
computer, etc.) and the expression a guilty pleasure (= sth 
you enjoy, but think you shouldn’t) in Dan’s questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. You may want to point out that although Who 
would also fit Dan’s question 4, it would not be a natural 
question to ask someone in an interview, as it would 
presuppose that the answer was a person, whereas 
the answer could be anything, e.g. a neighbour’s dog, 
worrying about something, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the interviews the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Florence Welch
1  What    ​2  did    ​3  don’t    ​4  was    5  who    ​6  would    ​
7  Where    ​8  Have    ​9  What / Which
Dan Stevens
1  When    ​2  do    ​3  What    ​4  What    ​5  Who    ​6  would    ​
7  How    ​8  does    ​9  Do
c	 Focus on questions 1–8 and go through them quickly, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis. Highlight that the 
questions begin Who do you think…? not Who…?, as the 
answers are implied rather than directly stated.
	 Now tell Sts to read the interviews again and to answer 
the questions with the celebrities’ initials.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 13@@
1A
13
1	 D – question 9
2	 F – question 5
3	 D – question 7
4	 F – question 4
5	 D – questions 1 and 8
6	 D – questions 1, 2, 3, and 4
7	 F – question 9
8	 F – question 3
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts to close their books, 
and then call out some of the answers (or part of the 
answers) from the two Q&A questionnaires, to see if Sts can 
remember the questions, e.g.  
T	
I go for walks in Griffith Park, in LA.    
Sts	 How do you relax?    
T	
What’s the wi-fi password?    
Sts	 What word or phrase do you most overuse?
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in pairs to decide which question is the most and 
least interesting, or too personal to ask a person whom 
you don’t know well. You might want to tell Sts that they 
don’t have to agree with each other.
	 Get feedback from various pairs.
e	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs. Give them time to 
choose their six questions.
	 Now focus on the Politely refusing to answer a question 
box and go through it with the class. Elicit / Explain that 
these answers should be said very politely, as normally, 
whoever asked you the question didn’t mean to be rude 
or intrusive.
	 Get Sts to ask and answer their questions. Encourage 
‘questioners’ to ask for more information where possible.
	 Get feedback by asking Sts for any interesting / funny 
answers, and deal with any vocabulary problems that 
arose.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by getting Sts to 
choose questions to ask you. Give reasonably full answers 
and encourage Sts to ask follow-up questions.
2	GRAMMAR  question formation
a	 e 1.2  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand the situation. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to write the four 
questions. If necessary, give Sts the first word of each 
question: What, How, Don’t, Can.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting each question onto the board.
1	 What brings you to London?
2	 How long are you going to be in London for?
3	 Don’t you like London?
4	 Can you tell us if there’s any truth in that?
e 1.2
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
J = journalist, C = Cindy
All four journalists	
Excuse me…, Excuse me…, Cindy…, Cindy….
J1	 Just a few questions…
C	 OK, OK, but you have just one minute.
J1	 What brings you to London?
C	 I’m here to accept an award and do some interviews.
J2	 How long are you going to be in London for?
C	 Just forty-eight hours, then I’m flying back to the States.
J3	 That’s a very short stay. Don’t you like London?
C	 I love London, but unfortunately my new movie starts shooting 
on Monday.
J4	 There’ve been rumours that you and your husband are having 
relationship problems. Can you tell us if there’s any truth in that?
C	 No, no, no, no. No comment. No, no more questions.
b	 Focus on the task and go through the questions. Make 
sure Sts remember what, for example, an auxiliary verb is 
(do, have, etc.).
	 Do it as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then 
check answers.
a question which ends with a preposition = 2
a subject question, where there is no auxiliary verb = 1
a question which uses a negative auxiliary verb = 3
an indirect question = 4
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1A on p.132. If your Sts 
have not used the English File series before, explain that 
all the grammar rules and exercises are in this part of 
the book.
Grammar notes
The Grammar notes in this Teacher’s Guide aim to add 
more information to the notes and rules on the Grammar 
Bank pages in the Student’s Book. There is a direct link 
between the number of each rule in the Teacher’s Guide 
and the Student’s Book. If there is no extra information 
about a rule in the Teacher’s Guide, this is either because 
we assume that Sts at this level should already know it, 
or because all the information needed is on the Student’s 
Book page.
Question formation
•	 Rule 1: basic word order in questions
	 Sts at this level should be familiar with basic rules 
regarding question formation, though they may still be 
making mistakes, especially when they speak.
•	 Rule 2: word order in negative questions
	 The word order is the same as in normal questions, i.e. 
just add n’t to the auxiliary verb, e.g. Aren’t you going to 
come? Why didn’t you tell me?
	 You may want to point out that when full forms are 
used, you have to put the not between the subject and 
verb, e.g. Are you not going to come? Why did you not 
tell me?
	 You should point out to Sts that it is much more 
common to use the contracted negative, especially in 
spoken English.
Indirect questions
You may want to highlight that in this kind of question, 
the question is formed in the first part (Can you tell me…? 
etc.) and the main question becomes a normal clause.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 14@@
1A
14
3	PRONUNCIATION  intonation: showing interest
Pronunciation notes
Non-native speakers can unintentionally sound 
uninterested or even unfriendly if they use very flat 
intonation. The first two exercises focus on encouraging 
Sts to use a wide voice range when asking questions, and 
on stressing words.
These exercises do not focus specifically on distinguishing 
between the different intonation patterns for yes / no  
questions and question-word questions (yes / no 
questions usually have a rising intonation and question-
word questions a falling intonation). In practice we think 
it is very hard for Sts to notice this distinction, and what is 
more, native speaker intonation, especially among young 
people, is constantly changing.
In exercises c, d, and e, Sts focus on using interested 
intonation to respond to what someone says. This is another 
context in which using flat intonation (e.g. when responding 
Really? ) can unintentionally convey a lack of interest.
a	 e 1.5  Focus on the task. Tell Sts they are going to 
hear someone asking each question twice – once with 
interested intonation and once not – and they must 
decide which one has the more interested intonation.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing if necessary after each 
question has been asked twice.
	 Check answers. Elicit what difference Sts notice between 
the interested and uninterested intonation.
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  b    ​4  a    ​5  b
e 1.5
See questions in Student’s Book on p.7
b	 e 1.6  Tell Sts they will hear the five questions again with 
interested intonation. They must listen and then repeat 
the question, copying the intonation.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each question for Sts to listen 
and repeat.
e 1.6
See questions in a in Student’s Book on p.7
	 Now repeat the activity, getting individual Sts to repeat 
each question.
c	 e 1.7  Focus on the Reacting to what someone says 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Tell Sts they are going to hear five conversations, each 
starting with the questions in a in the same order, and 
they must complete the four gapped reactions. Point 
out that the first one (Wow) has been done for them, and 
make sure Sts remember what a vegan is.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each 
conversation for Sts to complete the expressions and 
questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again as necessary.
Other expressions followed by the word order of 
indirect questions
Highlight that we only use a question mark when the 
introductory phrase is a question, e.g. Could you tell me…? 
Do you have any idea…? Where the introductory phrase 
is not a question, e.g. I’m not sure…, I wonder…, then the 
sentence ends with a full stop.
	 Focus on the example sentences for question formation 
and play audio e 1.3 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for indirect questions e 1.4.
	 Then go through the Other expressions followed by 
the word order of indirect questions box with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
questions.
a
1	 Should I tell her how I feel?
2	 How long have you known your best friend?
3	 Could you tell me when the next train leaves?
4	 What are you thinking about?
5	 What do you like doing at the weekend?
6	 What kind of music does Jane like listening to?
7	 Do you know what time the film finishes?
8	 How many students came to class yesterday?
9	 Do you remember where the restaurant is?
 10	 Who does the housework in your family?
b
1	 How often do you usually do exercise?
2	 Who wrote Oliver Twist?
3	 Could you tell me how much this book costs?
4	 I can’t remember where I parked my car this morning.
5	 Did you enjoy your trip to Paris last weekend?
6	 What kind of work does your sister do?
7	 Who ate / has eaten the last biscuit?
8	 Do you know what time the swimming pool opens on 
Saturdays?
9	 Why didn’t / doesn’t your sister like the present you gave her?
 10	 Do you have to play your music so loud?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication Indirect questions, A on p.106, 
B on p.110.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do.
	 Monitor and help where necessary.
	 Check answers by getting some Sts to ask their questions.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 15@@
1A
15
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read out the title and first paragraph, 
and do the task as a whole class, asking the questions to 
individual Sts.
c	 Focus on the article and give Sts time to read it and 
complete it with questions A–G, and find out how the 
questions should be answered.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA IDEA   You may want to tell Sts what kind of companies 
the ones mentioned in the article are:
The Phoenix Partnership, Palantir Technologies, and 
Clearwater Analytics are software companies.
Condé Nast is a mass media company which publishes 
magazines.
Page Group and Switch Consulting are recruitment companies.
Badoo is a dating-focused social network.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words and phrases.
1  G    ​2  C    ​3  E    ​4  B    ​5  D    ​6  A    ​7  F
	 Finally, ask Sts if they would now feel more confident 
answering the questions.
d	 Focus on the Guessing the meaning of new words and 
phrases box and go through it with the class. Many of the 
texts in English File Upper-intermediate have glossaries, 
but obviously there will sometimes be other words whose 
meaning Sts can’t guess and will want to check with a 
dictionary. Nowadays, many Sts will use online dictionaries 
via their phones. While these can be very useful, it’s worth 
pointing out to Sts that there are circumstances, e.g. in 
exams, when they need to try to guess the meaning of 
words, and that if they always rely on their phones, they 
won’t develop this skill. It is also sometimes not easy to 
find phrases or idioms in dictionaries, which is another 
reason for developing the skill of guessing from context.
	 Now tell Sts to read the article again, trying to guess what 
the highlighted words and phrases mean.
	 In pairs, Sts compare guesses.
e	 Now get Sts to match the highlighted words and phrases 
to definitions 1–8.
	 Check answers. Elicit or model pronunciation.
1  gut feeling    ​2  foolproof    ​3  light-hearted response    ​4  geek ​
5  work–life balance    ​6  the point of    ​7  good-natured rivalry    ​
8  job-seekers
	 Find out how many of the words Sts guessed correctly 
and deal with any other vocabulary problems.
f	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand genuine 
/ˈdʒenjuɪn/ (= real). Elicit or model its pronunciation.
	 Quickly go through the questions, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis. If Sts ask about the companies 
mentioned in brackets, you could tell them that Airbnb 
allows people to let accommodation, Banana Republic 
and Next are clothing companies, Redbox software is 
a computing company, TES Global helps teachers and 
schools worldwide, and General Electrics is a multinational 
company dealing in transport, renewable energy, 
healthcare, etc.
	 Check answers.
2  Why not    ​3  Me too    ​4  How interesting    ​5  Oh really
e 1.7
W = woman, M = man
1
W	 Do you have a big family?
M	 Yes, actually, I’m one of seven. I’ve got five sisters and a brother.
W	 Wow! That’s a huge family.
2
M	 What don’t you like about the place where you live?
W	 Well, for one thing, I don’t like my neighbours very much.
M	 Why not? What’s wrong with them?
3
W	 What sports or games are you good at?
M	 Well, I’m not really very sporty, but I’m quite good at chess.
W	 Me too! We could have a game one day.
4
W	 Do you think you have a healthy diet?
M	 Yes, very. In fact, I’m a vegan, so I only eat fruit and vegetables, 
and grains, and no meat or fish.
W	 How interesting! How long have you been a vegan?
5
M	 What makes you feel happy?
W	 Lots of things. Er…like buying new shoes.
M	 Oh really? I can’t think of anything worse!
d	 e 1.8  Tell Sts that this time they are just going to hear 
the responses and they must repeat them. Highlight 
that with these responses, it is also very important to use 
interested intonation. Encourage them to use a wide 
voice range and to get the correct rhythm.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each response for Sts to listen 
and repeat.
e 1.8
1	 Wow! That’s a huge family.
2	 Why not? What’s wrong with them?
3	 Me too! We could have a game one day.
4	 How interesting! How long have you been a vegan?
5	 Oh really? I can’t think of anything worse!
	 Now repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
e	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions in a. Encourage them to use interested 
intonation and to react to their partner’s answers.
	 You could get some pairs to practise in front of the class.
4	READING & VOCABULARY  working out 
meaning from context
a	 Focus on the cartoon and do the questions as a whole-
class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then get some 
feedback.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the title and 
first paragraph.
	 Now focus on questions A–G and make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, especially a CV (= a written record 
of your education and the jobs you have done).
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the questions.
	 Get some feedback and elicit which question Sts would 
least like to answer. You could tell Sts which question you 
would least like to be asked.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 16@@
1A
16
I	 That’s illegal now, isn’t it?
H	 Yes, I know, I believe that was illegal then.
I	 And what did you answer?
H	 I said no, I didn’t have a boyfriend, and I had no plans to get 
pregnant any time soon, but at that point, it was pretty clear to 
me that I did not want to work for that company.
3	 Sean
I	 Have you ever been asked a strange question in an interview?
S	 Yes. I was being interviewed for a job with an advertising agency 
and the interviewer kept checking information on my CV and 
then asking me about it, and he saw that I’d studied philosophy 
at university, and he said, ‘Oh, I see that you studied philosophy at 
university. Do you still practise philosophy?’
I	 What did you answer?
S	 I said the first thing that came into my head – I said, ‘Well, I still 
think a lot’.
I	 Was the interviewer impressed?
S	 Well, he obviously liked the answer, because I got the job.
4	 Alice
I	 Have you ever been asked a strange question in an interview?
A	 There’s one I can think of, which was when I was being 
interviewed for a job with a company in Switzerland.
I	 What was it?
A	 Well, the interviewer asked me, ‘What animal would you like to be 
reincarnated as?’
I	 Weird question!
A	 Totally.
I	 What did you say?
A	 So I said a cat because it was the first thing I thought of and 
because cats have a good life – well, at least in Britain they do. 
And then the interviewer immediately looked embarrassed and 
said that he’d been told to ask me that question to see how I’d 
react, but that he thought it was a stupid question.
I	 What happened in the end?
A	 I didn’t get the job, so maybe the interviewer wasn’t very fond of 
cats!
c	 Now tell Sts they will hear the audio again and this time 
they must make notes on how the people answered the 
questions and what happened in the end. Give Sts time to 
see if they can remember any of the answers.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to make notes. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Check the answers to the first question 
(How did they answer?), then play the audio again and check 
the answers to the final question.
How did they answer?
What happened in 
the end?
1
I can’t answer this right now.
Can I answer this at the end?
John Lennon, Picasso, and 
another artist or musician (he 
can’t remember).
He got the place at 
university.
2
No, I don’t have a boyfriend, 
and I have no plans to get 
pregnant.
She decided immediately 
that she didn’t want to 
work for that company.
3
Well, I still think a lot.
He got the job.
4
A cat
She didn’t get the job.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups to discuss what the 
questions tell the interviewers about the candidate, and 
whether this type of question really helps to choose the 
best candidate.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs or groups. You 
could tell Sts what you think or if you have been asked any 
similar questions at interviews.
g	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to choose two questions in f 
to ask their partner.
	 Get some feedback for each question if possible, or ask Sts 
for the most interesting answers they heard.
5	LISTENING  understanding the stages of a short 
interview
a	 Focus on the questions and elicit answers from the class. 
If you have a class of older adults, all of whom are likely to 
have had some kind of job interview, you could put Sts 
in pairs and then get some class feedback. Find out if any 
Sts have been asked tough interview questions as in the 
article in 4.
b	 e 1.9  Focus on the task and the chart. Give Sts time to 
look at the four gapped questions, and elicit / teach the 
meaning of reincarnated in 4.
	 Play Speaker 1 all the way through and then pause the 
audio. Get Sts to complete the question.
	 Check the answer.
	 Now repeat the process for the other three speakers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 have dinner, three people
2	 have, boyfriend, get pregnant
3	 practise philosophy
4	 What animal
e 1.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
I = interviewer, D = Dominic, H = Heidi, S = Sean, A = Alice
1	 Dominic
I	 Have you ever been asked a strange question in an interview?
D	 Yes, it was my interview for a place at Sarah Lawrence University 
in New York – where I’m studying now.
I	 What was the question?
D	 The question was, ‘If you could have dinner with three people 
from the past, who would you choose and why?’
I	 And what did you answer?
I	 It was one of the first questions I was asked, and I said, ‘I can’t 
answer this right now. Can I answer at the end?’ because I couldn’t 
think of anyone. So they said OK, and then they asked me the 
question again later, and I said something ridiculous like John 
Lennon, um, Picasso, and…er…I can’t even remember who the 
third person was, it was another sort of artist or musician I think.
I	 Do you think it was a good question?
D	 Yes, because it made me think – I mean, it wasn’t something I was 
expecting at all, and all the other ones were more yes / no, direct 
questions, so this one made me think a bit more.
I	 And you got the place?
D	 Yes, I did.
2	 Heidi
I	 Have you ever been asked a strange question in an interview?
H	 Yes, I have. That was many years ago, it was one of my first job 
interviews, in London, actually, after I moved to London from 
Germany. It was for a financial department, and the manager who 
interviewed me, I can’t remember, but I believe he, he must have 
been German – he asked me, ‘Do you have a boyfriend?’ and ‘Are 
you planning to get pregnant?’
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 17@@
1A
17
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions.
6	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication Tough questions, A on p.106, 
B on p.110.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do. Make sure too that Sts understand the 
questions they’re going to ask. You may need to explain, 
for example, aspect and desert island in A’s questions and 
treat, superhero, and lead role in B’s questions.
	 Get Sts to decide what kind of company they are 
interviewing for and then tell each other.
	 Tell Sts A to start by asking their partner the eight 
interview questions.
	 Monitor and help Sts, correcting any errors with question 
formation.
	 When they have finished, Sts A should tell their partner if 
they have got the job and why, or why not if they didn’t 
succeed.
	 Then they swap roles.
	 Get feedback to find out if there were any particularly 
interesting answers. With a show of hands, you could also 
find out how many Sts got the jobs.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1A.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to write their question. 
You might want to remind Sts that the aim of the question 
is for potential future employers to get information about 
the candidate’s personality and / or abilities.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could tell Sts to look back at all the 
previous questions in the lesson, to help them with ideas, 
or elicit a few possible questions from the class so that 
Sts know what they have to do. Then get Sts to write their 
question in pairs. For c, divide the class in half (with one 
student from each pair in each group) for the mingle.
	 Monitor and correct any mistakes in question formation.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to write two or three questions.
c	 If possible, get Sts to stand up and move around the class, 
asking as many other Sts as possible their question.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 18@@
1B
18
1	READING & LISTENING  understanding facts 
vs theories
a	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. If Sts don’t 
recognize any of the names, tell them not to worry, as 
they are going to find out.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts have heard about some of these 
mysteries, write their ideas on the board to help with the 
listening in b.
b	 e 1.10  Play the audio, pausing after each story to elicit as 
much information as possible about each mystery.
	 Now ask Sts what the three stories have in common.
They are all unsolved mysteries.
e 1.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
On the fourth of December eighteen seventy-two, a ship called the 
Mary Celeste was found floating in the Atlantic. There was no one 
on board. The ship wasn’t damaged, and everything was in order, 
although the lifeboat was missing. None of the crew or passengers 
were ever seen again.
On the fourth of March nineteen eighteen, a huge ship called the 
USS Cyclops left Barbados with three hundred people on board, 
and sailed into what we now call the Bermuda Triangle. Then it 
disappeared without a trace. No distress call was made, and no bad 
weather was reported in the region. A huge search for the Cyclops 
was launched – boats and planes scoured the area for wreckage or 
survivors – but nothing of the enormous ship was ever seen again.
On July second, nineteen thirty-seven, Amelia Earhart, the famous 
American aviator, took off with her navigator from New Guinea, in a 
small plane, on the last stage of their around-the-world flight. It was 
the last time they were seen alive. Four million dollars was spent on 
the search, but no trace of Amelia or the navigator was ever found.
	 Finally, ask Sts if they think we will ever find out what 
happened. You might want to tell Sts the following:
–– After looking at all the facts, the most likely conclusion 
is that the captain and crew of the Mary Celeste 
panicked, thinking their ship was going to sink because 
the pump was making a strange sound, and took the 
lifeboat along with the navigational instruments. There 
was a terrible storm, and their lifeboat probably sank.
–– The U.S. Navy says in its official statement about the 
Cyclops, ‘The disappearance of this ship has been one of 
the most baffling mysteries in the annals of the Navy, all 
attempts to locate her having proved unsuccessful.’
–– Some remains were found in 2018 on Nikumaroro 
island, in the western Pacific Ocean, which might be 
Amelia Earhart’s.
c	 e 1.11  Focus on the article and the photos to make sure 
Sts know what a lighthouse is (= a tower or other building 
that contains a strong light to warn and guide ships near 
the coast) and lighthouse keepers. Highlight that this is a 
true story, and the photo of the men is one that appeared 
in newspapers at the time.
	 Now focus on the task. Play the audio for Sts to read and 
listen at the same time. You might want to tell them that 
75 ft (feet) = 23 m.
 G   auxiliary verbs, the…, the… + comparatives
 V   compound adjectives, modifiers
 P   intonation and sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The topic of the lesson is understanding and explaining 
mysterious and unusual events.  
The first half of the lesson starts with a reading based on a 
true story of the disappearance of three lighthouse keepers 
in Scotland. Sts then listen to the end of the story, in which 
a detective tries to solve the mysterious disappearance of 
the men. This is followed by the grammar focus on auxiliary 
verbs, which includes both revision of question tags and  
So do I / Neither do I, and the use of auxiliaries for emphasis 
and in reply questions. Sts then work on intonation and 
sentence rhythm in questions and sentences using 
auxiliaries. Finally, the first half of the lesson ends with Sts 
pretending to be psychics and completing sentences about 
a partner.
In the second half of the lesson, the focus shifts to an 
unusual personality test. Sts listen to a mysterious voice 
guiding them on a walk through a forest. They listen to some 
instructions, make notes, and then analyse their answers. 
Sts then discuss other non-mainstream ways of analysing 
personality. Grammar in Context focuses on how to use the 
structure the…, the… + comparatives, e.g. the sooner, the 
better. This is followed by Vocabulary, where Sts expand their 
vocabulary of compound adjectives to describe personality, 
and use modifiers and compound adjectives to talk about 
people they know.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  auxiliary verbs p.163 
Communicative  What’s in a signature? p.193  
(instructions p.183)
For students
Workbook  1B
Online Practice  1B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.10 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
Elicit who Sherlock Holmes and Arthur Conan Doyle 
(1859–1930) are.
Get Sts to say what they think the quote means and 
whether they agree with it. You may want to tell them 
that this sentence, or slight variants of it, is something that 
Holmes says in many different stories and is one of his main 
strategies for detecting.
	1B	 It’s a mystery
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 19@@
1B
19
found equipment lying all over the island, and also a huge rock, 
much too heavy for any men to carry, lying on the steps leading up 
to the lighthouse. In the end, the only explanation he could think of 
was that the men had been carried off by an enormous wave.
Muirhead’s explanation was immediately rejected. But more than 
one hundred years later, in nineteen ninety-five, the ship Queen 
Elizabeth II was hit by a one-hundred-foot wave which, according 
to her captain, ‘came out of the darkness’ and ‘looked like the White 
Cliffs of Dover’.
Then a paper published in a scientific journal recently proved 
that the ‘monster wave’, which for centuries had been considered 
a sailors’ myth, is a mathematical reality: many smaller waves 
can suddenly combine in mid-ocean and create a huge wave of 
devastating force. Most marine scientists now agree that it is a 
naturally occurring – though rare – event.
So finally, the only explanation that fits the facts is that the three 
lighthouse men had rushed out to attend to some emergency 
and had then been swept away by an enormous wave. Inspector 
Muirhead, it now appears, was almost certainly right. He solved the 
case back in nineteen oh one, but he had to wait another century for 
the proof.
However, science still cannot answer all the questions surrounding 
the Flannan Islands mystery. Why did one man leave his rain jacket 
behind? Why were the bodies of the men never found? Maybe these 
are things we will never know.
f	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read items 1–5.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each item has been 
mentioned to give Sts time to make notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 A huge rock was lying on the steps leading up to the 
lighthouse, but it would have been too heavy for anyone to 
carry, so it adds evidence to the idea of the huge wave.
2	 The ship Queen Elizabeth II was hit by a 100-ft wave in 1995, a 
modern example of Muirhead’s theory.
3	 A paper in a scientific journal has recently been published 
saying that monster waves really exist.
4	 1901 was the date when Muirhead actually solved the 
mystery, but then there was no proof.
5	 There are some things we will never know the answers to.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.122, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
2	GRAMMAR  auxiliary verbs
a	 Tell Sts they are now going to tell each other about some 
more mysteries or unusual events that are difficult to 
explain, sharing any experiences they have had or stories 
they have heard. You could teach the term paranormal  
(= that cannot be explained by science or reason and that 
seems to involve mysterious forces).
	 Focus on the Reacting to a story about something 
strange box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and make sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, especially a UFO (= an unidentified flying object), 
a psychic (= a person who claims to be able to predict the 
future or communicate with dead people), and a faith 
healer (= a person who treats sick people through the 
power of belief or prayer). Elicit or model pronunciation, 
especially psychic /ˈsaɪkɪk/.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to think about a story they want 
to tell.
EXTRA IDEA   You may want to tell Sts that a film about this 
mystery, called The Vanishing, was released in 2019.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the article and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen, but not the 
words in d.
e 1.11
See article in Student’s Book on p.10
	 Now tell Sts to cover the article. Focus on the two sections 
and questions 1–5, making sure Sts know the meaning of 
facts and theories.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the questions.
	 Focus on The facts and check answers to questions 1 
and 2. Then focus on The theories, eliciting the ones 
mentioned in the article, and getting Sts to respond to 
them in questions 4 and 5.
1	 There was nobody at the lighthouse. This was discovered by 
the three new lighthouse keepers who arrived at the island 
to relieve the men who had been working there for three 
months.
2	 the lighthouse door was unlocked
	
a chair was knocked over
	
one rain jacket was hanging on its hook, but the other two 
had disappeared
	
the clocks had stopped
	
the last entry in the log book was 9 a.m. on 15th December
3	 The men had argued about a woman; they had been 
kidnapped by German agents; they had been carried away by 
a sea serpent, a giant bird, or a boat full of ghosts.
d	 Tell Sts to uncover the article and complete the definitions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Elicit or model the pronunciation, and highlight 
that the first a in extraordinary is silent.
1  puzzle    ​2  baffle    ​3  remote    ​4  extraordinary    ​5  trace    ​
6  solve
e	 e 1.12  Tell Sts that they are going to listen to the rest 
of the story. Focus on the task and elicit who Muirhead 
/ˈmjʊəhed/ is (an Edinburgh policeman). Point out the 
Glossary and go through it with the class.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen and get the gist of the story. You might also want to 
tell them that 100 ft (feet) = 30 m.
	 If necessary, play the audio again, pausing at intervals to 
give Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Muirhead thought that the men had been washed away by an 
enormous wave.
People rejected his idea at the time.
Now people think that small waves can combine to create a 
huge wave, which swept the men away.
e 1.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
An Edinburgh policeman, Robert Muirhead, was sent to the island 
to solve the mystery. Muirhead was a hard-working, practical 
investigator, and not at all superstitious. Among other clues, he 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 20@@
1B
20
	 A	Are you a vegetarian?         B No, I do eat meat, but I 
prefer fish.
	 A You can’t swim, can you?    B I can swim, but not 
very well.
Highlight that:
•	 if the auxiliary verb is part of the tense, e.g. is, will, 
or a modal, the main verb can be left out, i.e. in the 
second example above you could also say I can, but 
not very well.
•	 Sts must stress the auxiliary verb in these sentences.
•	 Rule 6: question tags
	 These probably won’t be new to most Sts, but they are 
not easy to use with fluency because they require quick 
manipulation of auxiliaries. In many languages, this kind 
of question is covered by the simpler ‘…, no?’  You may 
want to demonstrate the two different types and their 
intonation to Sts.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 1.14 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 He’s booked the flights, hasn’t he?
2	 It’s hot today, isn’t it?
3	 I do like it, but it isn’t my favourite.
4	 Neither would I.
5	 Is he? I thought he was arriving today.
6	 Tom liked it, but I didn’t. I thought it was awful.
7	 She does like you. She just doesn't want to go out with you.
8	 Yes, I am, and so is my boyfriend.
9	 You’ll remember to call me, won’t you?
 10	 I really want to go to Egypt, but my boyfriend doesn’t.
b
1	 It’s a great club, isn’t it?
2	 Don’t you?
3	 Neither have I.
4	 Oh, don’t you?
5	 I do.
6	 Do you?
7	 Why didn’t you go?
8	 I did go, but I arrived really late because my car broke down.
9	 So am I.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
	 Put Sts in small groups of four or five and get them to 
tell their stories. The Sts who are speaking should give as 
many details as possible, and those listening should try to 
react to the stories.
	 Monitor and help, if necessary, whilst Sts are talking.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get some feedback from the class. You could also tell the 
class how you feel about the paranormal and relate any 
experiences you have had or stories you have heard.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete the gaps 
with the correct auxiliary verbs. Conversations 1, 2, and 3 
should be revision, but Sts may not be familiar with the 
emphatic use of the auxiliary in conversation 4.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
c	 e 1.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  Did    ​2  do    ​3  have    ​4  have    ​5  did
e 1.13
1	 A	 I heard a noise in the middle of the night.
	
B	 Did you? What kind of noise?
2	 A	 You don’t believe in ghosts, do you?
	
B	 No, I don’t.
3	 A	 I’ve never been to a fortune-teller.
	
B	 Neither have I.
	
C	 I have. It was really interesting.
4	 A	 I don’t believe you really saw a UFO.
	
B	 I did see one. It couldn’t have been anything else.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to match auxiliaries 1–5 
in b to A–E.
	 Check answers.
A  5    B  4    C  2    D  1    E  3
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 1B on p.133.
Grammar notes
Auxiliary verbs
Auxiliary verbs (are, is, do, did, will, etc.) and modal verbs 
(can, must, etc.) have a variety of uses in English, and a 
good command of these will help Sts become more 
proficient speakers. Sts will be familiar with the basic uses, 
i.e. in question formation and short answers.
•	 Rule 2: to say that someone / something is the same
	 Highlight that neither can be pronounced /ˈnaɪðə/ or 
/ˈniːðə/.
•	 Rule 3: to say that someone / something is different
	 Highlight that in these kind of responses, you must 
stress the pronoun as well as the auxiliary, e.g.
	 A I loved the film.	
B Really? I didn’t.
•	 Rule 4: reply questions
	 Highlight that these have a rising intonation (the voice 
goes up).
•	 Rule 5: using auxiliaries to show emphasis
	 This will probably be new for many Sts, who may find 
it strange to see an auxiliary verb used in a positive 
sentence. This use of auxiliaries is common when we 
contradict or deny what someone has said, or when we 
want to give extra emphasis, e.g.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 21@@
1B
21
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete the eight 
sentences about themselves. Make sure Sts understand 
what a verb phrase is in sentence 2 (= verb + noun).
d	 Focus on the task, making sure Sts are clear that they 
should first respond with a reply question and then say if 
they are the same (Neither am I) or different (I am).
	 Focus on the examples, or demonstrate the activity first 
by completing the first two sentences for yourself and 
getting Sts to respond.
	 Then put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to respond to 
each other.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think your Sts are going to find 
the responses difficult, elicit what the ‘same’ or ‘different’ 
alternatives are for the sentences and write them on the 
board, i.e.
AREN’T YOU?	
NEITHER AM I. / I AM.
ARE YOU?	
SO AM I. / I’M NOT.
DO YOU?	
SO DO I. / I DON’T.
DON’T YOU?	
NEITHER DO I. / I DO.
HAVEN’T YOU?	
NEITHER HAVE I. / I HAVE.
WOULD YOU?	
NEITHER WOULD I. / I WOULD.
WERE YOU?	
SO WAS I. / I WASN’T.
DIDN’T YOU?	
NEITHER DID I. / I DID.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication You’re psychic, aren’t you?,  
A on p.106, B on p.111.
	 Focus on the title and the instructions for a. Elicit / Explain 
that the word psychic is both an adjective and a noun. 
Remind Sts of its meaning and pronunciation.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do. Elicit that when they check their guesses, 
they should be using rising intonation on the question 
tags unless they are 100% sure of the information.
	 Get feedback to find out who was the better psychic in 
each pair.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 1B.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  following 
instructions
a	 Do the question as a whole-class activity. You could also 
tell Sts how you would feel.
b	 e 1.16  Focus on 1–6 and elicit what the icons represent. 
Focus on the task and tell Sts they must imagine 
themselves in the forest and follow the instructions they 
hear on the audio. Tell them that you won’t pause the 
audio, so they must write the first answer they think of. 
There are some natural pauses in the audio (indicated by 
*** in the script) after each question. You could also tell Sts 
that you will play the audio a second time.
	 You might want to make sure Sts know what a fence is.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the task.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  intonation 
and sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
Reply questions
The auxiliary is stressed and the intonation rises as in a 
normal question, e.g.
A I’m a vegetarian.	
B Are you?
The important thing is to encourage Sts to use a friendly, 
interested intonation.
To say that someone / something is different, both the 
subject and the auxiliary are stressed, e.g.
A I’ve never been to a fortune teller.	 B I have.
So (do) I / Neither (do) I: In these responses, the auxiliary 
is normally unstressed, with the strong stress falling on the 
other two words, e.g.
A I believe in ghosts.    B So do I.
Question tags
Here, equal stress falls on both the auxiliary and the 
subject. The intonation native speakers give to a question 
tag depends on whether we are asking a real question 
or not. If we genuinely don’t know the answer, we tend 
to use the rising intonation of a question, e.g. You haven’t 
seen my car keys, have you? (= I don’t know if you have 
seen my car keys). However, if we are not asking a real 
question, but are just making conversation or asking for 
confirmation of something we already know to be true, 
our intonation falls and the question tag sounds like a 
statement, not a question, e.g. It’s a beautiful day, isn’t it? 
(= I know you will agree with me).
Using auxiliaries to show emphasis
In these sentences the auxiliary is stressed strongly.
As there are several issues of stress, rhythm, and 
intonation with auxiliary verbs, the pronunciation practice 
has been broken into parts. In a–b, Sts practise reply 
questions and auxiliaries for emphasis. In d, they practise 
So / Neither do I. In e, they then practise question tags.
a	 e 1.15  Focus on the task and the three conversations.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 1.15
See conversations in Student’s Book on p.11
	 Now play the audio again for Sts to listen and underline 
the highlighted auxiliaries that are stressed.
	 Check answers.
1	 Did you?
2	 I don’t believe…, I do.
3	 You don’t like…?, I do like them.
b	 Give Sts a few minutes, in pairs, to practise the 
conversations, swapping roles when they get to the end. 
Monitor and help them with their rhythm and intonation.
	 You could get some pairs to practise in front of the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
line, for Sts to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm and 
intonation.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 22@@
1B
22
The person you were walking with is an important person in your 
life.
The animal represents problems in your life. The bigger the animal, 
the more problems you have.
How you interact with the animal represents how you deal with 
your problems. If you were aggressive or decisive, that means you 
confront your problems, try to solve them. If the interaction was 
peaceful, then you’re a more passive person and often wait for 
problems to go away.
The house represents your ambitions. The bigger the house, the 
more ambitious you are. If there was no fence around the house, it 
means you’re very open-minded, and welcome new ideas. If it had 
a fence, then you’re more convinced that you’re right, and tend to 
surround yourself by people who agree with you.
The table represents how you’re feeling at the moment. If there was 
food or there were flowers on the table, and people sitting round 
it, this suggests that you’re feeling happy in your relationships. No 
food, flowers, or people suggests that someone in your family, or a 
friend, is making you unhappy.
The cup represents how strong your relationship is with the person 
you’re walking with, and how long the relationship will last. The 
harder and more resistant the material of the cup is, the stronger 
your relationship is.
The water represents your friends. If you saw a large river or lake, you 
have a big social circle and like to be surrounded by people. If you 
got very wet when you crossed it, your friends are very important 
for you. If you hardly got wet at all, it means that you depend less on 
your friends and are more self-sufficient.
e	 Focus on the first part of the task and give Sts time to look 
at their answers in b and the interpretation in d.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to discuss what they 
agree and disagree with.
	 You could elicit some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the scripts on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand the lexis 
in the bullet points. Elicit or model the pronunciation 
of the words in brackets, i.e. graphology /ɡræˈfɒlədʒi/, 
palmistry /ˈpɑːmɪstri/, and astrology /əˈstrɒlədʒi/.
	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs or small 
groups and then get some feedback.
	 GRAMMAR IN CONTEXT
g	 Focus on Grammar in Context and tell Sts that this 
regular feature focuses on extra, smaller language points 
that come out of a reading or listening. Go through the 
examples and then the rules.
	 Highlight that:
•	 you mustn’t separate the more, etc. from the adjective / 
adverb it goes with, e.g. The more interesting the book is, the 
more slowly I read. NOT The more the book is interesting…
•	 occasionally we just use the two comparatives, e.g. the 
sooner the better; the more the merrier, especially when one 
of them is better.
	 Now focus on sentences 1–4 and elicit the first one from 
the class (The more you study, the more you learn) and 
write the answer on the board.
	 Get Sts to do the other three.
	 e 1.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. For 3, you could also accept The more time 
you have, the more slowly you do things.
e 1.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.122)
A walk in the forest
I’m going to describe a situation and ask you some questions. 
Answer quickly without thinking about it too much – the first thing 
that comes into your head. Are you ready?
Imagine that you’re walking through a beautiful forest. The sun is 
out; there’s a light breeze. It’s a really beautiful day. You’re walking 
with one other person.
Question one: Who are you walking with?
***
As you walk through the forest, you come across an animal.
Question two: What kind of animal is it? A big animal or a small one? 
How do you interact with the animal?
***
Now you’re walking deeper into the forest, and you come to a 
clearing, where there are no trees. There’s a house in the middle of 
the clearing.
Question three: How big is the house? Does it have a fence around 
it or not?
***
You walk up to the door of the house and it’s open. You go in, and 
you see a table.
Question four: What is there on the table? Are there any people 
sitting round it?
***
You finish looking around the house and you leave out of the back 
door. There’s a huge garden behind the house. You go into the 
garden, and in the middle you find a cup.
Question five: What is the cup made of? Is it a ceramic cup? Metal? 
Plastic? Paper?
***
As you walk to the end of the garden, you come to some water. You 
must cross this water in order to get home.
Question six: What kind of water is it? A lake? A river? A small pond? 
How do you cross it? How wet do you get?
c	 Focus on the task and then play the audio again.
d	 e 1.17  Focus on the task and the chart. Point out that 
the numbers in the chart correspond to the question 
numbers in b.
	 Now play the audio for Sts to listen and complete the 
explanations for 1–6.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 the person = an important person in your life
2	 the animal = problems in your life
	
how you interact with it = how you deal with your problems
3	 the house = your ambitions
	
no fence = you are open to new ideas
	
a fence = you often think you are right
4	 the table = how you are feeling at the moment
5	 the cup = how strong your relationship is with the person you 
are walking with
6	 the water = your friends
	
how wet you get = how important your friends are to you 
(very wet = very important)
e 1.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
What you have just done is a psychological test which analyses how 
you interact with other people. Now I’m going to tell you what your 
answers mean.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 23@@
1B
23
EXTRA SUPPORT   After checking the answer, play the audio 
again for Sts to listen and repeat.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at each compound 
adjective in c and then decide what it means and whether 
it describes a positive or negative characteristic.
	 Check answers. You may want to point out to Sts that 
open-minded and narrow-minded are opposites. Laid-back 
and easy-going are very similar in meaning: laid-back 
(informal) = calm and relaxed about everything; easy-
going = relaxed and happy to accept things without 
worrying or getting angry.
	 You may also want to mention that depending on the 
context, some of the positive ones can be negative, e.g. if 
you say He’s a bit too laid-back. Explain that strong-willed, 
though often negative, can also be used in a positive 
sense, depending on the context.
Positive
easy-going = relaxed and happy to accept things without 
worrying or getting angry
good-tempered = cheerful and not easily made angry
laid-back = calm and relaxed
open-minded = willing to listen to, think about or accept 
different ideas
well-balanced = sensible and emotionally in control
well-behaved = behaving in a way that other people think is 
polite or correct
Negative
absent-minded = tending to forget things, perhaps because 
you are not thinking about what is around you, but about 
something else
bad-tempered = often angry; in an angry mood
big-headed = having a very high opinion of how important 
and clever you are
narrow-minded = not willing to listen to new ideas or to the 
opinions of others
self-centred = tending to think only about yourself and not 
thinking about the needs or feelings of other people 
strong-willed = determined to do what you want to do, even if 
other people advise you not to 
tight-fisted = not willing to spend or give much money
two-faced = not sincere
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit a sentence to describe each of the 
adjectives, e.g. A person who is bad-tempered gets angry easily, 
often about small things, etc.
e	 Focus on the Modifiers box and go through it with the 
class. Highlight that pretty is more informal than quite, and 
that rather is more often used with negative adjectives, 
e.g. rather self-centred.
	 Now focus on the task and example, showing that Sts 
need to explain why they have chosen a particular 
characteristic for someone they know.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to think of people with the 
characteristics listed in Do you know somebody who is…?
	 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to tell each other 
about the people they have chosen.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could choose one or two 
characteristics and tell the class about two people you know.
e 1.18
1	 The more you study, the more you learn.
2	 The more coffee I drink, the worse I sleep.
3	 The more time you have, the slower you do things.
4	 The fitter you are, the better you feel.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat. Tell them to try to copy 
the stress and rise–fall intonation.
h	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete each 
sentence. Monitor and help Sts, correcting any errors with 
the comparatives.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit some 
ideas.
Possible answers
1	 …the more I spend. / the more I save.
2	 …the better I feel. / the worse I feel. / the more I do.
3	 …the more difficult they are to understand.
4	 …the thinner I get. / the hungrier I am. / the more bad-
tempered I am.
5	 …the more I enjoy it. / the easier it gets.
6	 …the fitter i get. / the more I like it.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if there are any common expressions in 
their language with this structure (like the sooner the better) 
and get them to work out how to say them in English.
5	VOCABULARY  compound adjectives
a	 Tell Sts to look at the two extracts from the A walk in the 
forest listening. Give them time to work out what the 
missing words might be.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit some ideas before playing the 
audio.
b	 e 1.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  minded    ​2  sufficient    ​
e 1.19
1	 If there was no fence around the house, it means you are very 
open-minded, and welcome new ideas.
2	 If you hardly got wet at all, it means that you depend less on your 
friends and are more self-sufficient.
	 Now elicit whether the compound adjectives in a have a 
positive or negative meaning.
They both have a positive meaning.
	 Finally, focus on the Compound adjectives box and go 
through it with the class.
c	 e 1.20  Play the audio for Sts to listen and decide which 
word has the main stress.
	 Check the answer.
The second word
e 1.20
See compound adjectives in Student’s Book on p.13
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit the answer before playing the 
audio.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 24@@
CE1
24
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Ask Sts to brainstorm their top three tips for a friend who has 
a job interview the next day.
Elicit ideas and write them on the board.
1	r THE INTERVIEW  Part 1
a	 Books open. Focus on the photo and the biographical 
information about Ryan Judd. Either read it out loud or 
give Sts time to read it.
	 Do the question as a whole-class activity and elicit / 
explain that the HR department in a company deals with 
employing and training people.
b	 Focus on the task and go through the Glossary with the 
class.
	 Give Sts time to read 1–8.
	 Play the video (Part 1) once the whole way through for 
Sts to tick the things Ryan said.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
Sts should have ticked: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8.
I = interviewer, R = Ryan Judd
Part 1
I	 What’s the first thing you’re looking for in a candidate for a job?
R	 The first thing you’re looking for with a job candidate is 
enthusiasm for the role. You’re also looking for them to 
demonstrate experience…er…relevant to the position.
I	 How do you get candidates to relax in the interview?
R	 It’s important to engage with the candidate straight away, so 
when you collect them from reception or from the…the front 
of the building – whatever it may be – you want to kind of greet 
them in a friendly manner. You want to ask them some general 
questions – just talking about their journey into the interview or, 
um, the weather, or have they been to the city before.
I	 And during the interview?
R	 During an interview, once it has commenced, I will always try to 
start the interview with some general questions, just to allow the 
candidate to talk about themselves, to talk about their CV, their 
background. Um, and often when a candidate is talking about 
something they know, which is themselves and what they’ve been 
doing, um, they’re able to settle down much more quickly and 
have an element of confidence around…er…what they’re talking.
I	 Is it important for candidates to ask the interviewer questions, 
and if so, what kind of questions should candidates ask?
R	 Questions can be related to anything, so I personally would 
encourage candidates to ask questions rated to any aspect of 
employment, and most recruiters would welcome that sort of 
interaction as an opportunity to actually give a little bit more 
information about the company.
I	 Is it OK for candidates to ask about the money or the salary at the 
interview?
R	 Of course, and candidates should be honest and realistic 
about their expectations, too. An interview is an appropriate 
environment to ask such a question, especially if salary, or…er…
salary banding, was not identified in the job advert.
I	 How important are CVs and covering letters?
R	 CVs are very important to a recruiter because it actually provides 
an overview of a candidate’s background, their employment, 
Lesson plan
This is the first of five Colloquial English lessons featuring 
interviews and conversations commissioned and filmed 
specially for English File. In the first section, The Interview, 
there is an interview related to one or more of the topics 
in the preceding Files. The interviewees (Ryan Judd, Julia 
Eccleshare, Candida Brady, Simon Callow, and George 
Tannenbaum) all have unique first-hand experience in 
their field and offer interesting perspectives on what they 
do, as well as giving Sts an opportunity to engage with 
authentic, unscripted speech. In the second part of each 
Colloquial English lesson, The Conversation, there is an 
authentic unedited conversation between three people 
about an aspect of the same topic. The focus in this part 
is to encourage Sts to become more confident about 
following a conversation at natural speed. It is often hard for 
Sts to follow a conversation on audio when three (or more) 
people are speaking amongst themselves, and having these 
conversations on video will enable Sts to follow more easily 
who is saying what, and to focus on aspects of language 
related to such conversations, e.g. emphasizing a point, 
responding to an idea, etc. This part ends with Sts discussing 
further questions related to the topic in small groups. We 
suggest that Sts watch the video a final time with the script 
or subtitles, either in class after each section or at home. 
This will let them see what they did / didn’t understand, and 
help them to further develop their awareness of features of 
spoken English such as elision, false starts, discourse markers, 
hesitation devices, etc.
In this lesson, the person interviewed is Ryan Judd, a 
recruitment advisor who works in Human Resources, and the 
focus is on formal language.
Then, in The Conversation, Sts watch three people discussing 
whether it is OK to slightly exaggerate on your CV when 
applying for a job. Sts then discuss this question as well as a 
couple of other questions related to the topic, focusing on 
ways to emphasize their ideas.
Teacher can find all the video for these lessons on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre. Sts can find all the video content 
on Online Practice.
These lessons can be used with Class DVD or Classroom 
Presentation Tool.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Colloquial English 1 
Quick Test 1 
File 1 Test
For students
Workbook  Colloquial English 1 
Can you remember? 1
Online Practice  Colloquial English 1 
Check your progress
	 1	
Colloquial English  Talking about…
getting a job
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 25@@
CE1
25
which was absolutely fine, but again, during the interview, when 
she hadn’t announced that’s why she was doing it, it was a bit of a 
surprise.
I	 How important is the way a candidate dresses for an interview?
R	 A candidate’s dress for interview is important because it shows 
how serious they take the situation. Um, however, I would always 
recommend that candidates would come to interview, um, in 
a dress that is appropriate for the role they’re applying for. In 
today’s modern…er…recruitment…er…environment, it’s not 
always necessary for a…a guy to wear a suit to an interview. 
However, you would expect to see a shirt, you would expect 
to see a blazer, you would expect…expect to see appropriate 
footwear, and the same for a…a lady as well – um, certain clothes, 
certain types of footwear, would be inappropriate to come into 
an interview and may set a perception of that candidate which is 
perhaps incorrect.
I	 Have you ever had an interview with someone who was dressed 
very inappropriately?
R	 I had an interview on one occasion where a candidate actually 
arrived in tennis gear – a white T-shirt and shorts. They’d literally 
come straight from the tennis court and they had simply 
forgotten the interview was on that day, had suddenly had the 
reminder that actually they were due to be at the interview, so 
they thought they would come anyway as they were. Um, I did 
see the candidate and they were actually very impressive; we just 
had to move past the…the clothing aspect, but actually it was 
quite funny and allowed a real opportunity to engage with that 
particular candidate from the start.
I	 Did that person get the job?
R	 No, they didn’t.
b	 Focus on the four questions and the Glossary. Now give 
Sts time, in pairs, to see if they can remember any of the 
answers.
	 Play the video again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at appropriate 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare orally what they have 
understood.
1	 He could have stopped the interview or carried on.
2	 She was diabetic and needed to eat something to calm 
down.
3	 Clothes that are appropriate for the role that they are 
applying for.
4	 He had forgotten that he had the interview and had come 
directly from the tennis court in his tennis clothes. He didn’t 
get the job.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs 
and then get some feedback.
r Part 3
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the two 
gapped questions.
	 Play the video (Part 3) once the whole way through for 
Sts to complete the task.
	 Check answers. Make sure Sts understand the 
situation in 2.
what they’ve been doing to date. But a cover letter can actually 
be more important, because that’s where a candidate will actually 
list and identify how they meet the criteria for the post, so it 
allows a candidate to be very specific about demonstrating what 
skills and experience they have that would be relevant – and 
often, that skill and experience may be missed on a CV when 
you’re looking at a wider career history.
I	 What’s the worst thing a job candidate can do when they’re 
applying for a job?
R	 First thing is, obviously, to make mistakes on their application – 
um, that’s always viewed negatively, depending on the role that 
they’re applying for. Um, also coming to an interview late, coming 
to an interview unprepared.
c	 Focus on the three questions and give Sts time, in pairs, to 
see if they can remember any of the answers.
	 Play the video again the whole way through.
	 You could get Sts to compare with a partner before 
checking answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video after each 
question has been answered and, in pairs, get Sts to 
compare orally what they have understood.
1	 He asks some general questions about their journey to the 
interview, the weather, or if they have been to Oxford before.
2	 He asks some general questions about the candidate, their 
CV, their background.
3	 Information which shows how the candidate meets the 
criteria for the post, including specific skills and experience 
they have that is relevant
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Either do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs 
and then get some feedback.
r Part 2
a	 Focus on the task and play the video (Part 2) once the 
whole way through for Sts to answer the question.
	 Check answer.s
One candidate thought they were being interviewed for a very 
different job. 
One candidate started eating a chocolate bar during the 
interview. 
One candidate arrived in their tennis clothes.
Part 2
I	 Can you give us an example of some of the more difficult 
interviews you’ve been involved in?
R	 I’ve been in interviews where candidates haven’t been prepared 
and have not been able to, from the start, answer some of the 
questions. Um, one particular situation was when a candidate 
actually thought they were being interviewed for something 
completely different. Um, so again, you have to actually think 
how do you deal with that situation – do you stop the interview 
or do you carry on?
I	 Anything else that has surprised you during an interview?
R	 There was another situation where…er…a candidate actually 
produced food during the interview. Er…in the middle of 
answering a question, they stopped and rummaged in their 
bag to pull out a KitKat, um, which took both myself and the 
interviewing manager by surprise. We did ask and enquire as to 
what she was doing…er…at which point she actually advised she 
was a diabetic and just felt at that particular moment, um, that 
she just needed a little…er…something to eat to calm things – 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 26@@
CE1
26
1	 How would you describe Facebook to your grandmother?
2	 Would you rather fight a horse-sized duck or a hundred  
duck-sized horses?
Part 3
I	 What can you tell us about extreme interviewing, that is, asking 
candidates very strange questions like What dinosaur would 
you be?
R	 OK. Um, extreme interviewing is a technique used by recruiters 
to put the candidate in a situation that they may not have been 
in before, um, or to put them…give them a scenario where they 
have to think quickly, where they have to digest information, 
where they perhaps have to problem-solve before giving an 
answer.
I	 Have you used it yourself?
R	 It’s not something that I have direct experience of, but I am 
aware of some of the techniques that are used and some of the 
questions that could be used. Um, I was reading recently about, 
um, extreme interviewing techniques used for an insurance 
company. They asked candidates to describe if…they asked 
candidates during the interview how they would describe 
Facebook to their grandmother. What the recruiter was looking 
for was for that candidate to display an element of, um, technical 
skills and technical awareness, also to display communication 
skills and how they would explain Facebook to an audience or 
to somebody who doesn’t understand modern technology or 
modern social media.
I	 Do you have any others?
R	 One I was reading about recently was posed to candidates 
during an interview…er…where they were looking to assess 
a candidate’s ability to multitask. The candidates were asked 
whether they would want to fight a horse-sized duck or a 
hundred duck-sized horses. Depending on the answer – one or a 
hundred – that would potentially dictate whether that candidate 
was most comfortable multitasking or dealing with one…er…
situation or one objective at a time.
I	 What would your answer to that question have been?
R	 I…when I read it, I had to re-read it four times, and that’s just me 
reading it. In an interview, I would have had to have asked for that 
question to be repeated, and I’m not even sure if I would have 
been able to give an immediate response, because I would still be 
trying to understand what exactly they were asking of me. I guess 
for me personally, when I’d thought about it, I would have said 
one horse-sized duck, um, but that would potentially mean that 
I’m not able to multitask, so…!
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–6. 
Remind them that they need to say why the F sentences 
are false.
	 Play the video again the whole way through for Sts to do 
the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at the relevant 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare what they have 
understood before marking the sentences true or false.
1	 T
2	 F (‘It’s not something that I have direct experience of…’)
3	 T
4	 F (It was to see if candidates had the ability to multitask.)
5	 F (He would have had to have asked for the question to 
be repeated, and he probably wouldn’t have been able to 
answer immediately.)
6	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs 
and then get some feedback. You could also tell Sts your 
own answers. With a show of hands, you could find out 
how many Sts are good multitaskers according to the 
extreme interview question.
2	r LOOKING AT LANGUAGE
	 This exercise focuses on an aspect of spoken language 
which is illustrated by the person being interviewed. 
Focus on the Formal language box and go through it 
with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
extracts 1–7.
	 Play the video, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 If necessary, play again and then check answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they can remember any of 
the highlighted words or phrases before they listen to the 
extracts.
1  demonstrate    ​2  commenced    ​3  viewed    ​4  announced    ​
5  appropriate footwear, a lady    ​6  am aware of    ​7  response 
1	 …you’re also looking for them to demonstrate experience 
relevant to the position.
2	 During an interview, once it has commenced, I will always try to 
start the interview with some general questions…
3	 First thing is, obviously, to make mistakes on their application – 
um, that’s always viewed negatively…
4	 …but again, during the interview, when she hadn’t announced 
that’s why she was doing it, it was a bit of a surprise.
5	 …you would expect…expect to see appropriate footwear. And 
the same for a…a lady as well…
6	 It’s not something that I have direct experience of, but I am aware 
of some of the techniques that they use…
7	 …I’m not even sure if I would have been able to give an 
immediate response…
3	r THE CONVERSATION
a	 Focus on the photo and tell Sts they are going to watch 
the three people answer the question, which they will 
see on the screen. Focus on the task and make sure 
Sts understand what they have to do. Make sure Sts 
understand to exaggerate (= to make sth seem larger, 
better, worse, or more important than it really is).
!   Don’t ask Sts their opinion yet, as they will be discussing 
this later in c.
	 Now play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
write the initials in the appropriate place on the line.
	 Check answers by drawing the line on the board and 
writing the initials in the correct place.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening script and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
S
D
A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 27@@
CE1
27
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read extracts 1–3.
	 Play the video for Sts to watch and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  terrible terrible    ​2  really really    ​3  definitely
1	 I think it’s a terrible, terrible idea to even slightly exaggerate…
2	 …you might find yourself in a situation where you’ve wasted their 
time and you’ve just made yourself look really, really silly. 
3	 I’ve definitely exaggerated on a CV.
	 Highlight that we often repeat an adjective or adverb to 
be more emphatic. We can also use definitely to stress that 
we are sure about something.
e	 Focus on the question and the extracts and give Sts time 
to read them. 
	 Play the video for Sts to watch and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  speaking    ​2  will
	 Now ask Sts what the speakers do to make the missing 
word more emphatic.
They give the word extra stress.
1	 …but I wouldn’t do that if I knew the job was going to require me 
speaking that language…
2	 …you shouldn’t outright lie because you will get caught out and 
a lot of the times it could cost a company a lot of money…
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the extracts in d and e again and get 
Sts to try to copy each speaker’s stress and intonation.
f	 Put Sts in small groups of three if possible. Focus on the 
questions and check Sts understand what they mean. 
Then set a time limit for Sts to discuss them. 
	 Monitor and help, and encourage them to use the 
different strategies focused on in d and e to emphasize 
what they think.
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
Interviewer	
When you’re applying for a job, do you think it’s OK to 
slightly exaggerate on your CV?
Alice
I think it’s a terrible, terrible idea to even slightly exaggerate because 
I think it will always come back to hurt you. I think being as honest 
as you can − I think it doesn’t matter if you, if you can’t do something 
if you say ‘I’m willing to learn, I’m a good learner, I, like, I have these 
skills, I’m really open to learning some new ones’, but to go into an 
interview or, or write on your CV. Um, ‘I can speak, you know, a very 
average amount of French’ when you don’t know anything, that…
you might find yourself in a situation where you’ve wasted their 
time and you’ve just made yourself look really, really silly. I think it’s 
a terrible idea and I would feel really uncomfortable − um, I’d say I’m 
quite an honest person so, if I can’t do something, I’ll just say it.
Sarah
I’ve definitely exaggerated on a CV! Um, I think you have to be – I 
mean, I would still consider myself an honest person and I’m not 
going to say I speak fluent Chinese when I don’t − but I think I’ve 
done, I’ve done it when it wouldn’t be an essential skill for the job, 
maybe just to pad − well, not even pad things out because I’m 
talking very small exaggerations here, but, where it’s more for the 
optional side of things − just to make it look a bit more…like, I 
might put a language on there that, yeah I can read a postcard or 
I can understand an airport announcement, but if you asked me 
to actually speak it…but I wouldn’t do that if I knew the job was 
going to require me speaking that language because, like you say, 
you’re going to be potentially in a very awkward situation if that 
ever comes up, um, and I’ve had, I have had job interviews where 
they suddenly start speaking to you in another language to check, 
to check whether you speak the language or not, so…but I think, I 
think white lies are OK, personally.
Debbie
I swing between both. Um, you shouldn’t outright lie because you 
will get caught out and if it’s − a lot of the times it could cost a 
company a lot of money if they employ you to do a job and then 
when you turn up, you cannot do it or to the ability that you have 
told them you could, and there’s a lot of people to be affected. 
So, you shouldn’t lie because you will be asked to use it. But…the 
question didn’t say where on the CV, so I agree with you because 
when you’re talking about hobbies, that is to see what sort of person 
you are, whether they would like you to work with them, so if you’re 
quite a boring person and you don’t have many hobbies, I think 
you should exaggerate a few to make yourself look a little bit more 
interesting. So, I cook every single night, but that doesn’t mean I 
enjoy cooking, but I’m happy to put down that I love cooking.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentence 
beginnings 1–6 and endings A–F. 
	 Play the video again, pausing after each speaker to give 
Sts time to match their two sentence halves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  D    ​2  B    ​3  A    ​4  F    ​5  E    ​6  C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts 
in pairs and then get some feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 28@@
2A
28
	2A	 Doctor, doctor!
 G   present perfect simple and continuous
 V   illnesses and injuries
 P   /ʃ/, /dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /k/
Lesson plan
The topic of the lesson is medicine.  
The first half of the lesson starts with a quiz on first aid – the 
Sts’ own knowledge is tested and discussed. Sts then expand 
their vocabulary of medical words to describe symptoms, 
illnesses, and treatment. This is followed by a pronunciation 
focus on consonant sounds. Then Sts listen to three speakers 
talking about a time when someone needed first aid. Finally, 
Sts discuss whether they have ever received or given first aid, 
and what they could do in certain emergency situations.
The second half of the lesson starts with a light-hearted 
conversation between a doctor and a difficult patient, 
which leads into the grammar focus where Sts revise and 
extend their knowledge of the present perfect simple 
and continuous. These verb forms can be problematic 
for many Sts because of L1 interference. After practising 
the grammar, Sts read an article from The Sunday Times 
on cyberchondriacs, people who obsessively search for 
medical information online. Sts focus on summarizing 
each paragraph and on medical phrases, finishing with a 
discussion about hyperchondria and cyberchondria, and 
typical health concerns. Finally, the grammar and lexis are 
consolidated in the Writing Bank, where Sts write an informal 
email explaining to a friend why they haven’t been well and 
saying what they have been doing recently.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  present perfect simple and continuous p.164 
Communicative  Ask the doctor p.194 (instructions p.184) 
Vocabulary  Illnesses and injuries p.218  
(instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  2A
Online Practice  2A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.16 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Erma Bombeck (1927–1996) was 
a journalist and author of 15 books. She was a popular 
humorist in the USA and Canada.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and if they find it 
funny. You could ask them if there is anything else about a 
doctor or his / her surgery that would make them not want 
to go there.
1	VOCABULARY  illnesses and injuries
a	 Focus on the title of the quiz, Medical myths or first-aid 
facts? Elicit the meaning of myths (= sth that many people 
believe, but that does not exist or is false) and first aid 
(= simple medical treatment that is given to sb before 
a doctor comes or before the person can be taken to 
a hospital).
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to read all six 
questions in the quiz and to decide what the highlighted 
words and phrases mean.
!   Stress that Sts shouldn’t answer the questions until they 
completely understand all the options.
	 Check answers by explaining / translating / miming, or by 
using the illustrations.
running water = water from the tap
damp cloth = slightly wet cloth
rub (v) = to press two surfaces against each other and move 
them backwards and forwards
press (v) = to push sth closely and firmly against sth
tip (v) = to move so that one end or side is higher than the other
pinch (v) = to hold sth tightly between the thumb and finger
bandage (n) = a strip of cloth used for tying around a part of the 
body that has been hurt, in order to protect or support it
	 Now tell Sts to look at all six questions again with their 
partner and to mark whether options a, b, and c are myths 
(M) or facts (F). You might want to pre-teach / check some 
lexis, e.g. sprained ankle, hypothermia, etc.
	 Then get feedback from various pairs, but don’t tell them 
yet if they are correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read the introduction as a class, making 
sure Sts understand the aim of the quiz.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Medical myths or first-aid facts?,  
A on p.106, B on p.111, to each check the answers to half 
of the quiz.
	 When Sts have finished reading, ask them to close their 
books or to cover the answers and look at the illustrations 
on p.16, and tell their partner what the correct answer is 
for each one.
	 Check answers as a whole class, and find out how many 
Sts got the correct answers.
1  a and c are myths.    ​2  a is a myth.    ​3  a and b are myths.    ​
4  a is a myth.    ​5  c is a myth.    ​6  c is a myth.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Illnesses and injuries 
on p.152.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 29@@
2A
29
Vocabulary notes
Minor illnesses and conditions
Some of the words may be similar in Sts’ L1, e.g. diarrhoea, 
but the pronunciation is likely to be quite different.
You might want to point out that cough is both a noun 
and a verb.
Highlight that be sick = vomit, but feel sick = want to vomit. 
Sick is also sometimes used as a synonym for ill, especially in 
American English. Also highlight the meaning of swallow.
You may want to point out that the adjective swollen 
comes from the verb swell (swelled, swollen).
Highlight also that ache, hurt, and pain can all be used to 
describe the same thing, e.g. I have a pain in my back. / 
My back hurts. / My back aches. There is a slight difference 
between ache and hurt: ache = a continuous, dull pain; 
hurts = often stronger (especially sudden) pain, e.g. 
Ouch! That hurts! Ache is used both as a noun and a verb, 
whereas hurt is normally used as a verb, and pain is 
normally used as a noun.
Phrasal verbs connected with illness
Other phrasal verbs related to illness that you may want 
to teach are come down with (e.g. the flu), break out (e.g. an 
epidemic), or trip over.
	 Focus on the title of the Vocabulary Bank and explain / 
elicit the difference between illness and injury: 
– illness (n) = the general term for the state of being 
unwell, e.g. My uncle has a serious illness. 
– injury (n) = harm done to an animal or person’s body, e.g. 
in an accident
	 Focus on 1 Minor illnesses and conditions and check 
that Sts know the meaning of minor /ˈmaɪnə/ (= not very 
large, important, or serious). Get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs.
	 e 2.1  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.1
Illnesses and injuries
1 Minor illnesses and conditions, b
9	 a cough
6	 a headache
1	 a rash
4	 a temperature
2	 sunburn
8	 She’s being sick. / She’s vomiting.
 10	 She’s sneezing.
3	 Her ankle’s swollen.
7	 Her back hurts. / Her back aches.
5	 Her finger’s bleeding.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Now get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.2  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. You may also want to teach he has a runny 
nose as another symptom of a cold.
e 2.2
d
1	 B	 He has a sore throat. It hurts when he talks or swallows food.
2	 D	He has diarrhoea. He’s been to the toilet five times this 
morning.
3	 E	 He feels sick. He feels that he’s going to vomit.
4	 C	 He’s fainted. It’s so hot in the room that he’s lost consciousness.
5	 H	He has a blister on his foot. He’s been walking in uncomfortable 
shoes.
6	 F	 He has a cold. He’s sneezing a lot and he has a cough.
7	 A	 He has flu. He has a temperature and he aches all over.
8	 G	He feels dizzy. He feels that everything is spinning round.
9	 I	 He’s cut himself. He’s bleeding.
	 Give further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the words / sentences in a, 
look at the pictures, and see if they can remember them. 
	 Focus on 2 Injuries and more serious conditions and 
make sure Sts know the meaning of symptom /ˈsɪmptəm/ 
(= a change in your body or mind that shows that you are 
not healthy). Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.3
2 Injuries and more serious conditions
1	 C	 He’s unconscious. He’s breathing, but his eyes are closed and he 
can’t hear or feel anything.
2	 G	He’s had an allergic reaction. He was stung by a wasp and now 
he has a rash and has difficulty breathing.
3	 B	 He’s sprained his ankle. He fell badly and now it’s swollen.
4	 D	He has high blood pressure. It’s one hundred and eighty over 
one hundred and forty.
5	 E	 He has food poisoning. He ate some prawns that were off.
6	 F	 He’s choking. He was eating a steak and a piece got stuck in his 
throat.
7	 A	 He’s burnt himself. He spilt some boiling water on his hand.
	 Give further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on the Common treatments for… box and go 
through it with the class. You might want to point out 
that bandage here is a verb, but it can also be a noun. You 
could also elicit or model the pronunciation of sprained, 
allergic, and antihistamine /æntiˈhɪstəmiːn/.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the 
illnesses or conditions in 1a and (1–9) in 1c as well as 
the injuries or conditions (1–7) in 2a, look at the pictures, 
causes, or symptoms, and say the injuries or conditions.
	 Now focus on 3 Phrasal verbs connected with illness 
and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know the meaning of the 
new words / phrases.
e 2.4
3 Phrasal verbs connected with illness
1	 pass out means faint
2	 lie down means put your body in a horizontal position
3	 throw up means vomit, be sick
4	 get over means get better, recover from something
5	 come round means become conscious again
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 30@@
2A
30
	 Finally, get Sts, in pairs, to practise saying the words.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then check answers.
1	 ti (before on), ss, sh, ci; the most common is sh
2	 /dʒ/
3	 /k/ and /tʃ/; /tʃ/ is more common
d	 Now tell Sts to go to the Sound Bank on pp.166–167. 
Explain that here they can find all the sounds of English 
and their phonetic symbols, and also the typical spellings 
for these sounds, plus some more irregular ones.
	 Focus on the four sounds that Sts have just been 
working on and the typical spellings. Highlight that 
they have to be careful with ch because although it is 
usually pronounced /tʃ/, it can also be /k/, as in ache, or 
occasionally /ʃ/, as in machine. You may also want to point 
out when checking rule 2 that g before y can be /dʒ/ or 
/g/, e.g. gym /dʒɪm/ or gynaecology /ɡaɪnəˈkɒlədʒi/.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
e	 e 2.6  Focus on the task and give Sts a few moments to 
look at all the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Let Sts use dictionaries, and get them to 
focus on the phonetics to see if the words are pronounced 
the same in English as in their L1.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could also pause the audio before 
each word and get Sts to tell you how they think the word is 
pronounced, and then play the word.
	 Check answers and make sure that Sts know what all the 
words mean. Elicit or model pronunciation.
cholesterol = /k/    indigestion = /dʒ/, /tʃ/    
injection = /dʒ/, /ʃ/    operation = /ʃ/    scratch = /k/, /tʃ/    
surgeon = /dʒ/    syringe = /dʒ/
cholesterol /kəˈlestərɔːl/ = a substance found in blood, fat, 
and most tissues of the body. Too much cholesterol can cause 
heart disease.
indigestion /ɪndɪˈdʒestʃən/ = pain caused by difficulty in 
digesting food
injection /ɪnˈdʒekʃn/ = an act of injecting sb with a drug or 
other substance
operation /ɒpəˈreɪʃn/ = the process of cutting open a part of a 
person’s body in order to remove or repair a damaged part
scratch /skrætʃ/ = cut or damage your skin slightly with 
sth sharp
surgeon /ˈsɜːdʒən/ = a doctor who is trained to perform 
surgery (= medical operations that involve cutting open a 
person’s body)
syringe /sɪˈrɪndʒ/ = a plastic or glass tube with a long hollow 
needle that is used for putting drugs, etc., into a person’s body 
or for taking a small amount of blood from a person
e 2.6
See words in Student’s Book on p.17
	 Finally, play the audio again, pausing after each word for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the phrasal verbs, or model and drill them yourself. Give 
further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover 1–5 and try to remember 
the meaning of the phrasal verbs.
EXTRA IDEA   Sts can take it in turns to test each other. Sts B 
close their books and Sts A define or explain a word for B to 
try and remember, e.g. What does the phrasal verb ‘to pass out’ 
mean? After a few minutes, Sts can swap roles. 
In a monolingual class, Sts could also test each other by 
saying the word in their L1 for their partner to say in English.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
Possible answers
eating out: an allergic reaction, food-poisoning, diarrhoea, 
feeling sick, vomiting, stomach ache, choking
hiking in the mountains: a blister, hypothermia, a sprained 
ankle, sunburn, be stung by an insect
doing sport: backache, a sprained ankle, a swollen ankle, 
a blister
visiting a tropical country:  sunburn, be stung by an insect
2	PRONUNCIATION  /ʃ/, /dʒ/, /tʃ/, and /k/
Pronunciation notes
English sounds
Sts who have used previous levels of English File should 
recognize the sound pictures and be fairly confident 
with phonetic symbols. If your Sts are new to the series, 
you will need to explain to them that the sound pictures 
show the phonetic symbols and give a clear example of 
a word with the target sound to help them to remember 
the pronunciation of the symbol. There is one for each of 
the 44 sounds of English. Sts will see the chart and more 
example words when they go to the Sound Bank in d.
a	 Focus on the four sound pictures and elicit the words and 
consonant sounds (shower /ʃ/, jazz /dʒ/, chess /tʃ/, key /k/).
	 Then give Sts time to put the words in the correct column. 
You might want to tell them that this kind of exercise is 
easier if they say the words aloud to themselves.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
b	 e 2.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You might want to remind Sts that 
temperature /ˈtemprətʃə/ has three syllables (the second 
e is silent).
e 2.5
shower /ʃ/	 infection, pressure, rash, unconscious
jazz /dʒ/	
allergic, bandage, emergency, injury
chess /tʃ/	 choking, temperature
key /k/	
ache, sick, stomach
	 Now play it again, pausing after each group of words for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 31@@
2A
31
e 2.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
Jane
So, my husband and I were out shopping in our local town, and I saw a 
man lying on the ground. He was just a stranger, not someone I knew, 
and his wife was there, standing by him. And I used to be a nurse in 
A&E, so I went straight up to him to see if I could help. He was a bit 
blue; I felt his pulse and he didn’t have a pulse, so I thought he was 
probably having a heart attack. I felt quite calm because I knew what 
to do – um, I started doing cardiac massage – you know, putting your 
hand on the chest and pressing down fast and at regular intervals – 
and my husband talked to the man’s wife; he took her to one side to 
calm her down, because obviously she was in shock. I kept going until 
the ambulance turned up, and the man was still alive then, and they 
took him to hospital. I was really pleased that I could do something.
Daniel
So, I was cycling to work one morning, and just as I was coming round 
the corner, an old lady stepped off the pavement in front of me and 
she tripped and fell into the road. I just managed not to cycle into 
her, and I dropped my bike and I went over to see if she was OK. And 
it was busy in the street, as the shops were just opening and lots of 
people were around. She’d fallen heavily, but she was still conscious, 
and she told us she was sure she’d broken her arm. Somebody 
stopped the traffic, and I helped move her to the pavement, 
somebody else went and got a chair from one of the shops, and 
someone else called an ambulance, and we stayed with her until it 
came. It was obviously an effort for her to sit up, it was very painful, 
so I let her lean against me. I remember I was a bit worried because 
I’d left my rucksack on the bike with all my things in it, and I was 
worried someone was going to steal it, but I couldn’t move because 
I was holding the woman up. Later, I went to visit her in hospital, and 
she’d actually broken her shoulder in two places and had to have an 
operation. I think, though, if I had just been walking past, I wouldn’t 
necessarily have gone to help, but because it had happened right in 
front of me, I felt I had to do something, and now I’m, I’m glad I was 
able to do something – I felt quite good about it afterwards.
Alison
So, I was waiting for the bus at the end of my road, to go into work. A 
very big man – very tall man – walked past the bus stop, and I noticed 
him particularly because he was wearing very dirty clothes and he 
was walking in rather a strange way – and to be honest, I thought he 
was probably drunk. Then all of a sudden, he stopped walking and 
fell backwards, and hit the back of his head on the pavement. He 
fell so hard on the back of his head that it made a really loud noise. 
And then he just lay still. Some teenagers in the queue called an 
ambulance and I stood by the man. I felt completely helpless. He was 
breathing, but I didn’t really know what to do. The ambulance arrived 
quite quickly, and the paramedic took the man’s hand and talked 
to him, and then they put him on a stretcher and took him away. 
Afterwards, I thought I should’ve done more, I should’ve perhaps 
turned him on his side, or put a coat under his head – at least, I 
should have held his hand to show someone was there. I felt a bit 
ashamed because I think the reason why I didn’t help him more was 
because he was a bit dirty, a bit scruffy, and I was scared of him.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the three stories again 
and this time they need to answer questions 1–5 for 
each story.
	 Give Sts time to read the questions and see if they can 
remember any of the information.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts to explain why the 
speaker felt the way he / she did during and after the event 
(see answers in brackets in 5 in the answer key).
	 Before playing the audio, you might want to pre-teach 
pulse /pʌls/ (= the regular beat of blood as it is sent 
around the body, that can be felt in different places, 
especially on the inside part of the wrist).
	 Now play the first story, pausing at the end to give Sts 
time to answer the questions.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 
an anecdote – where they were, who with, what 
happened, how they felt
a	 Focus on the task and make sure that Sts understand 
the situation.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner what 
they would do and why.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. You could also have 
a class vote with a show of hands for each reaction, or 
simply tell the class what you would do.
b	 e 2.7  Focus on the task and give Sts time to quickly read 
the extracts.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers. You might want to check Sts know the 
meaning of pavement and stretcher.
1	 pulse, having a heart attack
2	 calm her down, in shock
3	 ambulance turned up
4	 tripped and fell
5	 was still conscious
6	 very painful
7	 fell backwards
8	 called an ambulance
9	 took him away
e 2.7
Jane
1	 …he didn’t have a pulse, so I thought he was probably having a 
heart attack.
2	 …he took her to one side to calm her down, because obviously 
she was in shock.
3	 I kept going until the ambulance turned up…
Daniel
4	 …an old lady stepped off the pavement in front of me and she 
tripped and fell into the road.
5	 She’d fallen heavily, but she was still conscious…
6	 It was obviously an effort for her to sit up, it was very painful…
Alison
7	 Then all of a sudden, he stopped walking and fell backwards…
8	 Some teenagers in the queue called an ambulance…
9	 …then they put him on a stretcher and took him away.
c	 e 2.8  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the stories 
and must make a note of whether the speaker helped or 
not when the incident happened, and why. Make sure Sts 
know what an incident is (= sth that happens, especially 
sth unusual or unpleasant).
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts 
time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Jane: Yes because she used to be a nurse.
Daniel: Yes because it happened right in front of him.
Alison: No because she didn’t know what to do.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 32@@
2A
32
e 2.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.123) 
D = doctor, P = patient
D	 Hello again, Mr Payne. What’s the problem this time?
P	 Doctor, I haven’t been feeling well for a few days. I’ve been 
coughing a lot, and I keep getting headaches. I have a 
temperature today.
D	 What have you been taking for the headaches?
P	 Paracetamol. But I read on the internet that headaches can be the 
first symptom of a brain tumour.
D	 How many tablets have you taken today?
P	 I took two before breakfast.
D	 And have you taken your temperature this morning?
P	 Yes. I’ve taken it five or six times already. It’s high.
D	 Let me see. Mmm…well, your temperature seems to be perfectly 
normal now.
P	 I think I need a blood test. I haven’t had one for two months.
D	 Well, Mr Payne, you know, I think we should wait for a few days 
and see how your symptoms…um…develop. Take two more 
paracetamol and go to bed early tonight.
P	 But…
D	 Goodbye, Mr Payne. Goodbye.
b	 e 2.10  Focus on the task and then play the audio.
	 Check answers. Elicit / Explain the meaning of the informal 
idiom a pain in the neck (= a person or thing that is very 
annoying) and that a person like this is a hypochondriac 
/haɪpəˈkɒndriæk/ (= sb who worries all the time about 
their health and believes that they are ill / sick when 
there is nothing wrong with them). Elicit or model the 
pronunciation.
They think he’s a pain in the neck. 
We call someone who behaves like this ’a hypochondriac’.
e 2.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.123) 
R = receptionist, D = doctor
R	 Your next patient is Mrs Morris – here are her notes…
D	 How many times has Mr Payne been to the Health Centre 
this month?
R	 Er, six times, I think…
D	 That Mr Payne! He’s a complete pain in the neck…
!   Don’t ask Sts yet if they know anyone who is a 
hypochondriac, as they will be asked this after the listening.
c	 e 2.11  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–7.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and circle the correct form.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with a 
partner. Check answers. Now ask Sts if both options are 
possible in any of the sentences.
1  I haven’t been feeling    ​2  I’ve been coughing    ​
3  have you been taking    ​4  have you taken    ​5  have you taken  ​
6  I’ve taken it    ​7  haven’t had
In 1 and 3, the other option is possible although less common.
e 2.11
1	 I haven’t been feeling well for a few days.
2	 I’ve been coughing a lot and I keep getting headaches.
3	 What have you been taking for the headaches?
4	 How many tablets have you taken today?
5	 And have you taken your temperature this morning?
6	 Yes. I’ve taken it five or six times already.
7	 I think I need a blood test. I haven’t had one for two months.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then either check 
answers now for Jane’s story, or repeat the process for the 
other two stories.
	 Check answers.
Jane
1	 She was out shopping with her husband.
2	 A man. He was lying on the ground.
3	 She felt his pulse and started doing cardiac massage.
4	 An ambulance came and took the man to hospital.
5	 a) She felt quite calm (because she knew what to do).
	
b) She felt pleased (because she was able to do something).
Daniel
1	 He was cycling to work.
2	 An old lady. She tripped and fell into the road.
3	 He helped move her and then helped her sit up until the 
ambulance came.
4	 She was taken to hospital and he visited her there.
5	 a) He felt worried (because he thought someone might steal 
his rucksack.
	
b) He felt glad (because he was able to do something).
Alison
1	 She was waiting for the bus.
2	 A big, tall man. He fell backwards and hit his head on the 
pavement.
3	 She didn’t really do anything.
4	 An ambulance arrived, and the paramedics took him away on 
a stretcher.
5	 a) She felt helpless (because she didn’t know what to do).
	
b) She felt ashamed of not helping the man (because he was 
a bit dirty).
EXTRA IDEA   You could ask Sts What do you think you would 
have done in the three situations?
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.123, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis, e.g. compulsory, severe, and epileptic seizure 
/epɪˈleptɪk ˈsiːʒə/. Elicit or model the pronunciation.
	 Put Sts in small groups to ask and answer the questions.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary.
	 Get some feedback for each question from various groups.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start, you could quickly elicit 
some expressions they saw in 1A for reacting to what 
someone says, e.g. Oh, really?, How awful!, etc.
4	GRAMMAR  present perfect simple and 
continuous
a	 e 2.9  Focus on the photo and the task. You could tell Sts 
to close their books and write the questions on the board.
	 Before playing the audio, you might want to tell Sts that 
paracetamol /pærəˈsiːtəmɒl/ is a type of painkiller – they 
saw painkiller in the Vocabulary Bank. Play the audio 
once the whole way through.
	 Check answers.
1	 A cough, headaches, a temperature
2	 A brain tumour
3	 A blood test
4	 He should wait a few days, take paracetamol, and go to bed 
early.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 33@@
2A
33
1	 Do you often get colds? 
How many colds have you had in the last three months?
2	 Do you take any vitamins or supplements? 
How long have you been taking them?
3	 Do you drink much water? 
How many glasses have you drunk today?
4	 Do you do any exercise? What (do you do)? 
How long have you been doing it?
5	 Do you eat a lot of fruit and vegetables? 
How many portions have you had today?
6	 Do you walk to school / work / university? 
How far have you walked today?
7	 How many hours do you sleep a night? 
Have you been sleeping well recently?
8	 Are you allergic to anything? 
Have you ever had a serious allergic reaction?
	 Give Sts time to ask and answer the questions in pairs. 
Monitor and correct any mistakes with the present perfect.
	 Get some feedback.
5	READING & SPEAKING  reading and 
summarizing
a	 Focus on the title of the article and elicit / explain the 
meaning of a confession /kənˈfeʃn/ (= a statement 
admitting sth that you are ashamed of or embarrassed 
about).
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to read the first 
paragraph.
	 When they have finished, they should complete the 
definition of a cyberchondriac. You could remind Sts of  
Mr Payne, the patient, in Grammar, and elicit that he was 
a hypochondriac.
	 Check the answer. You could elicit / explain the meaning 
of compulsively (= in a way that is difficult to stop or 
control).
Suggested answer
(real or imagined) symptoms of illness
	 Now ask Sts if they think the article is humorous or serious.
It’s humorous, e.g. Did I go straight there? Of course not., Sadly, the 
problem with Dr Google is that he isn’t exactly a comfort in times 
of crisis.
b	 Tell Sts they are now going to read the whole article. Point 
out that 1–5 summarize each paragraph of the article. 
They must complete each summary with phrases a–e. 
Point out the Glossary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted phrases.
1  b    ​2  d    ​3  a    ​4  e    ​5  c
	 You could now ask Sts if they have changed their minds 
about the tone of the article.
c	 Sts now focus on some more medical phrases which 
appear in the article. Get Sts to first look at the highlighted 
phrases in context and guess their meaning.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to circle the correct form(s) 
before they listen to the extracts. Elicit the answers and then 
play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2A on p.134.
Grammar notes
Present perfect simple and continuous
Sts at this level should already have a reasonable grasp of 
the uses referenced here for the two tenses, but will still 
need more practice.
Highlight that the present perfect continuous emphasizes 
both the continuity and / or temporary nature of an 
action, e.g. I’ve been waiting for you for two hours! (= more 
common than I’ve waited…).
for and since
Sts should be very familiar with how these words are 
used (for = period of time, since = point of time), but you 
may want to highlight that for is omitted with all day / 
morning / night, etc., e.g. I’ve been working all morning. NOT 
…for all morning.
	 Focus on the example sentences for present perfect 
simple: have / has + past participle and play audio  
e 2.12 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for present perfect continuous: have / has + 
been + verb + -ing e 2.13 and present perfect simple 
or continuous? e 2.14.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  ✓    ​2  phoned    ​3  been running    ​4  seen    ​5  met    ​6  been 
snowing    ​7  gone    ​8  ✓    ​9  been reading, read
b
1	 We’ve known Jack and Ann for years.
2	 You look really hot. Have you been working out at the gym?
3	 Emily hasn’t done her homework yet, so I’m afraid she can’t 
go out.
4	 They don’t live in London – they’ve moved.
5	 I hope they’re getting on OK. They’ve been arguing a lot 
recently.
6	 We’ve been walking for hours. Is this the right way?
7	 Why is my laptop switched on? Have you been using it?
8	 Oh no! I’ve cut my finger on this knife.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 This is an oral grammar practice activity. Focus on the task 
and questions. Point out that in question 6, Sts should 
choose between school, work, or university, as appropriate.
	 Check that Sts know what verb forms to use, and 
encourage them not to write the questions, but just use 
the prompts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to think what the questions 
are. Then demonstrate the activity by eliciting the questions 
from Sts and answering them yourself. If necessary, you 
could write the questions on the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 34@@
2A
34
b	 Focus on the Beginning an informal email box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Then focus on the task. Tell Sts to read Anna’s email again 
and to find the five sentences.
	 Check answers. Draw attention to how, in informal writing, 
we often leave out pronouns and use short questions, e.g. 
the follow-up question Anything exciting?
emailed, messaged, or phoned. = been in touch
reading and replying to = catching up on my emails
Have you been doing anything fun? = What have you been 
doing? Anything exciting?
I don’t have any more news. = that’s all for now
send my best wishes to = give my regards to
c	 Tell Sts they are going to write an informal email to Anna 
to answer her questions. First, they need to complete 
some expressions in the Useful language: an informal 
email box. Get Sts to do this individually or in pairs.
	 If Sts worked alone, get them to compare with a partner.
	 Check answers.
1  for    ​2  to    ​3  not    ​4  hope    ​ 
5  hear    ​6  to    ​7  luck    ​8  feel / are / get    ​ 
9  for    ​10  Give    ​11  forward    ​12  care    ​13  Best    
​14  PS
d	 Go over the plan with the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Go over the plan, focusing on one point at 
a time. Give Sts time to read Anna’s email again and check 
the answers.
1	 How are you? What have you been doing? How are your 
family? Could you recommend a hotel? Do you think you’ll be 
able to show me around?
2	 brother’s new job, the conference
e	 Tell Sts to answer Anna’s questions and to use expressions 
from the Useful language box when they write the email.
	 You may like to get Sts to do the writing in class, or you 
could set it as homework. If you do it in class, set a time 
limit for Sts to write their email, e.g. 15–20 minutes.
f	 Sts should check their email for mistakes before giving 
it in.
	 Then get Sts to match the highlighted phrases to 
definitions 1–7. You might want to point out that IDM in 
3 stands for idiom (= a group of words whose meaning is 
different from the meanings of the individual words).
	 Check answers.
1  open-heart surgery    ​2  miracle cures    ​3  under the weather  ​
4  scare stories    ​5  worst-case scenarios    ​6  heart rate    ​7  life-
threatening illness
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to cover the article and look at 
the definitions and try to remember the phrases.
d	 Tell Sts to read the article again and this time, after reading 
each paragraph, they should choose the best option for 
1–5: a, b, or c. You might want to check that Sts know 
the meaning of the verb rank (= to give sth a position on 
a scale).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  b    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  a    ​5  c
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Give Sts time to read the two questions and their options.
	 Now put Sts in small groups and get them to discuss 
the questions.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. If you know 
anyone who is a hypochondriac or cyberchondriac, you 
could tell the class about them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start, you could quickly elicit 
some expressions they saw in 1B for reacting to a story 
about something strange, e.g. How weird! That’s strange! etc.
6	WRITING  an informal email
	 This is the first time Sts are sent to the Writing Bank at 
the back of the Student’s Book. In this section, Sts will find 
model texts with exercises and language notes, and then 
a writing task. We suggest that you go through the model 
and do the exercise(s) in class, but set the actual writing 
(the last activity) for homework.
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing An informal email on p.115.
a	 Focus on the task. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to look at 
each mistake highlighted in Anna’s email. First, they need 
to decide what kind of mistake it is and then they must 
correct it.
	 Check answers.
1	 haven’t (punctuation)
2	 temperature (spelling)
3	 since for (grammar)
4	 Luckily (spelling)
5	 Anything exciting? (punctuation)
6	 are is (grammar)
7	 software company (punctuation)
8	 they’re (grammar)
9	 May (punctuation)
 10	 recommend (spelling)
 11	 sightseeing (spelling)
 12	 you’ll be able to show (grammar)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 35@@
2B
35
1	READING & SPEAKING  scanning several texts
a	 Focus on the task and on the list of adjectives, and make 
sure Sts know all of them.
	 Now give Sts time to think of someone and then circle the 
appropriate adjectives.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner about 
the person they chose in a. If you know of anybody, you 
could demonstrate the activity.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Focus attention on the photo and elicit ideas from the class 
on how old the two women are. Tell Sts that both names are 
Welsh and that Sian (also spelled Siân) is pronounced /ʃɑːn/.
Dilys is 85. Sian is 37.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to read an article where each woman 
talks about the other, and explains how they met and 
became friends, and what they value in each other. Sts must 
then look at sentences 1–12 and decide which person / 
people each one is about. You could also elicit / explain the 
meaning of the title, The joy of the age-gap friendship (= the 
happiness of having friends of very different ages).
	 Quickly go through sentences 1–12, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. to cheer sb up, an extreme 
sport, etc. Point out the Glossary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  B    ​2  S    ​3  B    ​4  B    ​5  D    ​6  B    ​7  B    ​8  D    ​9  S    ​10  D    ​
11  B    ​12  S
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. You might want 
to draw Sts’ attention to the meaning of just (= really, 
completely) in We just clicked, She was just a great person, 
and compare it to other meanings of just, e.g. recently (He’s 
just arrived ) or only (We have just one bottle left). Elicit or 
model the pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit some ideas.
They have a lot in common and they admire each other.
f	 Now focus attention on the photo of the two men, and 
elicit ideas from the class on their age difference.
g	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication The joy of the age-gap friendship,  
A on p.107, B on p.111.
	 Sts A read what Dave says about John and Sts B what 
John says about Dave.
	 When Sts have finished reading, they should cover their 
text and talk about each bullet point in b.
	 Finally, Sts discuss whether they would get on with Dave 
and / or John.
	 Get some feedback from Sts by eliciting the information 
they shared in b. Then find out if they think they would 
get on with either Dave or John, and why (not).
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
 G   using adjectives as nouns, adjective order
 V   clothes and fashion
 P   vowel sounds
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is age.  
The lesson begins with an article about friendship between 
people with a big age difference. This is followed by a 
speaking activity in which Sts discuss having a friend of a 
different generation and the advantages this can bring. The 
first half of the lesson ends with the grammar focus, where 
Sts extend their knowledge of how to use adjectives. They 
learn to use nationality adjectives as nouns when they talk 
about the people from a particular country (e.g. the British, 
the French) or a particular group of people (e.g. the rich, the 
unemployed), and they also focus on adjective order when 
two or more are used to describe a noun.
In the second half of the lesson, the angle is on age-
appropriate dressing. It begins with a photo and article 
about how women of different generations can wear the 
same clothes, and this leads to a lexical focus on clothes and 
fashion. This is followed by Pronunciation, which looks at 
short and long vowel sounds and diphthongs. Sts then listen 
to a radio programme on whether men and women should 
dress their age. In Speaking, Sts work in groups, giving their 
opinion on clothes and fashion. This is followed by a writing 
task, bringing the lexis and grammar together, where Sts 
write two ads to sell items of clothing online. The lesson 
ends with a documentary film about a small Welsh company 
whose jeans have become a global fashion item.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  adjectives as nouns, adjective order p.165 
Communicative  You’re only as old as you feel p.195  
(instructions p.184) 
Vocabulary  Clothes and fashion p.219  
(instructions p.214)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Some very special jeans
For students
Workbook  2B
Online Practice  2B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   Write the quote at the top 
of p.20 on the board and the name of the person who said it, 
or get Sts to open their books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Hayao Miyazaki is one of Japan’s 
greatest animation directors. Sts might have seen Howl’s 
Moving Castle, My Neighbour Totoro, and Spirited Away.
Get Sts to discuss what they think it means. Do they agree 
with the quote?
	2B	 Act your age
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 36@@
2B
36
	 Focus on the example sentences for adjectives as 
nouns and play audio e 2.15 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm correctly. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for adjective order e 2.16.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1  The Dutch    ​2  the sick    ​3  the blind    ​4  The French    ​5  the 
injured    ​6  The Swiss    ​7  the homeless    ​8  the unemployed    ​
9  the dead    ​10  the deaf
b
1	 an attractive young man
2	 dirty old shoes
3	 a beautiful black velvet jacket
4	 a tall teenage American girl
5	 a long sandy beach
6	 a magnificent 17th-century country house
7	 a stylish Italian leather bag
8	 huge dark eyes
9	 a friendly old black dog
 10	 a striped cotton T-shirt
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 This is an oral grammar practice exercise. Focus on the five 
statements and make sure Sts understand the lexis, e.g. 
second home, etc.
	 Put Sts small groups and tell them to discuss each 
statement, saying whether they agree or disagree, 
and why.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Remind Sts of expressions for giving 
opinions by writing them on the board, e.g.:
IN MY OPINION,…
PERSONALLY, I THINK THAT…
I’D SAY THAT…
EXTRA IDEA   Sts will be getting more practice with adjective 
order when describing clothes in the second half of the 
lesson, but if you want to give them more practice here, 
you could bring in some objects (or photos of objects) for 
them to describe with two or three adjectives, e.g. an old 
black leather wallet, a small brown wooden box, a pair of red 
plastic sunglasses, etc.
3	VOCABULARY  clothes and fashion
a	 Focus on the task and check Sts understand the title, 
and elicit / explain its meaning (Can the same clothes be 
worn by people of all ages?). Do the question as a whole-
class activity.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the seven 
gapped highlighted phrases with the items of clothing in 
the list.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know the meaning of the 
adjectives in the article, e.g. cropped, see-through, etc.
h	 Focus on the task and the seven sentences from the 
four texts.
	 Tell Sts to complete as many gaps as they can remember.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then to look back 
at the texts to complete any words that they couldn’t 
remember. When Sts have completed all the words, they 
should explain what the sentences mean.
	 Check answers and the meaning of the phrases.
1	 clicked; to click = become friends with sb at once
2	 hit; to hit it off = have a good friendly relationship with sb
3	 gap; age gap = age difference
4	 point, view; point of view = the particular attitude or opinion 
that sb has about sth
5	 take; take sides = to express support for sb in a disagreement
6	 care; couldn’t care less = used to say, often rudely, that you do 
not think that sb / sth is important or worth worrying about
7	 look; look up to = to admire or respect sb
i	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to discuss the questions.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
2	GRAMMAR  using adjectives as nouns, 
adjective order
a	 Focus on the sentences and give Sts time to tick or cross 
each option.
	 In pairs, they should discuss why they think some options 
are wrong.
	 Check answers, eliciting why the ✗ ones are wrong. In 1, b 
is wrong because you can’t use a definite article when you 
are talking about a group of people in general. In 2, only a 
is correct because opinion adjectives, e.g. lively, go before 
descriptive adjectives, and colour, e.g. dark-haired, comes 
before origin, e.g. Welsh.
1	 a ✓  b ✗ (no definite article needed)  c ✓
2	 a ✓  b ✗ (wrong word order)  c ✗ (wrong word order)
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 2B on p.135.
Grammar notes
Adjectives as nouns
•	 Rule 2: nationalities
Sts should already have a good knowledge of nationality 
adjectives in English, especially for the countries in their 
part of the world. However, the specific rules for talking 
about people from a country are quite complex, since 
where a noun for the people exists, this is often preferred.
You may want to elicit more examples of nouns used to 
describe people from a particular country, e.g. Greece – 
the Greeks, Scotland – the Scots, Spain – the Spaniards, 
Mexico – the Mexicans, Thailand – the Thais, etc.
Adjective order
It’s important to point out that in practice, people 
rarely use more than two adjectives (occasionally three) 
together, so Sts should not be put off by the chart 
showing adjective order. Encourage Sts to use their 
instinct as to what sounds correct, rather than try to 
memorize the chart, and to remember that opinion 
adjectives always come first. 
Learning common combinations will also help them to 
remember the rule, e.g. long fair hair, a big old house, etc.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 37@@
2B
37
	 e 2.18  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.18
d, Materials
4	 a cotton vest
9	 a denim waistcoat
5	 a fur collar
3	 a lace top
1	 a linen suit
7	 a lycra swimsuit
8	 a silk scarf
6	 a velvet bow tie
2	 a wool cardigan
 11	 leather sandals
 10	 suede boots
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and tell Sts to cover the words and 
phrases, look at the photos, and describe them.
	 Look at 2 Adjectives to describe clothes and the way 
people dress, and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.19  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.19
2 Adjectives to describe clothes and the way people dress
1	 She always wears casual clothes to work – she hates 
dressing formally.
2	 He looks really scruffy. His clothes are old and a bit dirty.
3	 Jane looked very smart in her new suit. She wanted to make a 
good impression.
4	 That tie’s a bit old-fashioned! Is it your dad’s?
5	 I like wearing classic clothes that don’t go out of fashion.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult 
to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to name one item of 
clothing they have for each adjective in the list in a.
	 Look at 3 Verbs and verb phrases, and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.20  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.20
3 Verbs and verb phrases
1	 C	 I’m going to dress up tonight. I’m going to a party.
2	 A	 Please hang up your coat. Don’t leave it on the chair.
3	 F	 These jeans don’t fit me. They’re too small.
4	 H	That skirt really suits you. You look great in it.
5	 G	Your bag matches your shoes. They’re almost the same colour.
6	 B	 I need to get changed. I’ve just spilt coffee on my shirt.
7	 E	 Hurry up and get undressed. It’s bath time.
8	 I	 Get up and get dressed. Breakfast is on the table.
9	 D	That tie doesn’t really go with your shirt. They don’t look 
good together.
	 Give further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and tell Sts to cover the verbs and 
verb phrases in 1–9 and remember them by looking at 
matching sentences A–I.
1  jeans    ​2  jacket    ​3  trainers    ​4  top    ​5  sandals    ​6  dress    ​
7  sweater
	 You could ask if any Sts have now changed their minds 
about the answer they gave in a.
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what an 
accessory is (= a thing that you can wear or carry that 
matches your clothes, for example a belt or a bag). Do this 
as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and then get 
some feedback.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Clothes and fashion 
on p.153.
Vocabulary notes
Describing clothes
Style
You may want to point out that polo-neck is normally used 
with sweater, but the others can go with any kind of top.
Adjectives to describe clothes and the way 
people dress
Remind Sts that in British English, smart = well dressed, but 
in American English it means intelligent.
Verbs and verb phrases
Make sure Sts are aware of the difference in meaning 
between match, suit, fit, and get changed / dressed / 
undressed. Highlight that the phrasal verb dress up means 
to wear smart clothes, or wear fancy dress. Elicit / Point 
out that dress up, match, fit, and suit are regular verbs and 
that hang up is irregular (past hung up).
You could elicit / point out the difference between wear 
and dress. Wear always needs an object (e.g. I’m going 
to wear a jacket tonight) and dress never has an object, 
but is normally used with an adverb, e.g. well, badly, etc. 
(e.g. She dresses well ). You could give Sts the following 
extra examples:
The English don’t dress very stylishly. / The English don’t wear 
very stylish clothes.
She usually dresses in black. / She usually wears black 
(clothes).
They dress their children in jeans and T-shirts. / The children 
wear jeans and T-shirts.
	 Focus on 1 Describing clothes and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 2.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 2.17
Clothes and fashion
1 Describing clothes, b
Fit
2	 loose
1	 tight
Style
6	 hooded
4	 long-sleeved
7	 polo neck
3	 sleeveless
5	 V-neck
Pattern
 12	 checked
 10	 patterned
8	 plain
 11	 spotted
9	 striped
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 38@@
2B
38
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss what they would 
and wouldn’t wear in each situation in the list.
	 Get some feedback for each situation.
5	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding a 
discussion – opinions, explanations, examples
a	 Focus on the photos and elicit some opinions. Make sure 
Sts know what a slogan is (= a word or phrase printed on 
the item of clothing).
b	 e 2.23  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
the topic of the radio programme.
	 Then get Sts to look at the clothing in 1–5 in a and the 
journalists’ comments in A–F. 
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and match the photos to the sentences. Remind 
them that there is an extra comment.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts listen, you could write on the board 
the names of the famous people the journalists mention 
(Meryl Streep, Catherine Deneuve, Helen Mirren, Jane Fonda, 
and Mick Jagger), and elicit some information about them, 
including how old Sts think they are and if Sts think they 
look good or dress well.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
A  3    B  5    C  2    D  4    F  1
e 2.23
(script in Student’s Book on p.123)
P = presenter, L = Liza, A = Adrian
P	
Welcome to today’s programme. The topic is age and fashion, 
and the question is: Do people nowadays dress their age, and 
should they? Our guests are both fashion journalists with well-
known magazines. Hello, Liza and Adrian.
L & A	Hello. Hi!
P	
Hi. Let’s start with you, Liza.
L	
Well, the first thing I’d like to say to all the young people out 
there is next time you give your granny a warm cardigan and 
some fur slippers for her birthday, don’t be surprised if she 
asks for the receipt because she’ll probably want to go out and 
change them for something more exciting.
P	
So you think nowadays older women dress much younger than 
they used to?
L	
Oh absolutely. Think of women like Meryl Streep, Catherine 
Deneuve, Helen Mirren, Jane Fonda. When Jane Fonda was in 
her seventies, she appeared on a US talk show wearing a leather 
miniskirt – she looked fabulous. But of course…
A	
I have to say, I saw that programme and I thought Jane Fonda 
looked awful.
P	
Adrian, can you let Liza finish?
A	
Sorry. Sorry, go ahead.
L	
Well, what I was going to say was that it isn’t just famous 
women who are dressing younger; some recent research says 
that nine out of ten women say that they try to dress younger 
than their years.
P	
What about younger women?
L	
Well, yes, of course it depends on your age. A lot of teenage 
girls try to dress older than they are, maybe to get into pubs 
and bars. But I would still say that from thirty onwards, most 
women try to dress younger than they are.
P	
And do you think there’s anything wrong with that?
L	
Nothing at all; it’s a question of wearing what suits you. And that 
could be anything, from current trends to classics. I mean, OK, 
there are a very few things which can look a bit ridiculous on an 
older woman, like, let’s see, very short shorts…but not many.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 2B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION  vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
Sts can improve their pronunciation by making an effort 
to distinguish between long and short vowel sounds, and 
diphthongs (a combination of two vowel sounds, e.g. the 
sound in hair /heə/).
Many nationalities have problems with the silent r, i.e. 
when r comes after a vowel and lengthens the sound, e.g. 
ir as in shirt, or ur as in fur, and need reminding that there 
is no /r/ sound. Remind Sts that /ː/ = a long sound.
a	 Focus on the task and tell / remind Sts that English 
vowel sounds are either short, long, or diphthongs – a 
combination of two short sounds.
	 Get Sts to answer the question in pairs.
	 Check answers. Elicit each sound, and then model and 
drill it.
1  /ɪ/ = short    ​2  /aɪ/ = diphthong    ​3  /eɪ/ = diphthong    ​ 
4  /ɜː/ = long    ​5  /uː/ = long
b	 e 2.21  Point out to Sts that all the words in the five 
groups are related to clothes. They must find the word in 
each group in which the pink letters are a different sound. 
Remind Sts that this kind of exercise is easier if they say 
the words aloud to themselves.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  striped    ​2  plain    ​3  leather    ​4  scruffy    ​5  wool
e 2.21
See words in Student’s Book on p.22
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
group of words for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs and get them to identify 
the sound of the odd word out. Check answers.
1  striped  /aɪ/    ​2  plain  /eɪ/    ​3  leather  /e/    ​4  scruffy  /ʌ/    ​
5  wool  /ʊ/
c	 e 2.22  Focus on the task and then play the audio, 
pausing after each phrase to see if anyone in the class is 
wearing the item described.
e 2.22
a loose linen shirt
brown suede shoes
a plain cotton T-shirt
a striped silk tie
red leather boots
dark blue denim jeans
a hooded sweatshirt
a long-sleeved V-neck sweater
a long patterned skirt
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 39@@
2B
39
	 Now give Sts time in their pairs to discuss which journalist 
they agree with more.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to both parts of the audio with the scripts on pp.123–
124, so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
f	 Focus on the five statements and go through them, 
making sure Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. vintage.
	 Now focus on the Managing discussions and Politely 
disagreeing box and go through it with the class.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three and set a time limit. 
Each student in the group takes it in turn to be the 
presenter and to choose one of the topics and organize 
the discussion.
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary.
	 Get feedback from various groups and deal with any 
general vocabulary problems that arose.
6	WRITING
a	 Focus on the instructions and example. Ask Sts if they 
have ever bought or sold anything on eBay.
	 Give Sts time to write their two descriptions. Go round 
helping with vocabulary, and encourage Sts to describe 
their clothes in as much detail as possible.
	 When everyone is ready, get them to write their name on 
their adverts.
EXTRA IDEA   You may want to set a time limit for Sts to 
write their descriptions in order to make it easier to manage 
stage b.
b	 Focus on the task and explain / elicit the meaning of the 
verb bid (= to offer to pay a particular price for sth).
	 Either get Sts to move around the class swapping adverts, 
or if possible, put the adverts on the class walls and get 
Sts to move around reading them. If they find an item of 
clothing they would like to bid for, they should make a 
note of it.
	 Stop the activity when you think most of the Sts have read 
all the adverts.
	 Get feedback to find out who would like to bid for 
something.
7 r VIDEO LISTENING
	 This is the first of five Video Listenings, which are 
incorporated into the Student’s Book. If you are unable to 
show the video in class, remind Sts that they can find the 
video on Online Practice, and ask them to watch the video 
and do the activities for homework.
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch an interview about a 
Welsh company that makes jeans. Focus on the question 
and make sure Sts understand what a USP is (Unique 
Selling Point = a feature of a product or service that makes 
it different from all the others that are available and is a 
reason for people to choose it).
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
A	
I think very short shorts look ridiculous at any age – well, on 
anyone over fifteen or so.
P	
Adrian, what about men? Do you think they also try to look 
younger than their age?
A	
Well, interestingly, in the research Liza mentioned, only twelve 
per cent of the men who were questioned said that they had 
ever thought about dressing to look younger. But actually, I 
think a lot of them weren’t telling the truth. Look at all those 
middle-aged men you see wearing jeans which are too tight, 
and T-shirts with slogans. I think they look terrible, as if they’re 
trying to pretend they’re still in their twenties.
L	
Sorry, but I don’t agree. I think Mick Jagger looks great in tight 
jeans and T-shirts. They suit him!
A	
True, but Mick Jagger is one in a million. Most men of his age 
can’t carry it off. Personally, I do think that men should take 
their age into account when they’re buying clothes.
P	
Let’s go back to the idea of dressing older than your age. Do 
you think that men do that, too?
A	
Yes, definitely, some do. Some men in their twenties look as if 
they were twenty years older by wearing blazers and chinos, 
or wearing a suit and a tie to work when nowadays most men 
don’t dress like that.
L	
Maybe they’ve just started work and they want their bosses to 
take them more seriously?
A	
Well, perhaps.
P	
I think we’re running out of time. So, to sum up, Liza, Adrian, 
what would your fashion rules be?
c	 Focus on sentences 1–6 and give Sts time to see if they 
can remember any of the information in the audio. If Sts 
don’t know who Mick Jagger is, you could tell them that 
he is the lead singer of a group called The Rolling Stones.
	 Now play the audio again the whole way through and 
get Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Remind 
them to correct the false ones. Play the audio again if 
necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (They sometimes dress older to get into pubs and bars.)
3	 T
4	 T
5	 F (He looks great.)
6	 F (Most men don’t dress like that nowadays.)
d	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to complete the two 
rules. You might want to tell them that the gaps do not 
represent one word only.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
e	 e 2.24  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. You 
might want to tell them that they will hear the presenter 
as well.
	 Check answers.
Liza	 Wear whatever you think suits you and makes you feel 
good.
Adrian	
Dress for the age you are, not for the age you wish 
you were.
e 2.24
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
P	 So, to sum up, Liza, Adrian, what would your fashion rules 
be? Liza?
L	 Wear whatever you think suits you and makes you feel good.
P	 And Adrian?
A	 Dress for the age you are, not for the age you wish you were.
P	 Liza, Adrian, thank you very much.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 40@@
2B
40
doesn’t. You know, like, the biggest and best thing we can do 
for the environment is make something last as long as possible.
And yes, we do free repairs for life and that means that those 
jeans last more and more time and that’s good. So I think we’re 
as far away from fast fashion as I, we, I can possibly get. And if 
we can get even further, I would love it.
N	
The company also has a no-wash club, to help lower the jeans’ 
environmental impact, even after they’ve been sold.
D	
There’s a reason for the, for the no-wash club and it’s twofold. 
And one is to, you know, if you want to have a truly beautiful 
pair of jeans then if you don’t wash it, you know, for three 
weeks, five weeks, you know, a couple of months, all those 
creases that you put in there, and those wrinkles, you know, 
when they, when you wash it once the dye goes out, and all, all 
those creases, and that imprint of you as a human being is there 
and it looks incredibly beautiful. So, so the second part is, you 
know, eighty per cent of the impact of a pair of jeans, you know, 
is by you and I washing it. So like, getting people to not wash a 
pair of jeans for three months or six months has a huge impact 
in the world. And so the greenest jean is the one that you don’t 
wash.
N	
Hiut’s reputation for quality and craftsmanship, together with 
caring for the planet, has been key in its success. And this success 
is something that David, Clare, and their whole team can be proud 
of.
D	
I’m proud of it. We…I love the fact we make one of the best pairs 
of jeans in the world. And that’s good. And the Grand Masters 
downstairs, they’re proud of it. They even sign each pair. And 
there’s a thing on the pocket that says all artists sign their work 
because we must be one of the few companies in the world 
where they actually make it from start to finish. Like, I mean, the 
robots might be coming, but they’re not coming to Cardigan 
anytime soon.
b	 Give Sts time to read the information in the chart and 
make sure that they understand all the lexis. Point out that 
the first one (denim) has been done for them.
	 Play the video again, pausing if necessary for Sts to make 
notes.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First, put Sts in pairs and tell them to try 
to remember any of the answers. Then play the video again.
	 Check answers.
2	 classic
3	 Meghan Markle (the Duchess of Sussex)
4	 In 2002 because the previous factory closed down and they 
wanted to get people’s jobs back.
5	 Many of the former factory’s workers
6	 180
7	 They encourage people not to wash their jeans for 3 or 
6 months.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. You could also tell Sts if you 
would like a pair of Hiut jeans and if you would join the 
no-wash club.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Each pair of jeans is made by hand.
Some very special jeans
N = narrator, D = David, C = Claudio
N	
This is the factory floor of Hiut denim, a small company in the 
seaside town of Cardigan in West Wales. Whether they’re cutting or 
stitching, everybody here shares the same goal – to produce a pair 
of simple but high-quality denim jeans.
D	
Can I describe our jeans? I mean, our jeans are classic, you 
know, five pocket Western jean. And our design philosophy is 
to keep things as simple as we can. And we don’t want to be 
high fashion because high fashion comes in and then it goes 
away. And so, we want to make a classic pair of jeans. We want 
to make, you know, one of the best jeans in the world. And we 
want to keep it as classic and as simple as we can because, like, 
classic doesn’t come in or go out of fashion. It just stays.
N	
The Hiut Denim Company was founded in two thousand and 
two by David and his wife Clare. Since then, it has become a 
cult fashion brand, selling to customers all over the world. The 
company has attracted the attention of the world’s media, as well 
as some very famous celebrities. Meghan Markle, the Duchess of 
Sussex, even wore a pair of Hiut Dina jeans on a royal visit to Wales 
– a major moment for the small but ambitious business. However, 
this is not the first time jeans have been manufactured in Cardigan. 
David and Clare started their company with a particular mission in 
mind.
D	
The reason we started is to try and get four hundred people 
their jobs back. Because, you know, for people out there to 
know the back story is, you know, this small town in West Wales 
used to have Britain’s biggest jeans factory in it and it made 
thirty-five thousand pairs of jeans a week. I mean, that’s a big 
number, but it did it for forty years. And then in two thousand 
and two, the factory closed because the economics had 
changed and, you know, the factory gates closed. And so, and 
the question myself and Clare asked was, ’Could we open those 
gates again and keep them open?’
N	
Today, Hiut operates from the old factory and employs many of its 
former workers. They call these lifelong jean makers their ’Grand 
Masters’, thanks to the skills and experience they bring to their 
craft.
C	
My name is Claudio Belotti. I’m the Grand Master in cutting. 
Originally, I was born in Italy and then came over to this country 
when I was three years old and lived in this area ever since. It’s 
something I’ve always done since the age of fifteen. I worked 
with Hiut from the start, David and Clare approached me and 
asked me if I’d like to help them start up a jeans factory again. 
To see jeans being made in Cardigan again was something I 
never thought I’d see.
N	
And what does Claudio think makes a good pair of jeans?
C	
I think it’s the love you put into it and that’s what it is. Unless 
you love doing what you’re doing, then I think it’s – don’t get 
the reward for putting all that effort in.
N	
Hiut is delighted to employ the former factory workers, but the 
company doesn’t follow the original business model. Instead of 
the thirty-five thousand pairs of jeans a week that the old factory 
manufactured, the Hiut Jeans Company produces only around 
one hundred and eighty pairs. This is because, after Claudio and 
his team have cut the denim, each pair of jeans is made by hand, 
crafted from start to finish by one person. This focus on quality 
rather than quantity – as well as the importance they place on 
environmental sustainability – sets them apart from many others 
in the clothing industry. So, how does Hiut fit in today’s world of 
’fast fashion’?
D	
We don’t. I mean, I mean that’s the thing. I mean, like, I think 
this throwaway culture is – I don’t think it makes the human 
being actually feel very good because like, ‘Oh, I’ve bought 
something, then I discard it.’ How do I feel? I mean, after a 
while you don’t think very much of either the environment or 
yourself. I think that ultimately messes with people. But also 
from an environmental point of view, you know, like, how does 
that work, you know, for the environment? And actually it 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 41@@
Revise and Check
41
d
1	 plain (the others are a pattern)
2	 smart (the others are a type of material)
3	 collar (the others are adjectives)
4	 lycra (the others are items of clothing)
5	 scruffy (the others are positive adjectives)
e
1  over    ​2  down    ​3  throw    ​4  up    ​5  hang
PRONUNCIATION
a	
1  ache /k/    ​2  suede /s/    ​3  striped /aɪ/    ​4  wear /eə/    ​
5  cough /ɒ/
b	
1  incredibly    ​2  big-headed    ​3  antibiotics    ​4  swimsuit    ​
5  fashionable
CAN YOU  understand this text?
a	
No, they don’t.
b	
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  c
r CAN YOU  understand these people?
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  c
e 2.25
1
I = interviewer, S = Sean
I	
Have you ever had an interview for a job or a place on a course?
S	
Er, yeah, I actually have been in several interviews for jobs only. I 
haven’t had one for school yet.
I	
What kind of questions did they ask you?
S	
Um, my last job interview, er, they asked me questions like what 
it’s like to, what is it like to be a part of a team, um, to me. Um, 
they asked me what my favourite superhero was, er, which was 
interesting. Um, they asked me…’cause right now I’m a server 
at a restaurant, so they were asking me like, oh, what’s, how’s 
customer service and how important, er, is it to you and stuff 
like that.
I	
Did you get the job or place?
S	
Yes.
2
I = interviewer, H = Harry
I	
Do you believe in ghosts or UFOs?
H	
I do believe in ghosts. I believe in ghosts because I grew up in 
a house where there is a ghost. My mum has heard it, my dad 
has heard it, my brothers have heard it. And I heard it one night 
when I was at home on my own, with the dogs. I was sitting 
downstairs watching TV, in the house, on my own, with the 
dogs, and I heard footsteps go from one end of the house to 
the other, along the corridor above. But, no-one’s scared of the 
ghost, we just know there’s a ghost in the house.
3
I = interviewer, M = Maria
I	
Have you ever given anyone first aid?
M	
Er, yes, when I was sixteen, I was at home with my two younger 
brothers, um, and they were playing upstairs. I heard a loud 
bang, and, um, my little brother came downstairs crying and 
There are two pages of revision and consolidation after every 
two Files. These exercises can be done individually or in pairs, 
in class or at home, depending on the needs of your Sts and 
the class time available.
The first page revises the grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation of the two Files. The exercises add up to 50 
(grammar = 15, vocabulary = 25, pronunciation = 10), so 
you can use the first page as a mini-test on Files 1 and 2. 
The pronunciation section sends Sts to the Sound Bank on 
pp.166–167. Explain that this is a reference section of the 
book, where they can check the symbols and see common 
sound−spelling patterns for each of the sounds. Highlight 
the video showing the mouth position for each sound. If you 
don’t want to use this in class, tell Sts to look at it at home 
and to practise making the sounds and saying the words.
The second page presents Sts with a series of skills-based 
challenges. First, there is a reading text which is of a 
slightly higher level than those in the File, but which revises 
grammar and vocabulary Sts have already learned. The 
listening is some unscripted street interviews, where people 
are asked questions related to the topics in the Files. Sts can 
either watch the interviews on video or listen to them on 
audio. You can find these on the Teacher’s Resource Centre, 
Classroom Presentation Tool, Class DVD, and Class Audio CDs 
(audio only). Alternatively, you could set this section / activity 
as homework. Sts can find the video on Online Practice. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 1&2  
Quick Test 2  
File 2 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
a	
1  about    ​2  did    ​3  does    ​4  Have    ​5  been
b	
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  b    ​4  c    ​5  b    ​6  b    ​7  a    ​8  c    ​9  a    ​10  c
VOCABULARY
a
1  tempered    ​2  absent    ​3  fisted    ​4  confident    ​5  fashioned
b
1  bleed    ​2  swollen    ​3  bandage    ​4  toothache    ​5  rash
c
1  feel    ​2  sprained    ​3  fainted    ​4  fit    ​5  changed
	1&2	 Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 42@@
Revise and Check
42
he’d hit his head on the door handle. Um, and there was quite a 
lot of blood, so I sat him on the sofa and got a wet cold flannel 
and put it on his head. Um, and, er, told him to sit, sit still a few 
minutes while I rang my mum who was working, um, a night 
shift, um, at the time. Um, and then while I was waiting for her 
to come home, I just checked his head, made sure that it wasn’t 
bleeding too much. Um, and yeah, it was fine. Um, my mum 
came home, took him to the hospital, so, it was fine.
4
I = interviewer, T = Tom
I	
Are you good friends with anyone who is a lot older or younger 
than you?
T	
I have a really good friend who’s a lot older than me. In fact, I 
just went to her sixtieth birthday party in London. Um, I won’t 
say how old I am, but that’s, that’s a lot older than me.
I	
How did you meet?
T	
Uh, we met as a part of an amateur theatre group. And, um, she 
was the funniest person in it, so we stayed friends.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 43@@
3A
43
	3A	 Fasten your seat belts
 G   narrative tenses, past perfect continuous; so / such…that
 V   air travel
 P   irregular past forms, sentence rhythm
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is air travel, though both speaking 
activities cater for Sts who have never flown.  
In the first half of the lesson, Sts listen to some 
announcements that are heard on planes and trains, and 
Vocabulary then focuses on lexis related to air travel. Sts read 
an article about where best to sit on a plane for comfort, 
safety, and service. In Grammar in Context, they also learn 
how to use so / such…that. Finally, they do a speaking 
activity on different aspects of travel.
In the second half, Sts listen to an interview with a pilot, who 
answers some of the questions air travellers frequently ask 
themselves. This is followed by a grammar focus on narrative 
tenses. Sts revise the three narrative tenses they already 
know (past simple, past continuous, and past perfect) 
and learn a new one: the past perfect continuous. The 
pronunciation which follows focuses on tricky irregular past 
verb forms as well as sentence rhythm. In the final speaking 
activity, Sts read and re-tell a couple of real stories about 
flying and then tell each other an anecdote related to travel.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  narrative tenses: past simple, past continuous, 
past perfect, past perfect continuous p.166 
Communicative  Talk about it p.196 (instructions p.184) 
Vocabulary  Air travel p.220 (instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  3A
Online Practice  3A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.26 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Al Gore was Vice President of the 
USA from 1993 to 2001. He has written several books on 
environmental issues and made documentaries on the 
same subject matter. In 2007, he was awarded the Nobel 
Peace Prize.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means.
1	LISTENING & VOCABULARY  understanding 
formal language in announcements; air travel
a	 e 3.1  Focus on the title of the lesson and ask Sts 
where they might hear this phrase (on a plane). Elicit the 
pronunciation of fasten /ˈfɑːsn/, pointing out the silent t, 
and drill its pronunciation. Check Sts understand what it 
means (= to close sth firmly).
	 Now focus on the instructions, and then play the audio, 
pausing after each announcement for Sts to write T (train) 
or P (plane).
	 Highlight that with announcements, the important thing 
is to understand what they need to do rather than every 
word of the announcements.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio, pausing after each 
announcement. Check the answer, eliciting from Sts some of 
the words that helped them guess the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
A  P    B  T    C  T    D  P    E  P    F  P    G  T    H  T    I  P    J  P
e 3.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
A	 Good afternoon. This is your captain speaking. I’d like to welcome 
you all on board the Wings flight eight-six A to London Stansted. 
We are currently cruising at an altitude of thirty-three thousand 
feet, at an airspeed of four hundred miles per hour. The weather 
en-route looks good and we are expecting to land in London 
approximately fifteen minutes ahead of schedule. So, sit back, 
relax, and enjoy the rest of the flight.
B	 This is a platform alteration. The eleven thirty-two South-Eastern 
service to Margate will now depart from Platform thirteen. 
Passengers travelling on the eleven thirty-two South-Eastern 
service to Margate, please make your way to Platform thirteen, as 
the train is ready for boarding.
C	 We are sorry to announce that the fourteen fifteen South-Western 
service to Bournemouth has been cancelled. This is due to a 
signalling failure. South-Western Railways apologizes for the 
disruption to your journey today.
D	 Ladies and gentlemen, may we have your special attention for the 
following safety instructions? There are six emergency exits on 
this aircraft, all marked with exit signs. Take a minute to locate the 
exit closest to you. Note that the nearest exit may be behind you.
E	 This is the final boarding call for passengers Alice and Christopher 
Carter, booked on flight N-Y-three-seven-two-A to Las Vegas. 
Please proceed to Gate three immediately. I repeat: this is the final 
boarding call for Alice and Christopher Carter. Thank you.
F	 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome on board Flight M-A-four-B-
seven to San Francisco. We are currently third in line for take-off 
and are expected to be in the air in approximately seven minutes’ 
time. We ask that you please fasten your seat belts at this time 
and place all baggage securely underneath your seat or in the 
overhead compartments. We also ask that your seats and tray 
tables are in the upright position for take-off. Please turn off all 
personal electronic devices.
G	 The next train to arrive at Platform three will be the seventeen 
oh eight Great Western service to London Paddington, calling at 
Reading, Slough, and London Paddington. This train is formed of 
five coaches. First-class coaches are at the front of the train.
H	 This is a Northern Line train via Bank, terminating at Morden. The 
next station is London Bridge. Change here for the Jubilee Line.
I	 This is the pre-boarding announcement for flight F-S-eight-
nine-B to Rome. We’re now inviting those passengers with small 
children, and any passengers requiring special assistance, to 
begin boarding at this time. Please have your boarding pass and 
identification ready. Regular boarding will begin in approximately 
ten minutes’ time. Thank you.
J	 We have now landed in London Gatwick. Please disembark by 
either the front or rear exits. Make sure you have all your personal 
belongings with you.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 44@@
3A
44
b	 e 3.2  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the 
announcements that are only related to train or 
Underground journeys, and focus on phrases 1–4. You 
could tell Sts that Margate and Bournemouth are towns 
on the southern coast of England; Paddington is a central 
train station in London as well as an Underground stop; 
and the Jubilee line is a line on the Underground.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
	 Now play it again, pausing after each announcement for 
Sts to write their answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 The train will now leave from platform 13.
2	 The train has been cancelled.
3	 The first-class coaches are at the front of the train.
4	 You need to change at the next stop (London Bridge).
e 3.2
1	 This is a platform alteration. The eleven thirty-two South-Eastern 
service to Margate will now depart from platform thirteen. 
Passengers travelling on the eleven thirty-two South-Eastern 
service to Margate, please make your way to platform thirteen, as 
the train is ready for boarding.
2	 We are sorry to announce that the fourteen fifteen South-Western 
service to Bournemouth has been cancelled. This is due to a 
signalling failure. South-Western Railways apologizes for the 
disruption to your journey today.
3	 The next train to arrive at platform three will be the seventeen 
oh eight Great Western service to London Paddington calling at 
Reading, Slough, and London Paddington. This train is formed of 
five coaches. First-class coaches are at the front of the train.
4	 This is a Northern Line train via Bank, terminating at Morden. The 
next station is London Bridge. Change here for the Jubilee Line.
c	 e 3.3  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the 
announcements that are only related to plane journeys. 
Focus on the two questions.
	 Play the audio, pausing after announcement 1 for Sts to 
answer the two questions. Play it again if necessary and 
then check answers.
	 Repeat the same process for announcements 2–6.
1	 On the plane. Relax and enjoy the flight.
2	 On the plane. Pay attention to the safety instructions and 
locate your nearest emergency exit.
3	 In the airport terminal. Go to Gate 3 immediately.
4	 On the plane. Fasten your seat belts and place all baggage 
under your seat, put your seats and trays in the upright 
position, and turn off all electronic devices.
5	 In the airport terminal. Passengers with children and needing 
special assistance can begin boarding; have boarding pass 
and ID ready.
6	 On the plane. Please get off the plane by the front or rear 
exits; remember to take your belongings with you.
e 3.3
1	 Good afternoon. This is your captain speaking. I’d like to welcome 
you all on board the Wings flight eight-six A to London Stansted. 
We are currently cruising at an altitude of thirty-three thousand 
feet, at an airspeed of four hundred miles per hour. The weather 
en-route looks good and we are expecting to land in London 
approximately fifteen minutes ahead of schedule. So, sit back, 
relax, and enjoy the rest of the flight.
2	 Ladies and gentlemen, may we have your special attention for 
the following safety instructions. There are six emergency exits on 
this aircraft, all marked with exit signs. Take a minute to locate the 
exit closest to you. Note that the nearest exit may be behind you.
3	 This is the final boarding call for passengers Alice and Christopher 
Carter, booked on flight N-Y-three-seven-two-A to Las Vegas. 
Please proceed to Gate three immediately. I repeat: this is the final 
boarding call for Alice and Christopher Carter. Thank you.
4	 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome on board Flight M-A-four-B-
seven to San Francisco. We are currently third in line for take-off 
and are expected to be in the air in approximately seven minutes’ 
time. We ask that you please fasten your seat belts at this time 
and place all baggage securely underneath your seat or in the 
overhead compartments. We also ask that your seats and tray 
tables are in the upright position for take-off. Please turn off all 
personal electronic devices.
5	 This is the pre-boarding announcement for flight F-S-eight-
nine-B to Rome. We’re now inviting those passengers with small 
children, and any passengers requiring special assistance, to 
begin boarding at this time. Please have your boarding pass and 
identification ready. Regular boarding will begin in approximately 
ten minutes’ time. Thank you.
6	 We have now landed in London Gatwick. Please disembark by 
either the front or rear exits. Make sure you have all your personal 
belongings with you.
d	 e 3.4  Focus on the task, and elicit / explain that 
announcements tend to use quite formal language. Put 
Sts in pairs and give them time to look at 1–6 and decide 
what the formal words and phrases mean.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each announcement for Sts 
to listen and complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, and elicit any other information given in 
the announcements.
1  about    ​2  find    ​3  go to    ​4  put, phones / iPads / laptops, etc.  
​5  needing    ​6  get off, back
e 3.4
1	 The weather en-route looks good and we are expecting to land in 
London approximately fifteen minutes ahead of schedule.
2	 Take a minute to locate the exit closest to you.
3	 Please proceed to Gate three immediately.
4	 We ask that you please fasten your seat belts at this time and 
place all baggage securely underneath your seat or in the 
overhead compartments…Please turn off all personal electronic 
devices.
5	 We’re now inviting those passengers with small children, and any 
passengers requiring special assistance, to begin boarding at this 
time.
6	 Please disembark by either the front or rear exits.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with script 3.1 on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Air travel on p.154.
Vocabulary notes
At the airport
Highlight the difference between luggage and baggage:
•	 luggage (uncountable) = bags and (suit)cases you take 
with you when you travel. You can’t use it in the plural, 
e.g. NOT I have a lot of luggages.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 45@@
3A
45
There aren’t any direct flights to La Paz from London, so I usually 
have to get a connecting flight in Madrid. Whenever I take long-haul 
flights, I always suffer from jet lag because of the time difference, 
and I feel tired for several days.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the words in the 
list and read the text aloud with the completed gaps.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to cover the text and try to 
remember the meaning of the words in the list.
	 Focus on 3 Travel, trip, or journey? and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.7  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.7
3 Travel, trip, or journey?
1	 Have a good trip! Hope the weather’s great!
2	 A	 Did you have a good journey here?
	
B	 No, my flight was delayed for six hours.
3	 Do you have to travel much in your job?
4	 We’re going on a five-day trip to the mountains.
	 Now either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or 
put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
1	 Travel is normally used as a verb. However, it can be used as 
an uncountable noun.
2	 Journey means the time when you travel from one place to 
another, but does not include the time you stay there.
3	 The noun trip means to go somewhere and come back, 
including the time you stay there, e.g. a business trip.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the sentences and 
remember what the words mean.
	 Focus on 4 Phrasal verbs related to air travel and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs. You may want to point 
out the use of travel as a noun referring to travel in general 
(it is normally a verb) in the phrase Air travel.
	 e 3.8  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.8
4 Phrasal verbs related to air travel
1	 My husband dropped me off at the airport two hours before the 
flight.
2	 I checked in online the day before I was going to fly.
3	 As soon as I got on the plane, I put my bag in the overhead locker.
4	 The plane took off late because of the bad weather.
5	 When I picked up my luggage at baggage reclaim, I bumped into 
an old friend who had been on the same flight.
6	 I filled in the immigration form for the US, which the cabin crew 
gave me shortly before landing.
7	 When I got off the plane, I felt exhausted after the long flight.
8	 My flight arrived really late at night, but luckily, a friend picked 
me up at the airport.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover the sentences and try to 
remember the meaning of the phrasal verbs in the list.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
•	 baggage (uncountable) = a more formal word used by 
airlines and at airports, e.g. it is used in the expression 
excess baggage and in the sign baggage reclaim. In 
conversation we would normally use luggage.
On board
Highlight that:
•	 aisle (seat) = the seat next to the passage between 
seats on a plane. Point out the silent s.
•	 turbulence = sudden and sometimes violent movement 
of air
•	 jet lag = tiredness caused by long-haul flight, especially 
when there is a big time difference between where you 
depart from and your destination
Phrasal verbs related to air travel
Highlight that drop sb off = take someone somewhere by 
car and stop briefly to let them get out. You can also use 
drop off + luggage (= to deposit it somewhere), hence bag 
drop. Remind Sts that you can use pick up with luggage  
(= collect), but also with a person, e.g. I’ll pick you up at 
the airport.
	 Focus on 1 At the airport and get Sts to do a individually 
or in pairs.
	 e 3.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.5
Air travel
1 At the airport
1	 A	 Airport terminal
2	 D	Bag drop
3	 I	 Baggage reclaim
4	 C	 Check-in desk
5	 J	 Customs
6	 B	 Departures board
7	 G	Gate
8	 H	Runway
9	 E	 Security
10	 F	 Lounge
	 Now either play the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words and phrases, or model and drill them yourself. 
Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover words 1–10, 
look at definitions A–J, and try to remember the words.
	 Focus on 2 On board and get Sts to do a individually or in 
pairs.
	 e 3.6  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
2  row    ​3  turbulence    ​4  cabin crew    ​5  seat belts    ​6  direct 
flights    ​7  connecting flight    ​8  long-haul flights    ​9  jet lag
e 3.6
2 On board
I often fly to Bolivia on business. I always choose an aisle seat, so that 
I can get up and walk around more easily. My favourite place to sit is 
the emergency exit row, so I have more legroom.
Sometimes there’s turbulence when the plane flies over the Andes, 
which I don’t enjoy, and the cabin crew tell the passengers to put 
their seat belts on.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 46@@
3A
46
	 Put Sts in pairs to ask and answer the questions. Tell them 
to start by asking their partner Have you ever flown? and, 
if the answer is yes, ask How many times?, to help them 
decide which section to use to interview their partner.
	 Monitor and help while Sts ask and answer the questions. 
Sts could either both answer each question as they go 
through the questionnaire, or take it in turns to talk about 
their travel experiences.
	 Get some feedback and deal with any general vocabulary 
problems that arose.
4	LISTENING
a	 Focus on the task and questions 1–6. Make sure Sts can 
remember the meaning of device and how to pronounce 
the plural devices /dɪˈvaɪsɪz/.
	 Now give Sts time to discuss the six questions in pairs and 
predict how the pilot will answer.
	 Elicit some ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct 
or not.
b	 e 3.9  Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to listen and see how many questions in a they predicted 
correctly.
	 You could get Sts to compare with their partner, before 
checking answers by eliciting brief responses at this stage.
	 Ask Sts how many they guessed correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 When the wind changes direction suddenly.
2	 No.
3	 Take-off is slightly more dangerous.
4	 So they aren’t distracted.
5	 Yes, definitely.
6	 No, never.
e 3.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
I = interviewer, R = Richard
I	 With me in the studio today I have Richard, who’s a pilot, and he’s 
going to answer some of the most frequently asked questions 
about flying and air travel. Hello, Richard.
R	 Hello.
I	 So, Richard, the first question is: what weather conditions are the 
most dangerous when flying a plane?
R	 Probably the most dangerous weather conditions are when 
the wind changes direction very suddenly. Er…this tends to 
happen during thunderstorms and typhoons, and it’s especially 
dangerous during take-off and landing. But it’s quite unusual 
– I’ve been flying for twenty-five years now, and I’ve only 
experienced this three or four times.
I	 What about turbulence? Is that dangerous?
R	 It can be very bumpy and very uncomfortable, but it isn’t 
dangerous. Even strong turbulence won’t damage the plane. 
Pilots always try to avoid turbulence, but it can sometimes occur 
without any warning, which is why we always advise passengers 
to wear their seat belt all the time during the flight.
I	 Which is more dangerous, take-off or landing?
R	 Both take-off and landing can be dangerous. They are the most 
dangerous moments of a flight. Pilots talk about the ‘critical eight 
minutes’ – the three minutes after take-off and the five minutes 
before landing. Most accidents happen in this period. But I 
would say that take-off is probably slightly more dangerous than 
landing. There is a critical moment just before take-off when the 
plane is accelerating, but it hasn’t yet reached the speed to be 
able to fly. If the pilot has a problem with the plane at this point, 
he has very little time – maybe only a second – to abort the  
take-off.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	READING  using a diagram to understand a text
a	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put 
Sts in pairs and then get some feedback. If you have a 
preference, you could tell the class.
b	 Focus on the instructions and the diagram of the plane. 
Point out the eight seats with crosses and tell Sts they 
must read the article and then match each seat to one of 
the paragraphs. Tell them not to worry about the gaps in 
the article.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the words in c.
If you want a speedy exit  4C
If you want to sleep  4L 
If you don’t like turbulence  11C
If you need more legroom  10L
If you want a better dining experience  3J
If you’re safety-conscious  21B
If you want to have an empty seat next to you  16J, 16L
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and this time to complete 
the gaps with the words and phrases in the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  overhead locker    ​2  altitude    ​3  cabin    ​4  low-cost    ​
5  evacuation    ​6  special assistance    ​7  engine    ​8  tail
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
GRAMMAR IN CONTEXT
e	 Go through the two examples and then the rules. 
Highlight that that is optional after so / such.
	 You may want to point out that we often use so / such 
simply for emphasis (i.e. without expressing a 
consequence), e.g. That steak was so good. We had such a 
nice day!
	 Elicit sentence 1 from the whole class and write the 
answer on the board (so).
	 Then get Sts to complete the rest of the gaps.
	 Check answers.
2  such a    ​3  so    ​4  so many    ​5  so much    ​6  such
3	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the questionnaire and point out the three 
sections, If you have flown several times, If you have never / 
hardly ever flown, and Have you ever… . Sts answer the 
questions in one or other of the first two sections, and 
then the third section. Elicit / Explain that several = more 
than two.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 47@@
3A
47
1  boarded    ​2  were sitting    ​3  asked    ​4  was trying    ​5  had 
asked    ​6  said    ​7  provided    ​8  landed
c	 In pairs, Sts look at the sentence and answer the questions. 
Sts should be able to work out the tense because of the 
auxiliary verb had and the -ing form staying.
	 Check answers.
Thursday and Friday
Past perfect continuous
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3A on p.136.
Grammar notes
Narrative tenses
•	 Rules 1–3
	 This should all be revision for Sts at this level.
•	 Rule 4: past perfect continuous
	 This will probably be new for most Sts. It has the same 
form as the present perfect continuous, except that had 
is used instead of have / has.
Past perfect simple or continuous?
The past perfect continuous is like all other continuous 
tenses in that it is used for actions that take place over a 
period of time, and is only used with action verbs.
In the examples given in the box, highlight that she’d been 
reading a book = she might have just finished reading or 
still have been reading the book when she started crying. 
She’d read the book = she had finished the book.
	 Focus on the example sentences for narrative tenses and 
play audio e 3.10 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Repeat for past perfect simple or continuous? e 3.11.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  were checking in    ​2  had won    ​3  had been looking forward 
to    ​4  had forgotten    ​5  had arrived    ​6  ran    ​7  went    ​8  was 
filling in    ​9  hurried    ​10  got
b
1	 I was really fed up because we’d / had been queuing for hours.
2	 She went to the police to report that someone had stolen 
her bag.
3	 It’d / had been raining all morning.
4	 She got to work late because she’d / had left her phone at 
home and had had to go back and get it.
5	 He’d / had changed a lot since I last saw him.
6	 They’d / had been sitting in the sun all morning and they 
hadn’t put on any sun cream.
7	 I could see from their expressions that my parents had been 
arguing.
8	 Jess had a bandage on her arm because she’d / had fallen off 
her bike that morning.
9	 I was amazed because I’d / had never seen such an 
enormous plane before.
 10	 How long had you been walking before you realized that 
you were lost?
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
I	 Why are passengers asked to switch off their electronic devices 
during take-off and landing?
R	 It’s mainly because they don’t want passengers to be distracted, 
in case there’s an emergency. It’s nothing to do with the 
devices interfering with aircraft controls. I mean, aircraft control 
systems are so sophisticated now that they wouldn’t cause any 
interference. Incidentally, that’s also the reason why people have 
to put their tray tables up. If we had to abandon take-off or have 
an emergency evacuation, a tray table could cause a passenger 
injury or prevent other passengers from getting out easily.
I	 Is it really worth listening to safety demonstrations?
R	 Definitely. I can tell you for a fact that when pilots are passengers 
in a flight, they always identify the nearest emergency exit and 
count how many rows in front or behind it is.
I	 Do you ever get scared?
R	 I’ve been asked this many times, and the answer is no – hand on 
heart. I’ve been flying since I was sixteen and there’s never been 
a single occasion where I’ve felt scared in the air. Bear in mind 
you’ve been asking me about dangerous situations, but these are 
incredibly rare.
I	 Thanks very much, Richard.
c	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen for more detail, 
pausing as necessary to give Sts time to write their notes. 
Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 When the wind changes direction very suddenly, especially 
during take-off and landing
2	 No, it isn’t, though passengers should wear their seat belts.
3	 They’re both dangerous, but take-off is slightly more 
dangerous.
4	 Because the crew don’t want passengers to be distracted if 
there’s an emergency, and they don’t want the tray tables to 
get in the way if there’s an evacuation.
5	 Yes, definitely, especially to identify the nearest emergency 
exit
6	 No, never, and he has been flying since he was 16.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
5	GRAMMAR  narrative tenses, past perfect 
continuous
a	 Focus on the newspaper article and tell Sts that this 
is a true story from a British newspaper called The 
Independent. Now focus on the task and make sure Sts 
know the meaning of deny /dɪˈnaɪ/ (= to say that sth is 
not true).
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the story and answer 
the questions. Tell them not to worry about 1–8 in the 
newspaper story.
	 Check answers.
The Daily Mail said that the pilot had told passengers they would 
probably have to fly with just one engine working and asked if 
they wanted to stay on the plane or get off.
In fact, the pilot just asked the passengers if they wanted to get 
off the plane or not, while he was trying to start the engines.
b	 Get Sts to read the article again and this time they should 
circle the correct form of the verbs in 1–8.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 48@@
3A
48
c	 e 3.12  Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check spelling by eliciting the answers and writing the 
verbs on the board in a chart.
e 3.12
1	 boot /uː/	
flew, threw
2	 fish /ɪ/	
hid, driven, hidden, ridden, written
3	 horse /ɔː/	
caught, fought, thought, fallen
4	 bird /ɜː/	
heard, hurt
5	 phone /əʊ/	 drove, rode, told, wrote, flown, thrown
6	 up /ʌ/	
cut, become
7	 egg /e/	
fell, held, kept, left, read, said, slept
8	 train /eɪ/	
became, lay, lain
	 Remind Sts that:
•	 verbs ending in -aught are pronounced exactly the same 
as ones which end in -ought, e.g. caught, fought, thought.
•	 the ea in read is irregular and pronounced /e/.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA IDEA   At this point, or perhaps at the end of the 
lesson, you may want to revise other common irregular 
verbs. Refer Sts to the Irregular verbs list on p.165 and 
explain that this is their reference list. Get Sts to go through 
the list quickly in pairs, checking that they know what the 
verbs mean. Encourage them to highlight verbs they didn’t 
know or whose past forms they had forgotten. Test the class, 
or get Sts to test each other. 
d	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts can remember what 
an anecdote is (= a short, interesting, or amusing story 
about a real person or event).
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read the anecdote and 
guess what the missing verbs might be.
e	 e 3.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  happened    ​2  flying    ​3  reading    ​4  watching    ​5  heard    ​
6  turned    ​7  having    ​8  came    ​9  born
e 3.13
This happened when my wife and I were on a flight to New York, 
and we’d been flying for a few hours. I was reading, and my wife was 
watching a film, when suddenly we heard an announcement – ‘Is 
there a doctor on board?’ It turned out that a woman was having 
a baby! Luckily, two doctors came forward, and the baby was born 
safely.
	 Tell Sts they are going to practise sentence rhythm now. 
Tell them to listen to the extract and notice that the bold 
words are stressed and the others aren’t. Remind Sts that 
the stressed words are the ‘content’ ones (e.g. verbs and 
nouns) – the ones that convey important information.
	 Play the audio again once the whole way through for Sts 
just to listen.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise reading the 
anecdote, concentrating on getting a good rhythm.
	 Get some Sts to read a sentence each to the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing at intervals, 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the task and get Sts to work either in pairs or 
groups of three. Set a time limit and remind Sts that they 
have to try to use the four different narrative tenses in the 
endings.
	 Get feedback and accept all correct meaningful sentences.
Some possible ways to complete the sentences
1	 …didn’t have his lights / seat belt on.
	
…was using his mobile.
	
…had gone through a red (traffic) light.
	
…had been driving too fast.
2	 …it was very hot.
	
…my neighbours were making a noise.
	
…I had had a cup of coffee after dinner.
	
…I had been worrying about work.
6	PRONUNCIATION  irregular past forms, 
sentence rhythm
Pronunciation notes
This exercise focuses on commonly mispronounced 
irregular past verb forms. Sometimes, Sts at this level still 
have some ingrained pronunciation problems with some 
of the trickier irregular past and past participle forms, e.g. 
the -ought / -aught endings.
There is also a focus on sentence rhythm with narrative 
tenses, and Sts get the opportunity to practise reading a 
short paragraph aloud.
a	 Focus on the picture words and elicit the eight sounds.
	 Then focus on the past simple verb in column 3 and elicit 
that it has the same vowel sound. Do the same with the 
verb in column 8.
	 Now get Sts to look at all the verbs in the list, think of the 
past simple form for each one, and write it in the correct 
column.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Check answers to a before doing b, by 
getting Sts to spell the verbs to you.
1	 /uː/	 flew, threw
2	 /ɪ/	
hid
3	 /ɔː/	
fought, thought
4	 /ɜː/	
heard, hurt
5	 /əʊ/	 drove, rode, told, wrote
6	 /ʌ/	
cut
7	 /e/	
fell, held, kept, left, read, said, slept
8	 /eɪ/	
lay
	 Or get Sts to do a and b in pairs.
b	 Now tell Sts to look at all the verbs in a again and decide 
which have a past participle form that is not the same 
as the past simple form. They must then write the past 
participles in the chart as well. You could do the first one 
with them (become, which should go in column 6).
	 Get Sts to compare answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 49@@
3A
49
7	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Flight stories, A on p.107, B on p.112.
	 Tell Sts they are each going to read a true story about 
a flight. Go through the instructions and make sure Sts 
know what they have to do.
	 Give Sts time to read their stories.
	 Now tell them to cover their story and use the information 
under Setting the scene, The main events, and What 
happened in the end to help them retell their story to their 
partner as if they had been a passenger on the plane.
	 Then Sts decide which situation was more scary.
	 You could get a show of hands for which story was more 
scary.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3A.
b	 Focus on the task and go through the instructions with 
the class.
	 Then focus on the Telling an anecdote box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Tell Sts to look at the topics and to choose one. If they 
have a real story, they can tell it as it happened. If not, they 
should invent the details. Later, their partner will have to 
decide if he / she thinks the story was true or not.
	 Give Sts plenty of time to plan how they are going to tell 
their stories, and go round checking whether they need 
any help with vocabulary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell one of the stories yourself first and elicit 
responses and questions from the class. Then ask Sts if they 
think the story is true or invented.
c	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and focus on the example. Sts A 
start by telling their story and Sts B should show interest 
and ask for more information. If necessary, remind them 
of the phrases for reacting to what someone says in 1A 
on p.7.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any misuse of narrative 
tenses and encouraging the listener to listen actively.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look back at p.11 to remind them 
of ways of reacting to a story about something strange.
	 When Sts A have finished telling their story, Sts B must 
guess whether or not it is true.
	 Sts then swap roles.
	 Get some Sts to tell their stories to the class. Deal with any 
general vocabulary problems that arose.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to write up their story for homework, 
using the same prompts as in Communication (Setting the 
scene, etc.) to help them with paragraphing.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 50@@
3B
50
b	 Now tell Sts that sentences A–D are the final sentences of 
each story. They must read the stories again and this time 
match the correct ending to each one.
	 Check answers.
1  D    ​2  A    ​3  B    ​4  C
	 Get Sts to say what they think each story is about. Do 
story 1 with the whole class. Elicit / Explain the meaning 
of chat-up lines (= sth you say in a friendly way to sb you 
are attracted to). Then elicit the story from Sts by asking, 
e.g. Where does the story take place? (on a train) Who are 
the characters? (a man and a woman) What does the man 
always do to chat women up? (He asks them a simple 
question and pays them a compliment.) Why didn’t it work 
this time? (Because the woman is reading her divorce 
papers.)
	 Then get Sts to explain the other three stories in pairs.
	 Get feedback, encouraging Sts to use their own words to 
explain each story. Find out which story they think has the 
best ending.
	 You might want to explain that although the stories deal 
with potentially ‘dark’ themes, such as male predatory 
behaviour, death, loneliness, and anger, the authors make 
their stories end in an unexpected and humorous way.
c	 Focus on the instructions and go through the five 
categories of adverbs. Make sure Sts understand the 
categories by focusing on the examples.
	 Get Sts to write the adverbs in the chart individually or in 
pairs.
	 If Sts worked alone, get them to compare with a partner, 
and then check answers.
Time: at once, at last
Manner: carefully, silently, angrily
Degree: much, absolutely
Comment: unfortunately
Frequency: always
d	 Explain that one of the problems with adverbs is where 
to put them in a sentence, and elicit / explain that there 
are three possible positions: at the beginning or end of 
the phrase / sentence, or in the middle (usually before the 
main verb). Tell Sts that although the rules may seem a bit 
complicated, they will probably have a good instinct for 
where adverbs should go, and to try to see which position 
sounds best.
	 In pairs, Sts put the adverbs in the sentences.
	 Check answers.
1	 He speaks French and Spanish fluently.
2	 I hardly ever use public transport.
3	 I thought I’d lost my phone, but fortunately it was in my bag.
4	 It’s extremely important that you arrive on time.
5	 When I find out, I’ll tell you immediately.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 3B on p.137.
 G   the position of adverbs and adverbial phrases
 V   adverbs and adverbial phrases
 P   word stress and intonation
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is stories and reading. 
The lesson starts with a grammar focus on adverbs and 
adverbial phrases, and their position in sentences, which is 
presented through four 50-word stories with a twist. This is 
followed by a vocabulary focus on certain pairs of adverbs 
which are often confused, and in Pronunciation the focus is 
on word stress and emphatic intonation on certain adverbs. 
Sts then write their own 50-word stories.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts begin by talking about 
their reading habits, or about why they don’t read for 
pleasure. They then read and listen to a short story by the 
French author Guy de Maupassant. The ending of the story 
is on the audio, in order to create more suspense. Finally, Sts 
go to the Writing Bank to prepare for writing longer stories.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  the position of adverbs and adverbial 
phrases p.167 
Communicative  Tell the story p.197 (instructions p.185) 
Vocabulary  Adverbs and adverbial phrases p.221 
(instructions p.214)
For students
Workbook  3B
Online Practice  3B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.30 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could elicit / tell Sts that Chuck Palahniuk is most 
famous for his novel Fight Club, which also was made into a 
popular film of the same name.
Ask Sts if they agree with the quote.
1	GRAMMAR  the position of adverbs and adverbial 
phrases
a	 Focus on the title of the lesson and on the name of the 
website. Explain that the stories submitted to the website 
have to tell a story in exactly 50 words.
	 Now focus on the task and put Sts in pairs.
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the stories, and tell them 
to use the pictures to help them. Tell them not to worry 
about the highlighted words or the number of words. You 
may want to remind them of the use of the present tense 
for dramatic storytelling even when the actions took place 
in the past.
	 Elicit some predictions from various pairs for each story.
	3B	 A really good ending?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 51@@
3B
51
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 e 3.15  This is an oral grammar practice activity. Focus 
on the instructions and tell Sts the sound effects and 
conversations will tell them what is happening in each 
situation and they then need to complete each sentence 
using the adverb in bold. Demonstrate by playing the 
audio and pausing after 1.
	 Now continue, pausing the audio after each sound effect 
or conversation to give Sts time to write the sentences. 
Play each situation again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Possible answers
1	 …had just left.
2	 …suddenly the music stopped / the electricity went off.
3	 …luckily, he found it in his pocket / it was in his pocket.
4	 …in fact, they have never met.
5	 …it was raining (so) hard, etc.
6	 …he was speaking incredibly fast / quickly.
e 3.15
1	 sound effects of bus leaving, followed by rushed footsteps
	
Woman	
Oh no!
2	 sound effects of a party with music, which suddenly stops
3	 Woman	
Can I see your boarding pass?
	
Man	
Oh no, I’ve lost it. Where is it? Where is it?
	
Woman	
I’m afraid you can’t fly if you haven’t got your 
boarding pass.
	
Man	
Oh, here it is...
4	 Woman	
Tom, this is Andrea – but you two know each other, 
don’t you?
	
Tom	
Actually, we don’t, but I’ve heard about you. Hi, 
Andrea. Nice to meet you at last.
	
Andrea	
Hello.
5	 sound effects of rain
	
Man	
I can’t see a thing. I think we’d better stop for a bit.
6	 Frenchman	
Excuse me. Please could you tell me how to get to 
the train station?
	
Taxi driver	
Yeah, mate. Straight down the high street, left at 
the lights, straight through the underpass, then it’s 
right in front of you.
	
Frenchman	
Pardon?
2	VOCABULARY  adverbs and adverbial phrases
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the story.
	 Elicit the answer. You could point out to Sts the use of the 
present simple for storytelling.
Dad
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the difference 
between the highlighted adverbs.
	 Check answers.
a	 near = close to, nearly = almost
b	 late = near the end of a period of time, lately = recently
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Adverbs and 
adverbial phrases on p.155.
Grammar notes
The position of adverbs and adverbial phrases
This is an area of grammar where practice and Sts’ own 
instinct as to what sounds correct will probably be more 
useful in the long run than memorizing rules. A useful tip 
to tell Sts is that with adverbs that don’t end in -ly (e.g. 
even, just, etc.), if in doubt, to put them in mid-position, 
e.g. before the main verb.
•	 Rule 1: adverbs of manner
	 In spoken English, adverbs of manner usually go after 
the verb or verb phrase, e.g. He opened the door quietly. 
However, in written English, e.g. a novel, they are 
sometimes used before the verb for dramatic effect, 
e.g. He quietly opened the door and came in. Jane quickly 
explained why she was leaving.
	 You could give Sts some more examples of adverbs of 
manner in passive sentences: Their house is beautifully 
designed. It’s a well-written story.
•	 Rule 4: a lot and much
	 You may want to expand this information and tell Sts 
that we can use a lot as an adverb after a verb (+ object) 
or verb phrase, e.g. She goes out a lot, He loves her a lot. 
We can also use much in the same way in questions 
and negatives, e.g. Does he drink much? I didn’t sleep 
much last night. In [+] sentences we can use very much, 
usually after a noun or pronoun, e.g. Thank you very 
much. We enjoyed the play very much.
	 Now focus on the example sentences and play audio 
e 3.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to 
copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Focus on the Other adverbs box and go through it with 
the class.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1	 a lot ✗  She liked the present a lot.
2	 very late ✗, last night ✗  Mark came home very late last night.
3	 after a few minutes ✓
4	 badly ✗  A young man was badly hurt and was taken to 
hospital.
5	 incredibly ✓
6	 a bit ✗  She’s a bit lazy about doing her homework.
7	 almost ✗, fortunately ✗  I almost forgot your birthday, but 
fortunately, my sister reminded me.
8	 luckily ✗, straight away ✓  Luckily, we had taken an umbrella 
because it started to rain straight away.
9	 always ✓, healthily ✓, often ✓
10	 apparently ✗  Apparently, John has been sacked.
b
1	 Their house was badly damaged in the fire last week.
2	 Ben is often at his friend’s house in the evening.
3	 My father usually has a nap in the afternoon.
4	 Julia left early and she didn’t even say goodbye.
5	 Martin always eats incredibly quickly.
6	 Apparently, his brother nearly died in a skiing accident.
7	 We’re probably going to the cinema tonight.
8	 I rarely send emails nowadays.
9	 I’ve just bought a really beautiful new coat.
 10	 Eventually, Karen realized that she was never going to learn 
to drive.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 52@@
3B
52
e 3.17
2 Comment adverbs
1	 ideally 
2	 in fact 
3	 basically 
4	 obviously 
5	 gradually 
6	 apparently 
7	 certainly 
8	 eventually
	 Now either play the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the adverbs, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation and get Sts to cover definitions 1–8, look 
at the sentences on the left, and see if they can remember 
the meaning of the adverbs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  word stress and intonation
Pronunciation notes
Comment adverbs and adverbs of degree are often given 
extra stress and intonation in a sentence to add emphasis 
to their meaning, e.g. It’s incredibly easy (extra emphasis 
and intonation on incredibly).
a	 e 3.18  Focus on the adverbs and give Sts time to 
underline the stressed syllable.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to say each 
adverb aloud, so they can work out which syllables are 
stressed.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the adverbs on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllable.
absolutely    actually    apparently    basically    definitely 
especially    eventually    fortunately    gradually    ideally 
incredibly    luckily    obviously    unfortunately
e 3.18
See words in Student’s Book on p.31
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
adverb for Sts to listen and repeat.
b	 e 3.19  Play the audio once the whole way through for 
Sts just to listen.
e 3.19
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.31
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each sentence for 
Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
Vocabulary notes
Confusing adverbs and adverbial phrases
Highlight that:
•	 actually does not mean now or at the present moment 
(it’s a false friend for some nationalities). It means in fact 
and is used to emphasize a fact or comment, or to say 
that something is really true.
•	 especially = above all (you can’t use specially here; 
specially is only used with an adjective or participle, e.g. 
It’s a specially designed umbrella NOT especially designed)
•	 at the end = when something has finished, e.g. at the 
end of the class / film, etc., or to describe the furthest 
point, e.g. at the end of the street.  
In the end = finally, after a period of time or series of 
events, e.g. It took me two years, but in the end, I passed 
my driving test.
•	 yet goes at the end of a phrase and still in the mid 
position, e.g. He hasn’t found a job yet. He still hasn’t found 
a job (still = more emphatic). You may want to tell Sts 
that still can also be an adjective meaning not moving.
	 Focus on 1 Confusing adverbs and adverbial phrases 
and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Make sure they 
understand what they have to do. Remind Sts to write 
in the Adverbs column on the right-hand side, not in the 
sentences.
	 e 3.16  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 3.16
Adverbs and adverbial phrases
1 Confusing adverbs and adverbial phrases
1	 He trains very hard – at least three hours a day.
	
It’s incredibly foggy. I can hardly see anything.
2	 I hate it when people arrive late for meetings.
	
I haven’t heard from Mike lately. He must be very busy.
3	 At the end of a film, I always stay and watch the credits roll.
	
I didn’t want to go, but in the end they persuaded me.
4	 I love most kinds of music, but especially jazz.
	
My wedding dress was specially made for me by a dressmaker.
5	 She looks younger than me, but actually she’s two years older.
	
At the moment they’re renting a flat, but they’re hoping to buy 
one soon.
6	 I’ve nearly finished my book. I’m on the last chapter.
	
Excuse me, is there a bank near here?
7	 Have you found a job yet?
	
He’s thirty-five, but he still lives with his parents.
8	 Have you ever been to the USA?
	
I’ve been all over the USA – I’ve even been to Alaska!
	 Give further practice of any words or phrases your Sts find 
difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation and get Sts to cover the Adverbs column 
on the right, look at sentences 1–8, and see if they can 
remember the missing adverbs or adverbial phrases.
	 Focus on 2 Comment adverbs and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 3.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 53@@
3B
53
Suggested answers
1	 she was socially ambitious, but poor.
2	 she was jealous of her life of luxury.
3	 he had got an invitation to a party at the Ministry.
4	 she had nothing to wear to the party.
5	 his wife didn’t want to go to the party and he had gone to a 
lot of trouble to get the invitation.
6	 he had already saved the money for himself.
7	 she didn’t have any jewellery.
8	 she lent her a beautiful necklace to wear.
e 3.20
See Part 1 in Student’s Book on p.32
	 Focus on the questions in bold and make sure Sts know 
the meaning of the verb sympathize /ˈsɪmpəθaɪz/ (= to 
feel sorry for sb). Elicit ideas. Tell Sts that the story is set in 
France at the end of the 19th century.
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
!   Sts may query why, in Part 1, Mathilde says ‘…whose 
wife has better clothes than I’ rather than ‘better clothes than 
me’. Explain that this is grammatically correct (it leaves out 
the second have = ‘better clothes than I [have]’), but is now 
considered very formal / correct English. The more usual 
expression nowadays is better clothes than me.
b	 e 3.21  Focus on the Glossary and go through it with 
the class.
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–7, making sure they 
understand the phrase raise money.
	 Play Part 2 on the audio for Sts to listen.
	 Then give Sts time to see if they can answer some of the 
questions.
	 Play the audio again, pausing to give Sts time to note their 
answers.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 Yes, she did. She was the prettiest of all, all the men admired 
her, she danced all night.
2	 They walked and then got a cab.
3	 That she had lost Madame Forestier’s necklace.
4	 Her husband went out to look for the necklace.
5	 They decided to buy another necklace.
6	 They used their savings and borrowed the rest.
7	 She reacted coldly and told Mathilde she should have 
returned the necklace sooner.
e 3.21
(script in Student’s Book on p.124)
N = narrator, L = Mr Loisel, M = Mathilde Loisel, F = Madame Forestier
Part 2
N	 The day of the party arrived. Mathilde was a success. She was the 
prettiest of them all, elegant, smiling, and mad with joy. All the men 
stared at her, asked her name, and asked to be introduced. She 
danced all night in a cloud of happiness.
	
They left at about four in the morning. It was a cold night, and her 
husband could not find a cab.
	
They walked towards the Seine, shivering, and finally found one. 
When they got home, Mathilde took off her cloak, but as she glanced 
at the mirror to see herself one last time, she suddenly gave a cry.
	
Her husband, half undressed already, asked…
L	 What is the matter with you?
4	WRITING
a	 If there is time, do this activity in class. If not, set it for 
homework. Focus on the instructions.
	 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to choose a title.
b	 Get Sts to think of their plot together.
	 Give them time to write the first draft, and tell them not to 
count the words yet.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Encourage them to write the first draft 
individually and then continue working individually through 
the next stage.
c	 Now give Sts time to edit their stories together to get the 
correct number of words. Remind them that they have to 
include at least two adverbs, and that contracted forms 
(I’m, don’t, etc.) count as one word.
	 Monitor and help as they write, suggesting ways they 
could cut down or expand their stories.
d	 When Sts have finished, get them to swap stories with 
two other pairs.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   You could put corrected stories on the wall of 
your classroom or on your class website for other Sts to read.
5	SPEAKING
a	 Put Sts in pairs and focus on the Reading habits questions. 
Make sure Sts understand all the text types, e.g. comics, 
classics, manuals, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to go through the different 
types of reading matter and discuss each one, saying 
whether they ever read them and how often. Monitor and 
encourage Sts to ask for more information when possible.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Reading habits on 
p.108.
	 Go through the instructions with them carefully.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) start by 
interviewing Sts B (book closed), then they swap roles.
	 Finally, Sts discuss how similar their reading habits are.
	 Get some feedback, and find out how many Sts in the 
class read for pleasure.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 3B.
6	READING & LISTENING  reading for pleasure
a	 e 3.20  Tell Sts they are going to read and listen to 
a story in parts and then answer a few questions. You 
could tell them that the short story is by a famous French 
novelist called Guy de Maupassant (1850–1893).
	 Focus on the Reading for pleasure box and go through 
it with the class.
	 Now play Part 1 on the audio for Sts to read and listen at 
the same time. Point out the Glossary.
	 Then focus on 1–8, and give Sts time to continue the 
sentences with a partner. They can do this either orally or 
in writing.
	 Elicit continuations from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read Part 1 of the story the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 54@@
3B
54
	 Get some feedback.
	 Now focus on the questions in bold and elicit ideas.
EXTRA IDEA   You may want to pause the audio before 
Madame Forestier’s last line and get Sts to predict what they 
think she is going to say.
Suggested answer for the message of the story
The moral of the story is that you should be happy with what 
you have.
e 3.23
Part 4
N	 One Sunday, after a hard week’s work, Mathilde decided to go for a 
walk in the Champs-Élysées. As she was walking, she saw a woman 
with a child. It was Madame Forestier, still young, still beautiful, still 
seductive.
	
Mathilde felt moved. Should she speak to her? Yes, certainly. And now 
that they had paid off the debt, she would tell her everything. Why 
not?
M	 Good morning, Jeanne.
N	 Madame Forestier did not recognize her. She hesitated.
F	 But, madame, I don’t know you. Are you not making a mistake?
M	 No. I am Mathilde Loisel.
N	 Her friend gave a cry.
F	 Oh, my poor Mathilde, how changed you are.
M	 Yes, I have had hard times since I last saw you, and many troubles, 
and all because of you.
F	 Because of me? How can that be?
M	 You remember that diamond necklace that you lent me, to go to 
the party at the Ministry?
F	 Yes. I remember.
M	 Well, I lost it.
F	 That’s not possible. You brought it back to me.
M	 I brought you back another one just like it. And for the last ten 
years we have been paying for it. You will understand that it was 
not easy for us; we had no money…But it’s paid for at last.
N	 Madame Forestier stared at her.
F	 You say that you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine?
M	 Yes. You did not even notice it, did you? They were exactly alike.
N	 Madame Forestier, much moved, took her by both hands.
F	 Oh, my poor Mathilde. But my diamonds were false; they were 
imitation. At most they were worth five hundred francs!
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could give Sts some useful language 
to respond to a story, e.g. I was really surprised / disappointed, 
I didn’t expect…, The ending was a real surprise, I thought it 
would end like that, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you photocopy script 3.23 from here, Sts 
could read and listen to the whole story.
7	WRITING  a short story
	 This writing stage focuses on using the narrative tenses 
practised in Lesson A and also on using adjectives and 
adverbs to make a story more vivid. Tell Sts to go to 
Writing A short story on p.116.
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the story and 
answer the two questions. Tell them not to worry about 
the gaps.
	 Check answers.
He wrote an email which had a negative comment about his 
boss’s wife in it and he accidentally sent it to his boss.
He was sacked.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts a few more questions about the story, 
e.g. What company did he work for? Why didn’t he like his boss’s 
wife? etc.
N	 She turned to him, in terror.
M	 The necklace. I have lost Madame Forestier’s diamond necklace!
N	 He jumped up, frightened.
L	 What? How? It is not possible!
N	 They searched everywhere, but they did not find it. They had no way 
of contacting the cab driver. Her husband rushed out and retraced 
their steps from the Ministry to where they had caught the cab. He 
came back at about seven o’clock in the morning. He had found 
nothing. He went to the police, to the newspapers, and to the cab 
companies to offer a reward, hoping against hope that it would be 
found.
L	 You must write to your friend…
N	 …he said…
L	 …that you have broken the clasp of her necklace and that you are 
having it repaired. That will give us time to decide what to do.
N	 By the end of the week they had lost all hope. The next day they 
went from jeweller’s to jeweller’s, looking for a necklace like the one 
Mathilde had borrowed. 
	
In a shop in the Palais Royal, they found a diamond necklace 
that seemed to them absolutely identical. The price was thirty-six 
thousand francs.
	
Monsieur Loisel had eighteen thousand francs, which he had 
inherited from his father. He borrowed the rest, asking a thousand 
francs from one friend, five hundred from another, doing business 
with money lenders, and signing promises to pay which he was 
not sure he would be able to keep. Finally, he was able to raise the 
eighteen thousand more that they needed.
	
When Mathilde took the necklace back to Madame Forestier, she 
said, coldly…
F	 You should have brought it back sooner. I might have needed it.
	 Finally, focus on the question in bold and elicit some 
ideas.
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.124, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
c	 e 3.22  Tell Sts they are now going to read and listen to 
Part 3.
	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–4, and also get them to 
look at the Glossary.
	 Play Part 3 for Sts to read and listen at the same time.
	 Get Sts to discuss the questions with a partner.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read Part 3 of the story the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 They moved to a small attic with no servant. She had to do all 
the housework and shopping, and wear worn-out clothes.
2	 He worked in the evening and at night.
3	 They had paid everything back that they owed.
4	 Mathilde now looked like an old woman.
e 3.22
See Part 3 in Student’s Book on p.33
	 Finally, focus on the questions in bold and elicit some 
ideas.
	 Deal with any other vocabulary problems that arose.
d	 e 3.23  Tell Sts that they are now going to hear the end 
of the story. Focus on the task and the Glossary, and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now play Part 4 once the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to discuss what they understood and then play 
the audio again as necessary.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 55@@
3B
55
b	 Focus on the instructions. Remind Sts to think about both 
the meaning and the position of the gap when they are 
choosing which word to complete it with.
	 Check answers.
2  quite    ​3  well    ​4  aggressive    ​5  frequently    ​6  new    ​
7  fond    8  quick    ​9  immediately    ​10  An hour later
c	 Focus on the instructions. Remind Sts that in a story, 
they can either use reported speech or direct speech, 
i.e. dialogue, but that if they use dialogue, they must 
punctuate it properly.
	 Give Sts time to write out the sentence with the correct 
punctuation. Remind them to look at the dialogue in the 
story to help them.
	 Check answers either by getting a student to write the 
text with punctuation on the board, or writing it yourself.
‘I want to talk to you about an email you sent,’ Mr Simpson said 
coldly.
	 Highlight that inverted commas go outside any other 
punctuation, e.g. full stops, commas, and question marks. 
Inverted commas can be single or double (“ ).
d	 Focus on the Useful language: time expressions box 
and give Sts time to complete the time expressions.
	 Check answers.
1  At that moment    ​2  As soon as    ​3  Ten minutes later    ​
4  One morning in September    ​5  just in time
e	 Go through the instructions. Then put Sts in pairs and give 
them time to choose which story to write and to discuss 
what the plot is going to be.
f	 Focus on the plan and go through points 1–3 with the 
class. When looking at 1, make sure Sts do not think they 
have to write another story that is exactly 50 words.
g	 If Sts wrote a 50-word story in class, it would probably be 
best to set this longer one for homework.
h	 Sts should check their short story for mistakes before 
giving it in.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 56@@
CE2&3
56
Warrior Scarlet was her favourite book when she was a child.
Her mother read Little House on the Prairie to her brother.
Her father read Mouse House to her when she was a child.
Northern Lights is a classic book by Philip Pullman, who is her 
favourite children’s writer.
I = interviewer, J = Julia Eccleshare
Part 1
I	 What was your favourite book when you were a child?
J	 It’s always very difficult thinking back to one’s favourite book as a 
child because…er…different times were different favourite books, 
but the book that I remember best that I go back to in times of 
wanting to have a quiet moment of…er…reflection is a book by 
Rosemary Sutcliffe called Warrior Scarlet, and why it appealed to 
me is very hard to say. It’s about a boy with a withered arm in the 
Iron Age, who can’t get his place in the tribe because he can’t kill a 
wolf. I probably read it once a year even now.
I	 Even now?
J	 Well, yes, because there is a special thing about reading a book 
that you loved as a child – it takes you back to that time. You…
typically if you ask people about their favourite book as…as 
a child or the book that made them a reader – which I think is 
another way of looking at it – they can remember a fantastic 
amount about it. They can often remember who gave it to them, 
or who read it to them, or where they read it, or…and I have 
exactly that experience with…with that book.
I	 When you were a small child, who read to you: your mother or 
your father?
J	 Well, I’m third of four children and – this is a terrible thing to say – 
I don’t think anybody read to me. I think I remember listening 
in on my older sisters being read to. So I was the youngest of 
three girls, and then I’ve got a younger brother. And I very much 
remember my mother reading the Laura Ingalls Wilder Little 
House on the Prairie sequence to my brother, and that’s when I 
heard them, too; I certainly never had them read to me. And then 
my father read me Rumer Godden’s Mouse House, and again, this 
is a very profound memory, probably because he didn’t actually 
very often read aloud, so it’s logged in my brain as something 
that he read to me.
I	 And who read to your children: you or your husband?
J	 Well, that’s interesting, because if I think back to it, I think, 
perhaps because I worked in books and my husband didn’t, he 
seems to have done more of the reading aloud than I did. Um, 
he loved reading aloud; he has incredible stamina for it, and 
he would read for an hour quite happily, I think, at the end of a 
working day. It was quite a nice thing for him to do.
I	 Do you have a favourite children’s writer?
J	 I think my favourite author at the moment is Philip Pullman. I 
think he gave us a classic book in Northern Lights, the first of His 
Dark Materials trilogy, which opened up to a very wide range of 
children what imaginative fiction can be at its best, and there’s 
nothing that Philip has written that isn’t interesting, beautifully 
crafted, um, surprising, and a story that you reflect on. He…he 
raises so many questions, giving openings for children to think – 
that’s the best kind of writing as far as I’m concerned. So if you ask 
me now of a contemporary writer, he would be the person who I 
think is the greatest.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences  
1–5. Remind them that they have to correct the ones that 
are false.
	 Play the video again the whole way through for Sts to 
mark each statement T (true) or F (false).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Lesson plan
In The Interview, the person interviewed is Julia Eccleshare, 
a British journalist and author on the subject of children’s 
books.
In The Conversation, Sts watch three people discussing 
whether there are any books that they think everyone 
should read. Sts then discuss this question as well as a 
couple of other questions related to the topic, focusing on 
vague language (e.g. I mean, sort of, etc.) and phrases to refer 
to what someone else has said (e.g. as you were saying, etc.). 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Colloquial English 2&3 
Quick Test 3 
File 3 Test
For students
Workbook  Colloquial English 2&3 
Can you remember? 2&3
Online Practice  Colloquial English 2&3 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   Write some characters 
from famous British and American children’s books you think 
your Sts might have read, and see if, in pairs, they can name 
the book:
1	 CHRISTOPHER ROBIN
2	 CAPTAIN HOOK
3	 HERMIONE
4	 LYRA AND WILL
5	 PETER, SUSAN, EDMUMD, AND LUCY
6	 LAURA INGALLS
1	 Winnie-the-Pooh by AA Milne
2	 Peter Pan by J.M. Barrie
3	 the Harry Potter series by J.K. Rowling
4	 His Dark Materials trilogy by Philip Pullman
5	 The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe by C.S. Lewis
6	 Little House on the Prairie by Laura Ingalls Wilder
1	r THE INTERVIEW  Part 1
a	 Books open. Focus on the biographical information about 
Julia Eccleshare. Either read it out loud or give Sts time to 
read it.
	 Do the question as a whole-class activity and find out if 
Sts have read any of the books.
b	 Focus on the task and go through the Glossary with Sts.
	 Play the video (Part 1) once the whole way through for 
Sts to do the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
	2&3	Colloquial English  Talking about… 
books
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 57@@
CE2&3
57
b	 Focus on the five sentences and the Glossary. Now give 
Sts time, in pairs, to see if they can remember any of the 
answers before they watch again.
	 Play the video again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at appropriate 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare orally what they have 
understood.
1  finding the right book    ​2  often    ​3  should    ​4  children, 
parents    ​5  shouldn’t
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could demonstrate 
the activity by talking about when you learned to read 
and your reading habits as a teenager.
r Part 3
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the three 
questions. You might want to check that Sts know what a 
BlackBerry is (= a type of smartphone or tablet).
	 Play the video (Part 3) once the whole way through for 
Sts to do the task.
	 Check answers.
1  Both    ​2  No    ​3  Yes
Part 3
I	 For the most part, do you read paper books or eBooks?
J	 Ah, I’m…I’m almost entirely a print-book reader – but that’s not 
out of prejudice, that’s just out of, um, the fact that I get sent all 
the books, so it’s easy for me to find the book I want to read and 
pick it up. Um, I read on my, um, iPad sometimes. Um, I think we 
are…ought to, sort of, stop seeing the two in polarity. I think, 
you know, everybody is going to read both. I read the newspaper 
online and I read it in print at the weekends. I think we are all just 
going to get very used to reading in different ways.
I	 Has all the new media made young people read less?
J	 When television first hit, as it were, everyone said children would 
stop reading, and the curious thing is that children’s books, and 
even books for teenagers, are stronger now – much stronger 
than they were when television – children’s television – first took 
hold. Children’s television has slightly dwindled; books have 
increased. So the book has always been under threat from these 
other media, but somehow reading survives, so there must be 
something very important about it, or it would have gone – we 
would all have taken to seeing things in film, which is a much 
easier way of accessing the same wonderful stories. Or, I…I 
always think the thing that really threatens reading is listening to 
music. I know you can do both, but most people don’t. But, you 
know, even with the explosion of music that children have access 
to, they still have found time for reading.
I	 Do you still read for pleasure?
J	 Well, I still do read for pleasure, um, but it’s harder to get back to 
that magical experience, which I do remember very clearly from 
childhood. I do remember that being totally absorbed in the 
book, but as you get older, it’s just harder to carve out time like 
that, and there is always something else pressing. And of course, 
that’s got more so with…you know, I have a BlackBerry; I look at it 
all the time, and…er…I have to stop myself doing that if I’m going 
to enter this amazing fictional world. So for me, the place that it 
really works best is a long train journey, ’cause I don’t have to look 
at anything; I can be out of my ordinary life and I can just have 
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at the relevant 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare orally what they have 
understood, before marking the sentences T or F.
1	 F (She reads it once a year.)
2	 T
3	 F (She doesn’t think her mother read to her and can only 
remember her father reading one book to her aloud.)
4	 F (He loved reading aloud and was very happy to do it when 
he came home from work.)
5	 T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could demonstrate 
the activity by talking about your childhood.
r Part 2
a	 Focus on the task and play the video (Part 2) once the 
whole way through for Sts to number the photos.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  B    ​2  A    ​3  C
Part 2
I	 What do you think is the one big thing that helps to make a child 
a reader?
J	 One of the extraordinary things about reading that isn’t talked 
about enough, I think, there’s a lot of…of talk about how children 
learn to read and all of this, but actually – and what strategy 
might be best – but actually, what makes a reader, a book, it’s 
finding the book that you really want to read. And so that’s the 
chemistry – that’s the chemical moment, when the child finds 
something that they really want to read.
I	 Teenagers can also be quite negative about reading. What do you 
think can help inspire teenagers to read?
J	 Well, I think the biggest inspiration that I…I would…I mean, 
I would like to say again – to get back to the idea that it is the 
right book – but I think there are lots of ways into reading, and 
one of the things that’s very evident is that, um, good films, far 
from putting children off reading the book, often take children or 
teenagers to read the book. You take a book like The Beach – all 
right, it wasn’t a book that was written for children, but it was a, 
you know, it was a great teen novel. It was a sort of…almost a 
teen anthem novel and, um, a lot of teenagers read the book after 
they’d seen the film.
I	 How do you feel about children reading books which are badly 
written?
J	 What I certainly wouldn’t do is make judgements about quality 
of writing. One of the weirdest things that happens in children’s 
books is that as soon as a child finds an author that they love, the 
parents tend to think it’s not suitable because they think if the 
child is loving it, it’s too easy, or too trivial, or too whatever. And 
Jacqueline Wilson is a very good example of this. She is an author 
who girls particularly found and loved for years, and it’s taken the 
parents a very long time to realize that she is a very good author. 
And what do you say about someone like J.K. Rowling, who is, you 
know, not a great literary stylist, but has some really remarkable 
qualities in her books and will be credited – probably over three 
more generations – for having made children readers? I wouldn’t 
want to say children shouldn’t have read her books because 
they’re not a great literary quality.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 58@@
CE2&3
58
3	r THE CONVERSATION
a	 Focus on the photo and tell Sts they are going to watch 
these three people discuss a question, which they will 
see on the screen. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do. 
	 Play the video and pause after the question. Then play the 
video once the whole way through for Sts to answer the 
question.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening script and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they watch.
D recommends one book.
E recommends more than one book.
I doesn’t recommend a specific book.
I = interviewer, E = Emma, Id = Ida, D = David
I	 Are there any books that you think everybody should read?
E	 I think that’s really tough because it depends a lot on the person, 
I think. But, I think the one thing I would say I think everybody 
should read is Harry Potter. 
I & D	
Hmm.
E	 I think, from, like, all of my friends that are my age, we all kind of 
read it when we were young and it just becomes, like, everyone 
knows what you mean when you talk about your Hogwarts 
house, for example.
I	 Yeah.
E	 And you just kind of lose yourself in this fantasy. The book that 
you read as a child, I still kind of re-read it every few years and a 
lot of people have said that it’s helped them deal with, like, grief 
and…
D	 Wow!
E	 …things like that. So, I think it’s actually quite powerful.
I	 I think also because, like you were saying, you, you, sort of grew 
up with it. So you grew up with the characters and, and they kind 
of become part of some larger literal, literary, literary, sorry, family.
E	 Yeah!
I	 And everybody knows what everybody else is talking about
E	 Mmmhmm.
D	 But then having said that, I’ve, I’ve never read it. I’ve never seen 
the films.
E	 Now I’m shocked.
D	 And then when people are talking about it – in the office or, or 
when I’m out – I haven’t got a clue what they’re talking about. 
And I feel a little bit out of it and maybe, maybe I should read it.
E	 Mmm, you should!
D	 Mmm…er…
I	 I think only for, from a sort of social perspective. It’s so huge and 
it’s influenced so many people in every country – not just in the 
UK, or not just Western countries – but all over the world that I 
think it becomes, like you were saying, a common language of 
sorts. And also becomes a, almost like a social history in a way.
E	 Yeah.
I	 It sort of becomes – it’s more than a book. It’s a kind of a, a 
common experience.
D	 I, I once read…The Diving Bell and the Butterfly, that was a good 
book. Very short book. And it was about a…
I	 I’ve never heard of it.
D	 …a gentleman, he had a stroke and he only could communicate 
the book, er, through blinking an eye…
E	 Oh, OK!
D	 …an eyelid.
I	 Oh right, OK.
D	 And, er, it was quite a moving thing to read, but also uplifting as 
well at the same time. I’d definitely recommend it.
E	 Things like that are great because it’s learning about other 
people’s experiences…
D	 Yeah.
E	 … and kind of finding empathy or…
I & D	
Yeah.
that experience of getting completely lost in the story. But it only 
really works when the story comes to you, and you have that kind of 
chemical moment when the story grabs you and you know you’re 
not going to stop until you’ve got to the end of it, or whatever. You 
know, you know you want to read it as long as possible. So I can still 
read for pleasure, but I have to find the right book.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–5.
	 Play the video again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at appropriate 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare orally what they have 
understood.
1	 She is referring to paper books and eBooks.
2	 When television first started, people said that children would 
stop reading and watch TV.
3	 Reading and listening to music at the same time
4	 It’s harder to find time to get absorbed in a book, as you 
always have other things you have to do.
5	 She means that you suddenly get a feeling that you must 
know how the story finishes and that you will carry on 
reading until you do.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could demonstrate 
the activity by talking about your reading habits.
2	r LOOKING AT LANGUAGE
	 This exercise focuses on a common feature of speech – 
giving yourself time to think. Focus on the Ways of giving 
yourself time to think box and go through it with the 
class. You could ask Sts if they do the same in their own 
language; in a monolingual class, if you know the Sts’ L1, 
you could elicit examples of this.
	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read extracts 1–6. 
Point out that the first one (Well ) has been done for them.
	 Play the video, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they can remember any of the 
missing words or phrases before they listen to the extracts.
2  actually    ​3  I mean    ​4  all right    ​5  sort of    ​6  you know
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to read completed 
sentences 1–6 aloud, to give them practice using the ways 
of giving yourself time to think.
1	 Well, that’s interesting, because if I think back to it…
2	 …I think there’s a lot of, of talk about how children learn to read 
and all of this, but actually, and what strategy might be best, but 
actually what makes a reader…
3	 Well, I think the biggest inspiration that I…I would…I mean, I 
would like to say again…
4	 You take a book like The Beach – all right, it wasn’t a book that was 
written for children…
5	 …it was a sort of…almost a teen anthem novel…
6	 And what do you say about someone like J.K. Rowling, who is, you 
know, not a great literary stylist…
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 59@@
CE2&3
59
2	 I grew up with the internet.
3	 I sometimes forget where I am when I’m reading. 
Suggested answers
1	 I really enjoyed reading (like) science fiction and stuff / things 
like that when I was younger.
2	 I like / kind of / sort of grew up with the internet.
3	 I mean / Like, I sometimes kind of forget where I am when I’m 
reading.
E	 I think, from, like, all of my friends that are my age, we all kind of 
read it when we were young and it just becomes, like, everyone 
knows what you mean when you talk about your Hogwarts 
house, for example.
I	 Yeah.
E	 And you just kind of lose yourself in this fantasy. The book that 
you read as a child, I still kind of re-read it every few years and a 
lot of people have said that it’s helped them deal with, like, grief 
and…
D	 Wow!
E	 …things like that. So, I think it’s actually quite powerful.
I	 I think also because, like you were saying, you, you, sort of grew 
up with it. 
e	 Put Sts in small groups of three if possible. Focus on the 
questions, and check Sts understand what they mean. 
Then set a time limit for Sts to discuss them.
	 Monitor and help, and encourage them to use the 
different examples of vague language focused on in d 
where appropriate.
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
E	 …just experiencing ‘Oh my goodness this has happened to 
someone’.
D	 Yeah.
E	 Um, so, I read a great book recently by Dolly Alderton – just 
about her life and her growing up and things and just, it’s kind of 
like a real celebration of, like, female friendship. And I just wanted 
to recommend it to all my friends.
D	 What period was that set in then?
E	 It’s, it’s present day, so it’s about her growing up. It’s called, um, 
Everything I Know About Love.
D	 Mmmhmm, mmmhmm.
I	 I think that what you said there about empathy and 
understanding other people’s experiences, I think that is the 
key to any good book. And I think that is what makes books so 
important. 
E	 Mmm.
I	 Not only to expand people’s imagination, and their minds, and, 
and practical knowledge, but the idea of empathy, particularly in 
the world we live in today, it’s sort of…
D	 Hmm…more so than ever…
I	 …allowing that time to understand other people’s experiences is, 
is vital, I think.
b	 Focus on the task and the three book titles. Give Sts time 
to read the questions. 
	 Play the video again for Sts to listen and answer the 
questions with a book.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
​1  C    2  B    ​3  B    ​4  A    ​5  A    ​6  C    ​7  B    8  B    ​9  C
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put 
Sts in pairs and then get some feedback. You could tell Sts 
what you think, too.
d	 Focus on the task. Give Sts time to read the extracts.
	 Play the video for Sts to listen and circle the option 
they hear.
	 Check answers.
1  like    2  kind of    ​3  things like that    ​4  sort of
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to decide if the other 
option is also possible.
	 Check answers.
1  no    2  yes    ​3  yes    ​4  yes
	 Highlight that: 
–	 like is used frequently nowadays as a filler, to give you 
time to think (Emma uses it in this way before all of my 
friends). Note that some people find the overuse of like 
annoying. 
–	 kind of and sort of are synonyms. 
–	 stuff = similar to things, a word we use for a substance 
or group of things when we don’t want to specify exactly 
what. It is only used in the singular.  
EXTRA IDEA   Dictate these sentences. Then get Sts to decide 
how they could use use the vague language from d and 
where they would put it.
1	 I really enjoyed reading science fiction when I was younger.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 60@@
4A
60
	4A	 Stormy weather
 G   future perfect and future continuous
 V   the environment, weather
 P   vowel sounds
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is the environment and climate 
change.
The first half of the lesson begins with a quiz to see if Sts are 
as environmentally friendly as they think. They then look at an 
infographic with predictions related to the environment. This 
leads into the grammar focus, which is on two tenses that will 
be new for most Sts: the future perfect and future continuous.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts expand their weather 
vocabulary. This is followed by a pronunciation focus on 
combinations of vowels which can be pronounced in different 
ways, e.g. ea and oo. Sts then read an article from a website 
called the Climate Stories Project, in which six people from 
different continents talk about how they are affected by 
climate change. Sts listen to an interview with a meteorologist, 
and finally they talk about their own experiences of climate 
change and extreme weather conditions.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  future perfect and future continuous p.168 
Communicative  In 20 years’ time p.198  
(instructions p.185) 
Vocabulary  Weather p.222 (instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  4A
Online Practice  4A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.36 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
Elicit / Explain what an anthropologist is (= a person who 
studies the human race, especially its origins, development, 
customs, and beliefs). You could tell Sts that Jane Goodall is 
also an animal rights activist and is known for her work with 
chimpanzees.
Ask Sts what they think Jane Goodall was saying in the 
quotation and whether they agree with her.
1	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and elicit from the class what 
environmentally friendly means (= doing things that help 
the environment, e.g. recycling).
	 Now ask Sts if they can think of any synonyms, and elicit 
eco-friendly and green.
	 Finally, explain to Sts that on a scale of 1–10, 1 means not 
at all and 10 means very. Give them a few minutes to put 
their friends and family on the scale, and then the people 
in their town.
!   Don’t ask Sts to put themselves on the scale, as they will 
be doing this later in the lesson.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to tell their partner their 
opinion on how environmentally friendly everyone is, and 
then get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the title of the questionnaire. Ask a few Sts how 
environmentally friendly they are and to give examples of 
what they do.
	 Point out the two sections of the questionnaire, A Your 
‘values’ and B Your ‘actions’. Focus on the instructions in 
both sections, and make sure Sts understand what they 
have to do.
	 Give Sts time to do the questionnaire individually and 
work out their scores.
	 When they have finished, they should compare their answers 
and scores with a partner, giving examples and reasons.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts do the questionnaire, focus 
on the Your overall score section, and quickly review the 
mathematical terms, i.e. average, add up, divide, and subtract.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Communication Your score on p.108.
	 Give them time to read about their score and then 
compare the meaning of their score with their partner’s.
	 Get some feedback from various Sts. With a show 
of hands, find out how many Sts were really as 
environmentally friendly as they thought they were.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
2	GRAMMAR  future perfect and future continuous
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what an 
infographic is (= information or data that is shown in a 
chart, diagram, etc., so that it is easy to understand).
	 Now focus on the question and the words in the list.
	 Either do the question as a whole-class activity, eliciting 
predictions from the class, or put Sts in pairs and then 
get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   Write the categories on the board and get Sts 
to close their books before they make their predictions, to 
avoid them reading the ones in b.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write Sts’ predictions on the board to help 
with b.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to read the infographic to 
see if their predictions are mentioned. Give them time 
to discuss each prediction and say how likely they think 
they are.
	 Elicit some opinions from the class.
c	 Focus on the instructions. Sts should look at the 
highlighted verbs in the predictions and decide whether 
they refer to an action or situation that will be finished or 
still in progress in the future.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 61@@
61
4A
a	 all the ones beginning with will have, e.g. will have installed, 
will have stopped, etc.
b	 all the ones with will be + -ing form, e.g. will be recycling, will be 
cycling, etc.
	 Elicit / Explain the basic difference between the future 
perfect and the future continuous:
•	 the future perfect + time expression = an action will be 
finished (at the latest) by that time
•	 the future continuous + time expression = an action will 
be in progress at that future time.
	 Highlight that by + time expression = that time at the 
latest.
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4A on p.138.
Grammar notes
Although Sts will probably have seen the future perfect 
and future continuous passively in reading, they are likely 
not yet part of their active knowledge.
If Sts have the same or similar tense in their L1, it will be 
worth drawing comparisons. If not, then you will need to 
make sure the concept is clear. Both tenses are projections 
into the future in the speaker’s mind.
If we use the future perfect instead of the simple future, 
we are emphasizing the certain completion of the 
action. However, the difference between the two tenses 
is often quite small.
The future continuous, though often used for an action in 
progress at a future time, is also very commonly used as 
an alternative to going to or the present continuous to ask 
about future plans or arrangements, e.g. Will you be going 
out this evening?
	 Focus on the example sentences for future perfect: will 
have + past participle and play audio e 4.1 for Sts to 
listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. 
Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for future continuous: will be + verb + -ing 
e 4.2.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences. You could get two strong Sts to read out the 
conversation in b.
a
1	 At 10.00 they’ll / will be flying to Geneva.
2	 By the end of the year, I’ll / will have saved €2,400.
3	 At 7.00 tomorrow, she’ll / will be driving to work.
4	 Don’t call me at 2.30 because we’ll / will be having a 
meeting.
5	 By June, he’ll / will have paid for his car.
6	 By the end of May, they’ll / will have finished their exams.
7	 By the end of this week, she’ll / will have written five 
chapters.
8	 It’s 7.00 and she’ll / will be working out at the gym.
b
1  won’t be lying    ​2  ’ll / will be working    ​3  will have 
disappeared    ​4  will have doubled    ​5  will have moved    ​ 
6  will have grown    ​7  will have run out    ​8  will have invented    ​
9  ’ll / will be getting
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 This is an oral practice activity. Focus on the definitely, 
probably, and likely / unlikely box and go through 
it with the class. Point out that the opposite of likely is 
unlikely, which is often used instead of not likely, e.g. He’s 
unlikely to come now. / He isn’t likely to come now. However, 
we don’t use improbably. Instead, we say probably not, e.g. 
He probably won’t come now.
	 Now focus on the first prediction, ask the class what they 
think, and elicit ideas.
	 Get Sts to continue in pairs.
	 Monitor and help Sts, correcting any mistakes with future 
forms.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA IDEA   You could elicit some more personalized oral 
practice with the futures by asking individual Sts:
	
What will you be doing a) in two hours’ time? b) this time 
tomorrow?
	
When do you think you will have finished your studies?, etc.
f	 Focus on the task and topics in the list. To help Sts, you 
could write on the board IN 20 YEARS’ TIME, I THINK…
	 Give Sts time in their pairs to make at least one prediction 
for each topic (or more if they can).
	 Elicit some predictions for each topic. Ask the other Sts if 
they agree each time. If not, ask why not.
3	VOCABULARY  weather
a	 Focus on the photos and ask the two questions to the class.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Weather on p.156.
Vocabulary notes
What’s the weather like?
Highlight that with the weather, it’s important to be sure 
whether the word you are using is an adjective or a noun.
•	 Compare It’s windy (adj) with There’s a strong wind (n).
•	 The difference between chilly and cool is a question of 
how pleasant / unpleasant it is; 12°C may be cool for 
one person and chilly for another. This may also vary 
depending on the part of the world where Sts are.
Elicit / Explain the literal meaning of boiling (= 100°C).
Adjectives to describe weather
Point out that:
•	 despite having similar meanings, certain adjectives are 
only used with certain nouns, e.g. you can say strong 
winds, but not strong rain (you have to say heavy rain), 
and we say bright sunshine (not strong sunshine).
•	 settled is the opposite of changeable.
	 Focus on 1 What’s the weather like? and point out that 
the phrases in the top row of the chart refer to not very 
cold / hot / rainy / windy weather, and the phrases in 
the bottom row refer to very cold / hot / rainy / windy 
weather.
	 Get Sts to do a and b individually or in pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 62@@
62 4A
2  heavy    ​3  thick    ​4  icy    ​5  clear    ​6  bright    ​7  changeable    ​
8  sunny    ​9  settled
e 4.5
3 Adjectives to describe weather
In the north of England and Scotland, it will be very cold, with strong 
winds and heavy rain. There will also be thick fog in the hills and 
near the coast, though it should clear by midday. Driving will be 
dangerous, as the roads will be icy. However, the south of England 
and the Midlands will have clear skies and it will be bright and 
sunny, though the temperature will still be quite low. Over the next 
few days, the weather will be changeable, with some showers, but 
occasional sunny periods. It should become more settled over the 
weekend.
	 Do Activation. If your Sts are all from the same place, do 
the question as a whole-class activity. If your Sts live in 
different places with different seasons, put them in pairs 
to discuss the question, and then get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look at the words in the list and 
try to remember what sort of weather they are associated 
with.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
4	PRONUNCIATION  vowel sounds
Pronunciation notes
You may want to give Sts the following rules:
•	 The letters ow can be pronounced /aʊ/ or /əʊ/, though 
they are more commonly /əʊ/ when they come at the 
end of a word.
•	 The letters ea are usually pronounced /iː/ or sometimes 
/e/, e.g. head. They can occasionally be /eɪ/, as in break 
and great.
•	 The letter i between consonants is usually /ɪ/, but 
sometimes /aɪ/, e.g. mild.
•	 The letters oo are usually pronounced /uː/ or /ʊ/, but 
they are occasionally /ʌ/, e.g. in blood and flood.
•	 ought is usually /ɔːt/ – drought is an exception.
•	 The letter u between consonants is usually /ʌ/, but can 
be /juː/, e.g. music.
•	 The letters or are usually pronounced /ɔː/, but /ɜː/ 
after w.
a	 Focus on the instructions and point out that the first one 
(owl) has been done for them. Encourage Sts to say the 
words out loud to help them to identify the sound of the 
pink letters in each word.
b	 e 4.6  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
2  phone    ​3  boot    ​4  up    ​5  egg    ​6  tree    ​7  horse    ​8  fish    ​
9  bike    ​10  ear
e 4.6
See groups of words in Student’s Book on p.38
	 e 4.3  Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers to a and b.
e 4.3
Weather
1 What’s the weather like?
a
1	 It’s cool.
2	 It’s chilly.
3	 It’s freezing.
4	 It’s below zero.
5	 It’s mild.
6	 It’s warm.
7	 It’s boiling. It’s scorching.
8	 It’s humid.
9	 It’s damp.
 10	 It’s drizzling.
 11	 There are showers.
 12	 It’s pouring.
 13	 There’s a breeze.
b
When the weather’s foggy or misty, or there’s smog, it’s difficult to 
see.
Mist isn’t usually very thick, and often occurs in the mountains or 
near the sea.
Fog is thicker and can be found in towns and in the country.
Smog is caused by pollution and usually occurs in big cities.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
sentences, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to look at the words in the list and 
try to remember what sort of weather they are associated 
with.
	 Focus on 2 Extreme weather and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 4.4
2 Extreme weather
1	 heatwave
2	 drought
3	 hail
4	 lightning
5	 thunder
6	 blizzard
7	 flood
8	 hurricane
9	 monsoon
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce, 
e.g. drought, which is very irregular.
	 Do Activation and get Sts to cover the weather words 
on the left, look at definitions 1–9, and see if they can 
remember the weather words.
	 Focus on 3 Adjectives to describe weather and get Sts 
to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 4.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 63@@
63
4A
6	LISTENING  understanding examples
a	 Focus on the task and questions 1–7. Make sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, but don’t explain what a 
meteorologist is, as Sts need to answer that question 
in 1. You could elicit or model its pronunciation 
/miːtiəˈrɒlədʒɪst/.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to predict what Mike 
Bench is going to say for questions 1–7.
	 Elicit some answers, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct.
b	 e 4.7  Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to listen and check their predictions in a.
	 Check answers. Find out if any Sts got all seven answers 
correct.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the audio after the 
meteorologist has answered each question, to give Sts time 
to write.
1	 A meteorologist collects the data, and a weather presenter 
presents the information on radio or TV.
2	 Five to seven days
3	 Not in detail, but they can give a general trend.
4	 Thunderstorms
5	 Because it affects everything they do, because the weather 
changes all the time.
6	 He doesn’t think it has changed significantly – there’s a bit 
more extreme weather and it’s a bit warmer.
7	 Pessimistic
e 4.7
(script in Student’s Book on pp.124–125)
P = presenter, M = Mike Bench
P	 And moving on to our next guest… We all know that one of the 
favourite topics of conversation here in the UK is the weather, 
especially after the scorching temperatures we’ve been having 
recently. Now we have with us in the studio meteorologist Mike 
Bench, and earlier in the show we asked listeners to tweet us any 
questions they had about the weather, and now Mike’s going to 
answer some of them for us. Welcome to the show, Mike.
M	 Thanks, Jennie.
P	 So, the first question for you from our listeners is: What’s the 
difference between a meteorologist and a weather presenter?
M	 Well, basically, a meteorologist collects all the data, whereas a 
presenter, well, is given the information and presents it on the 
radio or on TV, or wherever. Mind you, a few presenters are also 
trained meteorologists, but not many.
P	 How far ahead can you accurately predict the weather?
M	 I think, typically, we can forecast about five to seven days ahead 
on average. But some weather is more predictable than others. If 
there’s high pressure, with not much changing, we could forecast, 
maybe, seven to ten days ahead. On other occasions, it can be 
very uncertain, we don’t know even over just a few hours, so for 
example, if there’s a lot of low cloud at airports, it will be very 
difficult for us to know when the cloud is going to clear enough 
for aircraft to take off or land.
P	 Are long-term forecasts ever accurate?
M	 In terms of forecasting as far ahead as next summer or winter, 
there’s a very new system where we can see how what’s 
happening in one part of the world might affect another weather 
system somewhere else. So, like, weather in the Arctic and in the 
Indian Ocean both make a difference to the weather in the UK. So 
we can’t get real detail that far ahead, but we can get a general 
trend.
P	 What’s your favourite kind of weather?
M	 Thunderstorms, especially at night, because they’re very 
exciting. You can see things like the lightning moving around 
inside the clouds, especially at night, when the lightning really 
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You may want to give Sts the rules in the 
Pronunciation notes.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
5	READING  scanning for examples
a	 Focus on the task and either read the introduction as a 
class, or give Sts time individually to read it.
	 Ask the question to the class.
It’s about sharing stories about how climate change has affected 
people in different parts of the world.
b	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs.
	 Give Sts time, individually, to read the six stories. Then they 
should discuss in their pairs where they think each person 
might be from. Encourage them to look at the names and 
photos, and to look for clues about the places where they 
live in the texts.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the six stories the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Diana Maciaga is from Poland.
Umberto Crespo Palmarito is from Cuba.
Nadine Lefort is from Canada.
Harou Abass Hadiza is from Niger.
Efleda Bautista is from the Philippines.
Jordan Hamada is from the USA.
c	 Give Sts time to read the stories again, and this time find 
items 1–6 and say who mentions them and why.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. If you have any Sts who speak Polish, you 
could ask them how to pronounce the word in 5. It is 
/pʃedˈviːɔːʃnie/.
1	 Efleda – They had one month’s rainfall in one or two days and 
everywhere was flooded.
2	 Umberto – They used to say that 21st September was when 
the weather changed.
3	 Jordan – Los Angeles and Manhattan will eventually be 
underwater – a scary thought.
4	 Harou – The river used to be deep and green and they used 
to swim in it, but now it’s dusty and dirty.
5	 Diana – This means the period between winter and spring, 
which doesn’t really exist any more.
6	 Nadine – Many beautiful properties and parks on the coasts 
will disappear because of erosion.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 64@@
64 4A
7	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the Modifiers with strong adjectives box and 
go through it with the class. Remind Sts that really can be 
used with both normal adjectives, e.g. It’s really cold, and 
strong adjectives, e.g. It’s really freezing. Remind Sts too 
that we normally say these adjectives with extra stress and 
intonation.
	 Get Sts to focus on the questions, making sure they 
understand all the lexis, e.g. mood.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to ask and answer all the 
questions in the first section, and then tell their partner 
about any information they can for the questions in Have 
you, or has anyone you know, ever been somewhere when…?
	 Monitor and correct any misuse of modifiers.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 When Sts have finished, get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate first by telling Sts about an 
experience of your own.
highlights the shape of the clouds. You never quite know 
what weather might come out of a thunderstorm; it’s a kind of 
‘weather factory’, really. It can generate large amounts of rain of 
tremendous intensity; it can bring very strong winds, large hail, 
snow sometimes…There’s just incredible power and majesty in 
thunderstorms.
P	 Why do you think the British talk about the weather so much?
M	 Because it affects absolutely everything we do, every day. So, 
for instance, driving to and from work, what to wear when 
we’re going out, whether we heat our house or not. It can affect 
what’s in the shops, even how we feel – it just absolutely affects 
everything. Another reason is that in the UK, the weather changes 
all the time. We might not get global extremes of weather, but we 
get pretty much everything, so there’s always something to talk 
about.
P	 In what ways have you noticed that the weather has changed in 
the last ten years?
M	 Well, in fact, over the last ten years, I don’t think the weather has 
changed an awful lot. This year we’ve had an intense heatwave 
and also quite a lot of snow. It’s unusual, yes – these are quite 
extreme for the UK, I suppose – but it’s not unprecedented; both 
have happened before, and both will happen again. There’s 
evidence to show that maybe extreme weather is happening 
a little bit more frequently; certainly globally, looking at the 
science, it tends to have got more extreme than it has been in the 
past, and it’s obviously becoming a bit warmer as well, so yeah, 
but I’ve not necessarily noticed it myself day to day.
P	 Are you optimistic or pessimistic about climate change?
M	 I’m fairly pessimistic about it. I think in the UK, it will probably 
lead to more frequent, more extreme heatwaves, potentially 
colder and longer winters, and some more extreme weather as 
well, more intense rainfall, and a greater risk of extreme flooding.
P	 Mike, thank you very much for coming and answering our 
questions.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–6.
	 Play the audio again, pausing if necessary to give Sts time 
to write the examples.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Low cloud at airports, knowing when it’s going to clear
2	 The weather in the Arctic and the Indian Ocean can affect the 
weather in the UK.
3	 You can see lightning moving inside the clouds, showing the 
shape of the clouds.
4	 Driving to and from work, what to wear when we’re going 
out, putting the heating on, what’s in the shops, how we feel
5	 An intense heatwave
6	 More extreme heatwaves, colder and longer winters, more 
rain and flooding
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.124–125, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
Suggested answer
Yes because he’s very enthusiastic, almost poetic, about his 
favourite kind of weather (thunderstorms), and about how the 
weather affects almost every aspect of people’s lives.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 65@@
65
4B
 G   zero and first conditionals, future time clauses
 V   expressions with take
 P   linked phrases
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is risk.
In the first half, Sts listen to four people answering the 
question Are you a risk-taker? and they then interview each 
other to find out if they too are risk-takers. This is followed 
by the grammar focus on conditionals. Sts expand their 
knowledge of future time clauses and real conditionals, and 
see the variety of tenses that can be used apart from the 
present simple and future simple. In Pronunciation, Sts look 
at linked phrases, such as and above all, as far as, etc.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read an article about 
the rise in popularity of extreme sports. This is followed 
by a vocabulary focus on common collocations with take 
(e.g. take a risk, take seriously). Then Sts go to the Writing 
Bank to focus on for and against essays. Finally, Sts watch a 
documentary about a young Irish surfer who talks about the 
risks and rewards of the sport.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  zero and first conditionals, future time 
clauses p.169 
Communicative  Finish the sentences p.199  
(instructions p.185)
Teacher’s Resource Centre
Video  Riding the waves
For students
Workbook  4B
Online Practice  4B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.40 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You might want to tell Sts that Eleanor Roosevelt (1884–
1962) also served as the First Lady of the United States 
during her husband President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s four 
terms in office, making her the longest-serving First Lady of 
the United States.
Ask Sts why they think Eleanor Roosevelt said this and 
whether they agree with it.
1	LISTENING  focusing on the main points
a	 Focus on the instructions and the list, making sure Sts 
know the meaning of all the items.
	 Give Sts time, individually, to score each item in the list 
from 1–5.
	 Now put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them 
to compare their scores.
	 Get some feedback by finding out if there were any strong 
disagreements on how risky some of the things are.
b	 e 4.8  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Explain, if necessary, that ✓ / ✗ is for 
people who answer both yes and no.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and do the task.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 ✗, a sport
2	 ✓, money
3	 ✓ / ✗, a job
4	 ✗, a relationship
e 4.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
P = presenter, H = Holly, K = Karen, T = Tom, J = Jeanie
1	 Holly
P	 Are you a risk-taker?
H	 Generally, definitely not, and I think that started early in life when 
I was a little girl. I hated getting hurt, therefore I thought, ‘If I don’t 
take any risks, I won’t get hurt’, and so I think even to this day I’m 
not really a risk-taker.
P	 Can you give me an example of a risk you have taken?
H	 Well, as I said, I don’t usually take risks , for example, I hate flying. 
I only fly if there’s no alternative, and I drive safely – carefully – 
because I don’t want to put myself or my family in any danger. 
But once, someone persuaded me to try scuba-diving. I was very 
worried in the beginning, until I knew what I was doing. My mum 
was absolutely horrified that I was going to try it, so maybe it’s 
a personality thing. In my family, my children are the same. But 
anyway, in the end I was very pleased I did the scuba-diving; it’s 
one of the best things I’ve ever done! That’s quite interesting, isn’t 
it? So even for me, I can see that sometimes taking a risk has a 
positive outcome.
2	 Karen
P	 Are you a risk-taker?
K	 I’d say that, on the whole, perhaps I am.
P	 Can you give me an example of a risk you’ve taken?
K	 Well, something I do a lot is buy things on eBay. And there, you’re 
buying something you, you’ve never seen. You’re relying on 
what the seller says about it, but you’re going to calculate the 
risk based on their description, and how much you’re paying, so 
if it only costs five pounds, it’s not a great risk. However, if it’s an 
expensive item, you might lose some money. But I reckon that’s 
something that most people take a risk on now.
3	 Tom
P	 Are you a risk-taker?
T	 I am in some ways – I mean, I’ve done some things that were 
physically dangerous – but when it comes to things like money, 
then I think I’m much more conservative.
P	 Can you give me an example of a risk you’ve taken?
T	 Well, when I finished university, my mum and dad just wanted 
me to apply for a normal kind of job – for example, working for 
a company – but I decided that I wanted a bit more fun while 
I was that age, so I decided to spend some time working as a 
bar manager, and I worked at loads of different food and drinks 
festivals all over the UK. I knew it would affect my CV because 
employers are always asking you questions about why you chose 
to do that, how was that useful to you, and just saying it seemed 
like a fun idea isn’t a very good answer. After two or three years, 
I realized that it was going to be very difficult for me to continue 
doing the job past the age of about thirty. But now I’m glad I did 
it, and actually maybe it gave me what they call soft skills, like 
being flexible and dealing with people, which are really useful in 
	4B	 A risky business
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 66@@
4B
66
b	 Give Sts time, in pairs, to answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
1	 Any present form, e.g. present simple, present continuous, 
present perfect, or an imperative
2	 Any future form, e.g. will, going to, present continuous – with 
future meaning (H), future perfect, future continuous, or an 
imperative (D)
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do b and c as a whole class.
c	 Focus on the task and questions.
	 Give Sts time to do the task.
	 Check answers.
1  a    ​2  b
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 4B on p.139.
Grammar notes
Zero conditional
This kind of conditional has not previously been focused 
on, but Sts are likely to have seen it. Emphasize here that 
a zero conditional is used to generalize or give facts, e.g. 
If you heat water, it boils.
Although zero conditionals are usually based on present 
tenses, they can also be used in the past, e.g. If people 
didn’t have money, they didn’t eat.
First conditional
Up to now, Sts have probably been given a simplified 
version of the first conditional (i.e. that we always use 
present simple in the if-clause, and the future with will 
in the main clause). In this lesson, they learn that a much 
wider variety of forms is possible (including in the main 
clause the two new tenses they have just studied in 4A – 
the future perfect and continuous).
Remind Sts that although a present tense is used after if, 
the meaning here is future.
Future time clauses
Perhaps the most important point to emphasize is that 
a future tense can never be used after if or after when, as 
soon as, until, unless, before, after, and in case.
Typical mistakes are:
•	 I’ll be ready as soon as I’ll have had a shower.
	
I’ll have dinner as soon as I’ll get home.
•	 We’ll probably be watching the cup final when you’ll arrive.
in case
This expression may be new to Sts. Be careful that they do 
not confuse it with in case of, which is sometimes seen in 
notices, e.g. In case of fire, break glass.
You may want to point out that in case can also be used 
in the past tense, e.g. I took a jacket in case it got cold later. 
Also point out that unlike the other expressions, in case 
cannot be used at the beginning of a sentence.
	 Focus on the example sentences for zero conditional 
and play audio e 4.9 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for first conditional e 4.10 and future time 
clauses e 4.11.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
my job now – I work in sales in a computer software company – 
so on balance, I think the risk was worth it in the end.
4	 Jeanie
P	 Are you a risk-taker?
J	 Um, not really, no, I don’t think I am. Though once I took a really 
big risk.
P	 What was it?
J	 When I left university, I went into a well-paid job straight away, 
um, and after about two years, I was doing really well and 
enjoying it a lot. And then, through some friends, I met this guy, 
Richard, and we fell in love immediately. I know people think love 
at first sight doesn’t really happen, but it did. Anyway, um, he 
was – is – a scientist, a marine biologist, um, and, um, after we’d 
been going out for not very long, he was offered a job working 
in Australia, and he said, ‘Come with me.’ I did think about it a 
bit, but not much, and I left my well-paid job to follow a man I’d 
known less than three months to the other side of the world. My 
parents were horrified. I was a bit horrified myself, actually. Um, 
but I married him, and we are still together. So it was definitely 
worth it, but on the other hand, um, I haven’t really had a career 
as such, and if I hadn’t gone with him then, maybe I would have 
had a different kind of life. Who knows?
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the audio again, and this 
time they must decide who 1–8 is about. Give them time 
to read the questions and see if they can remember any of 
the answers.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each speaker.
	 If necessary, play again, and then check answers.
1  H    ​2  K    ​3  J    ​4  H    ​5  K    ​6  T    ​7  J    ​8  T
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
!   Don’t ask Sts who they identify with most, as they will be 
seeing whether they are risk-takers in the next activity.
2	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the task and instructions, making sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and get them to interview each 
other. Stress that Sts should explain their answers and not 
just say Yes or No.
	 Monitor and help whilst Sts are talking.
b	 When Sts have finished, get them to look at all the circles 
they have written an R in and decide in which areas of life 
their partner is a risk-taker.
	 Sts share their results and discuss whether or not they 
agree with the conclusions.
	 Finally, they should decide which of them is the bigger 
risk-taker.
	 Get some feedback and deal with any general vocabulary 
problems that arose.
3	GRAMMAR  zero and first conditionals, future time 
clauses
a	 Focus on the sentence halves and give Sts time to match  
them.
	 Check answers.
1  B    ​2  D    ​3  C    ​4  G    ​5  F    ​6  E    ​7  H    ​8  A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 67@@
4B
67
	 Check the answer.
as soon as
	 Now give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to answer the 
question.
	 Check the answer.
a)	 As and soon are linked because as finishes with the /z/ sound 
and soon starts with the very similar sound /s/.
b)	 Soon and as are linked because soon ends with a consonant 
sound (/n/) and as begins with a vowel sound (/æ/).
e 4.12
I’ll call you as soon as my shopping’s been delivered.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to complete the task before 
playing the audio.
b	 e 4.13  Focus on the task and give Sts time to quickly 
read 1–8. Tell Sts that each gapped phrase is three words 
and contractions count as one word.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
1  unless it’s an    ​2  far as I’m    ​3  and above all    ​ 
4  such an amazing    ​5  short time ago    ​6  worth it in    ​ 
7  First of all    ​8  In an ideal
e 4.13
1	 Don’t call me unless it’s an emergency.
2	 As far as I’m concerned, you have to be mad to want to do an 
extreme sport.
3	 Be careful with your wallet, and above all, don’t use your phone in 
the street.
4	 It was such an amazing experience that I’ve never forgotten it.
5	 I dyed my hair blue a short time ago, and I hated it!
6	 I was quite scared at first, but it was worth it in the end.
7	 First of all, let’s try to find a cheap hotel.
8	 In an ideal world, everyone would earn a salary.
c	 Focus on the task and then put Sts in pairs.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying all the highlighted 
phrases, linking the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could use the audio or model and drill 
the phrases to help Sts before giving them time to practise 
in pairs.
	 Then tell Sts to make as many sentences as possible about 
themselves, using the highlighted phrases.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to write some sentences 
before they tell their partner.
	 Get some Sts to tell the class their sentences.
5	READING  summarizing an argument
a	 Focus on the task and then give Sts a few minutes to label 
the photos with the sports in the list and to think of other 
extreme sports. If Sts don’t know what an extreme sport is, 
get them to guess by looking at the photos (= a sport that 
is extremely exciting to do and often dangerous).
	 Check answers and elicit some other extreme sports onto 
the board. Elicit or model pronunciation.
1  wingsuit flying    ​2  bungee jumping    ​3  skydiving    ​ 
4  paragliding
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with a 
partner.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
a
1  aren’t feeling    ​2  ’ll have sold    ​3  have    ​4  have scored    ​
5  ’ll be bathing    ​6  won’t get    ​7  aren’t wearing    ​8  ’ll catch    ​
9  always gets    ​10  won’t go
b
1	 I’m going to pack my suitcase before I go to bed.
2	 Take your phone with you in case you get lost.
3	 I’ll be leaving work early tomorrow unless there’s a last-
minute crisis.
4	 Let’s meet when I’m in London next week.
5	 There's a crisis! Please call me as soon as you possibly can.
6	 If I’m late tomorrow, start the meeting without me.
7	 Lily will have packed some sandwiches in case we get 
hungry.
8	 Dan will be playing football in the park until it gets dark.
9	 Then, after we’ve eaten, we could go for a walk.
10	 Don’t call the emergency number unless it’s a real 
emergency.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Focus on the sentence stems and get Sts to complete 
them in pairs. Elicit ideas for sentence 1 from the whole 
class to demonstrate the activity.
	 Get feedback. You could write the phrases on the board 
and get the class to vote for the best tips.
Suggested answers
1	 …you’re sure it’s in good condition.
2	 …you’re afraid of needles.
3	 …someone has an accident.
4	 …they are at least 14 years old.
5	 …you have a problem when you’re on holiday.
6	 …destroy the old one immediately.
7	 …you’ve told someone where you’re going.
8	 …you’ll need to learn the language.
4	PRONUNCIATION  linked phrases
Pronunciation notes
The way words are linked in English can often cause 
problems in understanding when Sts hear several words 
run together so that they sound like one word, e.g. Sts 
sometimes hear festival when someone is saying first of all. 
Here, Sts get more practice in deciphering linked phrases. 
They should know the two main rules for linking which 
are revised here, i.e. a) a word ending in a consonant 
sound followed by a word beginning with a vowel, e.g. 
some eggs, or b) a word ending in a consonant sound 
followed by a word which begins with the same sound, 
e.g. some money.
Sts may need reminding that with the second rule, /s/ and 
/z/ are considered the same sound, and /t/ and /d/. So for 
example, the words is singing are linked, and the words 
wanted to are linked.
a	 e 4.12  Focus on the task.
	 First, play the audio the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the sentence.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 68@@
4B
68
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 What’s the first extreme sport you did? When was it?
2	 What other extreme sports have you done?
3	 Why do you enjoy extreme sports?
4	 Are you ever afraid that you might get injured or killed?
5	 Why do you think extreme sports are becoming more 
popular?
6	 Do you think extreme sports are more popular with men than 
with women?
e 4.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.125)
Skiing was the first extreme sport that I did. I started when I was six 
and I haven’t really stopped since. I take after my dad – we’re both 
sports-mad. He got me into skiing so he could take me on winter 
holidays.
***
I’ve done a lot of extreme sports in the mountains, such as mountain 
biking, and rock climbing, and ice-walking across glaciers. I’ve also 
done white-water rafting recently. It’s very hard work, but really 
worth the energy.
***
I think it’s because I love taking risks; I love the adrenaline rush.
***
I don’t really think about getting injured or killed. I’ve never had 
a bad accident, but I’ve had some scary moments, where I knew 
if I made a mistake, I could get seriously hurt. But I’ve never really 
thought there was a chance I could die.
***
I think more and more people are taking part in extreme sports 
because they’re becoming more accessible, and there’s much more 
exposure than before on TV and on social media. Like I said before, 
it’s the adrenaline rush that people really enjoy – you can’t always 
get that in your everyday life.
***
A few years ago, I would have said men were much more associated 
with extreme sports. However, I think it’s becoming a bit more 
equal between men and women. Extreme sportswomen are really 
appreciated because they’re going against the gender stereotype, 
but men do still seem to dominate, maybe because they were more 
involved when the sports were first recognized.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to see if they can 
remember any of the information.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each of Sophie’s 
responses to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Skiing; when I was six
2	 Mountain biking, rock climbing, ice-walking, white-water 
rafting
3	 I love taking risks; I love the adrenaline rush.
4	 I don’t really think about getting injured or killed.
5	 Because they’re becoming more accessible, and there’s much 
more exposure than before on TV and on social media. It’s the 
adrenaline rush that people really enjoy.
6	 I think it’s becoming a bit more equal between men and 
women, but men still dominate.
c	 Focus on the three extracts from the interview and give 
Sts time to see if they can remember any of the missing 
words.
	 Check answers.
b	 Focus on the title of the article, Why are deadly extreme 
sports more popular than ever?, and make sure Sts 
understand it.
	 Now focus on reasons 1–6, and make sure Sts know 
the phrasal verb to take sth up (= to learn or start to do sth, 
especially for pleasure). You might also want to point out 
that live in 5 is the adjective /laɪv/. Point out the Glossary 
and go through it with the class.
	 Before Sts start reading, you could tell them that 110 mph 
(miles per hour) is 177 kmph (kilometres per hour).
	 Give Sts time to read the article and tick the three reasons 
they find.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Sts should have ticked 2, 4, and 5.
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
	 Give Sts time to first work out whether 1–7 need a name 
or number, and then to read the article to complete 
the gaps.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, looking for 
the missing information, elicit what kind of information is 
missing. Then give Sts time to find the information in the 
article.
1  a number    ​2  a number    ​3  two names    ​4  a number    
​5  a number    ​6  a name    ​7  a name
	 Check answers.
1  110 mph    ​2  33    ​3  Dean Potter, Graham Hunt    ​4  59,679    ​
5  36%    ​6  Jess Cox    ​7  Steph Davis
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
He means that people need to learn to do them better, e.g. more 
elegantly, rather than more dangerously.
	 Again, either elicit Sts’ opinions as a whole-class activity, or 
put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Look at the writer’s quote as a class and 
work out the meaning. Then put Sts in pairs and get them 
to tell each other whether they agree with the quote or not. 
Finally, elicit some opinions.
e	 Put Sts in pairs to answer the questions.
	 Get some feedback. If you have ever done an extreme 
sport, you could tell the class about it.
6	VOCABULARY  expressions with take
a	 e 4.14  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the 
six questions. Tell them they are going to hear Sophie 
Rees speaking – they will not hear the questions she is 
answering, but there will be a small space between her 
answers.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and match the questions to Sophie’s answers.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 69@@
4B
69
Sts A
1  after    ​2  care of    ​3  advantage of    ​4  place    ​5  notice
Sts B
1  your time    ​2  up, up    ​3  into account    ​4  to, against    ​5  out
	 Before giving Sts time to ask and answer their questions 
in their pairs, get them to focus on the Giving 
examples box.
	 In their pairs, Sts now ask and answer their questions.
	 Finally, when Sts have finished, deal with any new 
vocabulary, and elicit or model the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
7	WRITING  for and against
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing For and against on p.117.
a	 Focus on the task. Give Sts time to read the blog post 
and answer the question. Tell them not to worry about 
the gaps.
	 Elicit opinions.
b	 Tell Sts to read the blog post again and to complete gaps 
2–10 with the linking expressions from the list. Point out 
that two of the expressions are interchangeable (can be 
swapped around).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  for example    ​3  Another advantage    ​4  Furthermore / In 
addition    ​5  On the other hand    ​6  Although    ​7  for example    ​
8  Because of    ​9  Furthermore / In addition    ​10  To sum up
c	 Focus on the Useful language: linking expressions 
box and get Sts to complete the chart with the linking 
expressions from b.
	 Check answers.
To list advantages / disadvantages: another advantage
To add more points to the same topic: furthermore, 
in addition
To introduce an example: for example
To make contrasting points: on the other hand, although
To give a reason: because of
To introduce the conclusion: to sum up
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to choose which topic 
they want to write about in their post.
e	 Focus on the task and go through points 1–3 with the 
class.
f	 Focus on the instructions, making sure Sts know what 
colloquial expressions means.
	 Then either get Sts to write their blog post in class (set 
a time limit of, e.g. 20 minutes) or get them to write it at 
home for homework.
g	 Sts should check their post for mistakes before giving it in.
8	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Focus on the task and go through the Glossary with the 
class.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the question.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1  after    ​2  risks    ​3  part
	 Elicit the meaning of each phrasal verb or idiom.
1	 take after sb = to look or behave like an older member of 
your family, especially your mother or father
2	 take risks = to do sth even though you know that sth bad 
could happen as a result
3	 take part in = to be involved in sth
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.125, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Focus on the task and point out the two sections, 
Expressions with ‘take’ and Phrasal verbs with ‘take’.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to work out the 
meaning of the highlighted words by looking at the 
context.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
Vocabulary notes
You may want to explain that take advantage of can also 
mean to make use of sb / sth in a way that is unfair or 
dishonest, e.g. He took advantage of my generosity and 
asked for much more than I had intended to give him.
1	 take care of = care for sb / sth / yourself; to be careful about 
sth
2	 take advantage of = make use of sth well; to make use of an 
opportunity
3	 take place = happen, especially after previously being 
arranged or planned
4	 take your time = use as much time as you need without 
hurrying
5	 take into account = consider particular facts, circumstances, 
etc. when making a decision about sth
6	 take no notice = pay no attention
7	 take pity on = show compassion, feel sorry for
8	 take off = remove; leave the ground and begin to fly
9	 take up = learn or start to do sth, especially for pleasure
10	 take to = start liking sb
11	 take against = to start not liking sb / sth for no clear reason
12	 take out = go to a restaurant, theatre, club, etc. with sb you 
have invited; remove
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts a few minutes to read the 
sentences again and check their answers. Then put Sts in 
pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) read a sentence to Sts B 
(book closed), using beep to represent the blanks, e.g.:
A	My neighbour beep beep beep my son while I’m at work.
B	 takes care of
Then they swap roles.
e	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication I’ll take a question, A on p.108, 
B on p.114.
	 Go through the instructions carefully.
	 Give Sts time to complete the phrasal verbs or expressions 
in 1–5.
	 Check answers by only eliciting the missing words, not the 
whole question.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 70@@
4B
70
G	 Yeah, definitely because when you’re addicted to surfing, you’re 
addicted to that adrenaline rush. It’s just something you want 
to keep going back for more and more of. So you have a really, 
really good surf and you think you’re satisfied for like a week. 
But no, the next day, you’re like, ‘I want to do the same again.’ It’s 
definitely something that you’re drawn to time and time again. 
And I don’t think it’s just the adrenaline. It’s being out in nature 
and water. Like several times surfing has gotten me over difficult 
times in my life. So I lost my dad when I was sixteen. And surfing 
is what got me through that, surfing with my friends and people 
around here. There’s something about being in nature that sort 
of relaxes you and just gets your mind off everything else.
N	 Grace has managed to organize her life around surfing. For her, and 
many others like her, it isn’t just an extreme sport, it’s a way of life. 
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–10.
	 Play the video again, pausing if necessary for Sts to 
complete the gaps.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First, put Sts in pairs and tell them to try 
to remember any of the answers. Then play the video again.
	 Check answers.
1	 Ireland
2	 maths teacher
3	 older brother
4	 Europe, Indonesia
5	 hundred, dollars
6	 more popular
7	 healthy, fun
8	 breath, relax
9	 best wave
10	 hurt, killed
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video again 
with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases.
c	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of an adrenaline rush (= an increase in the 
substance produced in the body when you are excited, 
afraid, or angry. It makes the heart beat faster and 
increases your energy and ability to move quickly).
	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. You could also tell Sts what you 
think and what you do that is both healthy and fun.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do these as open-class questions.
	 Check the answer.
Surfing helped her to relax and get her mind off her problems.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 4B.
Riding the waves
N = narrator, G = Grace
N	 Tramore is a small town on the south coast of Ireland. Its long and 
unspoilt stretch of coastline makes it very popular with tourists, and 
the sea plays an important role in life here. Just ask local resident 
Grace Doyle. Grace is a qualified maths teacher, but she decided to 
take a career break to pursue her lifelong love of surfing.
G	 So, I started surfing at maybe eleven or twelve years old. But I 
always used to be in the ocean and playing on a bodyboard and 
I used to always know what surfing was and wanted to do it. My 
oldest brother got a surfboard lesson for his twenty-first birthday. 
And that eventually just got passed down to me as I grew up 
because my other brother started doing it. And then I wanted to 
do it naturally.
N	 Each day Grace checks the weather conditions online. If the waves 
are good, she packs her boards, and drives to one of her favourite 
spots. Luckily, the Irish coastline offers plenty of places to surf due to 
its position in the Atlantic Ocean, attracting surfers from all over the 
world. Surfing as a sport is growing rapidly in Ireland, and reflects a 
global trend. Grace’s success in competitive surfing has led to several 
sponsorship deals, allowing her to chase waves all over the world. 
G	 I’ve been to a lot of places around the world – Central America, 
Indonesia, Europe. The best wave I’ve ever surfed is probably in 
Indonesia. So, the water’s warm, the waves are crystal clear and 
super clean. Part of it is because they’re bigger so I enjoy the 
bigger waves.
N	 Today, there are an estimated thirty-five million surfers around the 
world and the industry has annual revenues of around one hundred 
billion dollars. How does Grace account for this growth in popularity?
G	 There’s a lot of media coverage lately, a lot more than there used 
to be. So you’ve got like Facebook, and Instagram and YouTube 
and everything is just being put out there now, whereas years 
ago it would be quite hard, you’d have to wait for the magazines 
to come out to see the footage. People are seeing how healthy 
surfing is as a lifestyle. So if you surf, you’re out with nature, you’re 
exercising, you’re having fun, you’re getting everything in one 
go. So I think people are drawn to that because it’s something 
healthy and fun at the same time.
N	 But surfing can be dangerous too. 
G	 I guess the scariest thing that’s happened to me as a surfer is 
being held down for quite a long time under the water. So you 
might fall off a wave and it’s quite a big wave. So it just holds you 
down for quite a long time. Once it happened to me in Indonesia, 
and I just thought that maybe it was the end, but then you always 
just come up. I’ve learned to relax. So when it happens, you know 
it’s going to be a long hold down. So you just have to rely on 
holding your breath and relax because if you panic, then you’re 
going to run out of breath faster.
N	 Does Grace enjoy the element of danger?
G	 To a point, like, it’s part of the adrenaline rush. So I would enjoy 
the element of danger in the sense of, like, I’m out in big waves 
and I know if I wipe out there’s a high risk, I’m going to get 
injured. But there’s also a high risk I’m going to get the best wave 
of my life. So I, I like that adrenaline rush.
N	 And Grace knows that this can go too far.
G	 I have seen people that are out in waves that they shouldn’t 
be out in. And you can see before it even happens, that stuff is 
going to happen to them. It’s a fine line in that sense that they’re 
putting everything and everything around them at risk, like, in 
terms of losing them, if they die. Because that’s…at that level of 
big wave surfing, if you wipe out, like, in those kind of waves it’s 
like, are you going to die or not? It’s not like, are you going to hurt 
yourself? It’s more like, are you going to come up?
N	 As with all extreme sports, this element of danger is part of the 
attraction and it can be extremely addictive. Does Grace consider 
herself an adrenaline junkie?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 71@@
71
Revise and Check
	3&4	Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.41.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 3&4 
Quick Test 4 
File 4 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
a
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  a    ​5  c    ​6  c    ​7  a    ​8  c    ​9  b    ​10  b
b
1  ’ll / will be lying    ​2  will, have started    ​3  has landed / lands    ​
4  drink    ​5  finish / ’ve finished
VOCABULARY
a
1  gate    ​2  baggage reclaim    ​3  aisle    ​4  turbulence    ​5  jet lag
b
1  trip    ​2  lately    ​3  even    ​4  hard    ​5  especially
c
1  blew    ​2  dropped    ​3  poured    ​4  got    ​5  took
d
1	 blizzard (the others only relate to wind)
2	 chilly (the others relate to hot temperatures)
3	 damp (the others are nouns)
4	 bright (the others relate to cold temperatures)
5	 drought (the others relate to storms)
e
1  in    ​2  off    ​3  up    ​4  after    ​5  place
PRONUNCIATION
a
1  windy /ɪ/    ​2  clear /ɪə/    ​3  lounge /aʊ/    ​4  humid /uː/    ​
5  trolley /iː/
b
1  eventually    ​2  gradually    ​3  especially    ​4  passenger    ​
5  hurricane
CAN YOU  understand this text?
a	 Mount Misti
b	 1  N    ​2  T    ​3  N    ​4  M    ​5  T    ​6  M
r CAN YOU  understand these people?
1  b    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  c
e 4.15
1
I = interviewer, N = Nora
I	 Have you ever flown long-haul?
N	 Yes, I’ve flown to Hong Kong. I was flying from Dublin, but I had a 
stock-, a stopover in Stockholm. Uh, but still, Stockholm to Hong 
Kong I think was thirteen hours. So quite long.
I	 How was the flight?
N	 Er, it was OK. But it was, it was very long, and, er, can get a bit 
tiring I think, just sitting down and wondering when you’re going 
to land. Er, but I watched films on the plane to distract myself and 
fell asleep. 
2
I = interviewer, R = Rafael
I	 What kind of things to you enjoy reading?
R	 I like to read. I’m a slow reader, but I love reading, so I like to read, 
um, besides everything about everything, everybody, every 
subject. I like biographies, and, er, and I like, er, true testimonies, 
and, er, it varies, I like poetry a lot, and very occasional fiction, 
which I know is a challenge to write well. 
I	 Do you prefer reading in print or online?
R	 I still prefer to read in print, but online saves time.
3
I = interviewer, D = Diarmuid 
I	 Have you ever experienced extreme weather?
D	 Er, I lived in Japan, um, I lived in Japan and every year, er, Japan 
has a typhoon season. Um, and it was quite soon into my stay 
there that we had several typhoons, one after the other. Um, and 
it was quite extreme.
I	 What happened?
D	 Um, er, we had, we were all told to stay indoors. Um, they were 
very used to it, so they had drills. Um, and it did cause some 
damage in the town, I think like broken roofs and things like that. 
Um, but they did deal with it very well. 
4
I = interviewer, J = Julia
I	 Have you ever done a dangerous sport?
J	 Er, yeah, I guess waterskiing is the most dangerous sport I’ve 
done. 
I	 Did you enjoy it?
J	 I did, but mostly because I just didn’t realize that you can die from 
it. So I went really, I went really, really quickly and was like, this is 
great. And then afterwards my sister told me about a relative of 
ours who like, broke their leg from waterskiing. So…but it’s fine, 
yeah.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 72@@
72 5A
	5A	 I’m a survivor
 G   unreal conditionals
 V   feelings
 P   word stress in three- or four-syllable adjectives
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is survival. 
In the first half, Sts talk about how they think they would 
react in an emergency situation and they read about a British 
reality TV show in which groups of participants have to 
survive on a remote uninhabited island. Sts then listen to an 
interview with one of the participants talking about the best 
and worst experiences on the island. The vocabulary focus is 
on feelings, e.g. devastated, stunned, etc., and Pronunciation 
looks at word stress in three- or four-syllable adjectives.
The second half of the lesson is based on the true story, later 
made into a documentary for Discovery TV, of three young 
backpackers and their guide who got lost in the Amazon 
jungle. Sts read and listen to the story. The grammar focus is 
on unreal conditionals, i.e. second and third conditionals. Sts 
should have seen both these structures before, but will still 
need practice in using them, especially third conditionals. 
Finally, Sts go to the Writing Bank and focus on writing a 
blog post.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  unreal conditionals p.170 
Communicative  Would you survive? p.200  
(instructions p.186) 
Vocabulary  Feelings p.223 (instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  5A
Online Practice  5A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.46 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could point out that Bear Grylls was an SAS serviceman 
and is now an adventurer, TV presenter, writer, and survival 
instructor. Although his real name is Edward, he was 
nicknamed Bear by his sister when he was one week old, 
and the name stuck. He is currently involved in a TV survival 
series called The Island.
Ask Sts whether they agree with him.
1	SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the six survival questions, making sure Sts 
understand all the situations, e.g. hear an intruder, ski off-
piste, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to read each question 
and simply say how they would feel in that situation: 
calm, nervous, scared, or terrified. You could write the four 
adjectives on the board to remind Sts. Tell them not to 
look at options a–c. You could demonstrate by telling the 
class how you would feel for the first two questions.
	 Get some feedback.
b	 Now quickly focus on options a–c for each question and 
make sure Sts understand all the situations, e.g. confront 
an intruder, neutral / lower gear, etc.
	 Now tell Sts to choose an answer for all six questions.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three and get them to compare 
their answers. Remind them to give reasons for their 
answer.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Focus on the task and then tell Sts to continue working 
in their group of three, A, B, and C. Tell them to go to 
Communication It’s an emergency!, A on p.108, B on 
p.112, and C on p.114.
	 Monitor and help while Sts are reading the answers to the 
situations. Then give them time to make notes under the 
headings You should… and You shouldn’t…
	 When they are ready, each student should tell the other 
two people in their group what they should and shouldn’t 
do in that particular situation. Encourage Sts to do this in 
their own words, without looking at the text.
	 Get feedback for each emergency situation.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
d	 Finally, get Sts to quickly look back at their answers to the 
six questions in b to see if they chose the correct answers.
	 Check answers.
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  a
	 With a show of hands, find out how many Sts chose the 
correct answers.
2	READING & LISTENING  recognizing positive 
and negative experiences
a	 Focus on the task and either give Sts time to read the 
description individually, or read it as a class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts some comprehension questions 
to check understanding. Tell them to use their own words 
when answering, e.g. What kind of island do the participants 
go to? (An island that is far away and has no people living 
on it) Is Bear Grylls with them? (No, they are alone.) What 
was different about series 5? (The participants were put into 
groups according to how much money they earn.), etc.
	 Ask the class if they have a similar programme in their 
country. If so, have they watched it, and did they enjoy it?
b	 Focus on the interview and the image. Tell Sts that the 
photo is of Ali Brookes – a participant in series 5 of The 
Island – and elicit what else they can see in the image.
	 Give Sts time to read the interview and tell them not to 
worry about the gaps.
	 Give Sts time individually to think of their answers to the 
two questions.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 73@@
73
5A
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit some 
feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the interview the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
c	 Give Sts time to read the interview again and this time 
complete gaps 1–10. For each gap, there are three 
choices, and they must choose the best one. Encourage 
them to look carefully at the surrounding context and to 
try the sentence out with each of the alternatives before 
choosing the one they think fits best.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner and explain their 
choices.
d	 e 5.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check. Tell them 
the person on the audio is Ali Brookes.
	 Check answers.
1  challenge    ​2  so    ​3  actually    ​4  easy    ​5  through    ​6  sick    ​
7  if    ​8  Although    ​9  as well    ​10  definitely
e 5.1
See text in Student’s Book on p.47
	 Now ask Sts if they think that Ali was mostly positive or 
negative.
On balance, she was positive.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
e	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the second part of the 
interview. Look at the seven things they will hear Ali talk 
about, and make sure Sts understand them.
	 Give Sts time to tick and cross each item that Ali mentions 
according to whether they think she enjoyed it or found it 
difficult.
f	 e 5.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers, and if Sts are doing the Extra challenge, 
elicit reasons (see script).
	 Find out with a show of hands how many people 
predicted all Ali’s answers correctly.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts when they listen they should also 
make a note why the experiences were positive or negative.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
✗	 most of what we ate was yucca, which is a bit like a potato
✗	 the water we had to wash in was the sea
✗	 when it rained
✗	 we were meeting all these new people we’d never met before
✓	(He) threw us out of the boat and told us to swim to the 
island.
✓	we had a sports day and we had a talent show
✓	leaving the island
e 5.2
(script in Student’s Book on pp.125–126)
I = interviewer, A = Ali
I	 What was the most difficult or challenging part of your 
experience?
A	 Well, because you’re, um, put on the island with just the clothes 
on your back and a few basic tools, it means that anything you 
eat you have to find, catch, and kill, if necessary. So, for the first 
week, we didn’t eat anything at all except a few coconuts. Um, so 
I lost four kilos in just a week. Um, after that, most of what we ate 
was yucca, which is a bit like a potato, grows in the ground. But 
you have to walk a lot to find it, um, and even then it would only 
be the equivalent of having a small potato each, um, every day. 
So we were still hungry. We were able to catch some fish, um, and 
then we did manage to kill a wild boar. And also because of the 
lack of food we became really weak, so it was hard you, – hard 
even to go out for a stroll along the beach. That became really 
difficult. It was also difficult being dirty all the time, because the 
water we had to wash in, er, was the sea. So you’re obviously salty 
and covered in sand and you never really feel clean. Um, when it 
rained, which was all the time, the ground would become really 
muddy and everything would just get absolutely filthy. We had 
a couple of weeks where the weather was really bad, so we were 
completely soaked, really freezing cold, wet, miserable, and 
hungry. Um, and the other thing that was really difficult was the 
tension between the groups and also within our group, because 
everyone was very stressed and hungry and tired, it didn’t take 
much for arguments to occur, and there’s nowhere to escape from 
on the desert island.
I	 What were the highlights?
A	 So at first, even just landing on the island was a highlight, um, 
because we were so excited and we were meeting all these 
new people, um, we’d never met before, and we were full of 
enthusiasm and energy. Um, and we just had lunch, so we weren’t 
hungry. Um, so when Bear Grylls picked us up on his boat and 
drove us round the island, um, and then he stopped in the middle 
of the sea and threw us out of the boat and told us to swim to the 
island, um, which was so exciting. Um, and the last week was also 
a real highlight for me because the two groups came together 
and we built a communal shelter in the middle of the beach so 
everyone − for everyone to sleep in and to enjoy, and we had a 
really good time. The weather at this point, um, had turned really 
good and so, we had a sports day and we had a talent show, and 
even a wedding! It was a really fun week. Um, but I think probably 
leaving the island was the real highlight − best day of my life, 
even. Um, it was so brilliant to know that we’d survived for thirty-
five days. And seeing Bear pull up on his boat, er, to come and 
collect us was just an amazing feeling. I felt both really proud and 
super relieved.
I	 Out of the sixteen people that landed on the island, thirteen, 
including Ali, managed to last the whole five weeks. Two 
participants decided to leave before the end, and unfortunately, 
one had to go to hospital with an eye injury. By the last week, the 
participants had all realized that they were much more effective 
working together as one big team than trying to survive in 
separate groups. How much money they earned, or what their 
background was, turned out to be completely irrelevant. Both 
teams worked hard, kept their morale high, and survived.
g	 Focus on items 1–5 and make sure Sts know what 
they are.
	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and make a note of 
what Ali says about each item (this time the items are 
mentioned in the order given).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 For the first week, they didn’t eat anything except a few 
coconuts.
2	 They managed to kill a wild boar.
3	 There was tension between the two groups, and it didn’t take 
much for arguments to occur.
4	 The two groups came together, and they built a communal 
shelter on the beach in the last week.
5	 Ali survived for 35 days (five weeks) on the island.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.125–126, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 74@@
74
5A
	 Focus on 1 Adjectives and get Sts to do a individually or 
in pairs.
	 e 5.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.4
Feelings
1 Adjectives
1	 B	 I feel really miserable.
2	 F	 I feel a bit homesick.
3	 E	 I’m quite disappointed.
4	 G	I’m very lonely.
5	 I	 I’m incredibly proud.
6	 H	I’m really fed up.
7	 C	 I’m very grateful.
8	 A	 I’m very upset.
9	 D	I’m so relieved.
10	 J	 I’m very offended.
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover 1–10, look at situations A–J, 
and try to remember the adjectives.
	 Focus on 2 Strong adjectives and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 5.5
2 Strong adjectives
1	 stunned
2	 devastated
3	 thrilled
4	 delighted
5	 astonished
6	 desperate
7	 overwhelmed
8	 bewildered
9	 horrified
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
adjectives, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Now do Activation. Get Sts to choose five adjectives from 
1a and 2a and make true sentences about themselves. 
They could write their sentences or do it orally with a 
partner.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to cover definitions 1–9, look at the 
strong adjectives in the list, and try to remember what each 
one means.
	 Focus on 3 Informal words and expressions and get Sts 
to do a and b individually or in pairs.
	 e 5.6  Now do c. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check 
their answers to a and b.
	 Check answers.
h	 Ask Sts the first two questions and check answers.
13
They learned that they were much more effective working 
together as one big team.
	 Finally, either do the last question as a whole-class activity, 
or put Sts in pairs and then get some feedback. Ask Sts to 
give examples of what they would enjoy, what they would 
find difficult, and what they would miss. You could tell the 
class if you think you could survive on the island.
3	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
feelings; word stress
a	 e 5.3  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the 
two extracts.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit some possible adjectives for the 
gaps before Sts listen, but don’t tell them if they are correct. 
Sts then listen and check.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and write the missing 
adjectives that describe how Ali was feeling.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know what all the 
adjectives mean. Elicit or model pronunciation.
1  stunned    ​2  thrilled    ​3  proud    ​4  relieved
e 5.3
So, I was absolutely stunned when they told me they wanted me to 
go on the, on the programme, but at the same time, um, I was thrilled.
…seeing Bear pull up on his boat, er, to come and collect us was just 
an amazing feeling. I felt both really proud and super relieved.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Feelings on p.157.
Vocabulary notes
Adjectives
Make sure Sts are clear about the meaning of the 
new words. Nervous may be a false friend for your Sts, 
depending on their L1. In English it means anxious, 
worried, or frightened about something that is going to 
happen in the future, e.g. a job interview, an exam, etc.
You might want to explain / elicit the difference between 
fed up and upset:
•	 fed up = bored or frustrated and unhappy (especially 
with a situation which has gone on too long), e.g. I’m 
really fed up with my job. I think I’m going to quit. Point 
out that fed up is always followed by with, e.g. I am fed 
up with this awful weather.
•	 upset = unhappy when something bad happens, e.g. 
Carol was terribly upset when her dog disappeared.
Strong adjectives
You might want to remind Sts that you can’t use a bit, 
quite, or very with these adjectives. NOT I was very 
astonished. If you want to use an intensifier, use really / 
absolutely / totally / completely.
Informal words and expressions
Highlight that words like gobsmacked and gutted would 
only be used in very informal situations, e.g. talking with 
friends.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 75@@
75
5A
4
A	 What don’t you understand in the report?
B	 I’m completely bewildered by so much information.
5
A	 Were you surprised to hear that the boss is leaving?
B	 I was astonished. I really wasn’t expecting it.
6
A	 So can you come to dinner next week?
B	 Yes, we’d be delighted to. Thank you so much.
7
A	 How did your parents react when you told them you and Rita had 
separated?
B	 They were devastated. It was such a shock.
8
A	 How did you feel when you heard the news about the plane 
crash?
B	 I was absolutely horrified. It was an awful accident.
9
A	 Do you like the necklace?
B	 I love it. I’m overwhelmed – it’s stunning!
d	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the 
sentences, paying attention to intonation and stress in the 
adjectives. Make sure they swap roles.
e	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to choose their three 
adjectives from c and to think of what they want to tell 
their partner.
	 In their pairs, Sts tell each other their situations for the 
three adjectives they have chosen. Get them to give as 
many details as possible.
	 Get some feedback.
4	READING & LISTENING  understanding mood 
and feelings
a	 Focus on the six sentences about the Amazon rainforest. 
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and tell them to 
complete as many gaps as they can in 1–6.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts understand all the 
lexis, e.g. canopy, indigenous. For 5, you could tell Sts that 
there are around 400–500 indigenous tribes living in the 
Amazon rainforest altogether.
1  Australia    ​2  Brazil, Peru, Colombia    ​3  second-longest    ​
4  dark    ​5  tribes, contact    ​6  snakes, frogs, spiders
b	 Focus on the beginning of the story and the photos. 
Explain that the people in the first photo are two of the 
four men, plus a local man, taken before they went into 
the jungle. Stress that this is a true story which happened 
some years ago. Set a time limit for Sts to read the 
beginning of the story and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers to 1–3, and elicit from Sts their own ideas for the 
questions in bold.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the whole story the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 To go deep into the jungle for seven days and visit an 
undiscovered Indian village
	
After seven days, they still hadn’t found the village and there 
were tensions in the group, so they decided to turn around 
and go back to Apolo, their starting point.
e 5.6
3 Informal words and expressions
1	 B	 I was scared stiff when I heard the bedroom door opening.
2	 A	 You look a bit down. What’s the problem?
3	 D	I’m absolutely shattered. I want to relax and put my feet up.
4	 F	 I was completely gobsmacked when I heard that Tina was 
getting married!
5	 E	 I’m sick of hearing you complain about your job.
6	 C	 When England missed the penalty in the last minute, we were 
absolutely gutted.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and get Sts to cover sentences 1–6 
in a, look at feelings A–F in b, and try to remember what 
they mean.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point
Pronunciation notes
Word stress
There are not many clear rules to give Sts regarding the 
pronunciation of three- and four-syllable adjectives, and 
the stress may fall on the first, second, or third syllable. It 
is worth reminding Sts that prefixes and suffixes are not 
stressed, e.g. dishonest, ungrateful, etc.
It is also worth reminding Sts that the unstressed /ə/ 
sound often occurs after or before the stressed syllable 
in multi-syllabic words, and may even occur twice, e.g. 
desperate /ˈdespərət/.
c	 e 5.7  Focus on the task and tell Sts that each line in 1–9 
is a response to part of a conversation. Give Sts time to 
read 1–9.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to decide which they think is the 
stressed syllable in each bold adjective before they listen 
(but not to underline it yet). Remind them that this kind 
of exercise is easier if they say the adjectives out loud to 
themselves.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to the nine conversations 
and underline the stressed syllable in the bold adjectives.
	 Check answers by writing the adjectives on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllables. Elicit what the context 
was in each mini conversation.
1  desperate    ​2  offended    ​3  disappointed    ​4  bewildered    ​
5  astonished    ​6  delighted    ​7  devastated    ​8  horrified    ​
9  overwhelmed
e 5.7
1
A	 Hi, Sue. What’s the matter?
B	 I’ve just been robbed! Please come quickly. I’m desperate.
2
A	 You weren’t offended by what I said, were you?
B	 Yes, actually, I was. I don’t like you criticizing my family.
3
A	 What did you think of the film?
B	 To be honest, I was a bit disappointed.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 76@@
76
5A
e 5.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Kevin was feeling desperate. He didn’t know if Yossi was alive or 
dead, but he started walking downriver to look for him. He felt 
responsible for what had happened to his friend because he had 
persuaded him to go with him on the river.
Yossi, however, was feeling quite optimistic. He was sure that Kevin 
would look for him, so he started walking upriver, calling his friend’s 
name. ‘Kevin! Kevin!’ But nobody answered.
At night Yossi tried to sleep, but he felt terrified. The jungle was 
full of noises. Suddenly, he woke up because he heard a branch 
breaking. He turned on his flashlight. There was a jaguar staring at 
him…
Yossi was trembling with fear. But then he remembered something 
that he had once seen in a film. He used the cigarette lighter to set 
fire to the insect repellent spray…and he managed to scare the 
jaguar away.
	 e 5.10  Repeat the process for Part 3.
5	 Because he was exhausted and starving. Then he saw 
footprints which he thought were Kevin’s and followed them. 
Then he realized they were his own.
e 5.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
After five days alone, Yossi was exhausted and starving. Suddenly, 
as he was walking, he saw a footprint on the trail – it was a hiking 
boot. It had to be Kevin’s footprint! He followed the trail until he 
discovered another footprint and then another. But suddenly he 
realized that the footprints weren’t Kevin’s footprints. They were his 
own. He had been walking around in a circle. At that moment, Yossi 
realized that he would never find Kevin. In fact, he felt sure that 
Kevin must be dead. He felt totally depressed and on the point of 
giving up.
	 e 5.11  Repeat the process for Part 4.
6	 He had been looking for Yossi.
7	 He decided to save himself and let himself float down the 
river.
8	 He was rescued by two (Bolivian) hunters.
e 5.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
But Kevin wasn’t dead. He was still looking for Yossi. But after nearly 
a week, he was also weak and exhausted from lack of food and lack 
of sleep. He decided that it was time to forget Yossi and try to save 
himself. He had just enough strength left to hold onto a log and let 
himself float down the river.
Kevin was incredibly lucky – he was rescued by two Bolivian hunters 
who were travelling downriver in a canoe. The men only hunted 
in that part of the rainforest once a year, so if they had passed by 
a short time earlier or later, they wouldn’t have seen Kevin. They 
took him back to the town of San José, where he spent two days 
recovering.
	 e 5.12  Repeat the process for Part 5.
9	 He went to an army base and asked them to look for Yossi.
10	 Because the plane had to fly too high over the dense forest, 
so they couldn’t see anything..
11	 He paid a local man with a boat to take him up the river.
2	 a	 The three friends started to suspect that Karl (the guide) 
didn’t know where the village was.
	
b	Marcus was complaining about everything, especially his 
feet.
3	 Kevin was angry with Marcus because he thought it was his 
fault that they were having to cut the trip short; Kevin and 
Yossi decided to raft down the river, but didn’t want Marcus to 
come. Marcus and Karl decided to go back to Apolo on foot.
	 Now check whether there is any vocabulary Sts couldn’t 
guess and elicit / explain the meaning. Encourage Sts to 
write down any new lexis.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you want to check that Sts have really 
understood the first part, you could ask them the following 
comprehension questions before moving on to the listening: 
What did Karl promise the three friends? What promise did 
they make to each other? How do you think the three friends 
felt before going into the jungle? What decision did Kevin 
take? etc.
c	 e 5.8 – e 5.13  Now focus on the instructions and 
photos. Get Sts to look at the photos first, and use them to 
pre-teach jaguar and footprint.
	 e 5.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen to the first part. Then 
play it again and get Sts to answer the questions orally in 
pairs.
	 Check answers and elicit opinions for the questions in 
bold. Make sure Sts use the correct verb form I would 
rather have been in X’s situation…
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the scripts and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 They were both thrown into the water when the raft hit a 
rock.
2	 He swam to the river bank and found their backpack floating 
in the river, with food, insect repellent, a lighter, and the map.
e 5.8
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
Yossi and Kevin soon realized that going by river was a big mistake. 
The river got faster and faster, and soon they were in rapids.
The raft was swept down the river at an incredible speed until it hit 
a rock. Both men were thrown into the water. Kevin was a strong 
swimmer and he managed to swim to land, but Yossi was swept 
away by the rapids.
But Yossi didn’t drown. He was carried several kilometres downriver 
by the rapids, but he eventually managed to swim to the riverbank. 
He was totally exhausted. By an incredible piece of luck, he found 
their backpack floating in the river. The backpack contained a little 
food, insect repellent, a lighter, and most important of all…the map. 
But the two friends were now separated by a canyon and six or 
seven kilometres of jungle.
	 You may want to ask a few more questions before moving 
on to the next part to make sure Sts got all the details (e.g. 
Can you remember what was in the backpack?).
	 e 5.9  Repeat the process for Part 2.
3	 Kevin was feeling desperate and responsible for what had 
happened to Yossi. Yossi was feeling quite optimistic because 
he was sure he would find Kevin.
4	 A jaguar came near him, but he frightened it away.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 77@@
77
5A
3 and 4 refer to a hypothetical situation in the past.
1 and 2 refer to a hypothetical situation in the present or future.
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5A on p.140.
Grammar notes
Unreal conditionals
Sts will have studied both the second and third 
conditionals separately, but here they are contrasted. 
Sts should be fairly confident with the concept of both, 
although they will probably still have problems using 
them orally with fluency, especially the third conditional.
Sts also widen their knowledge of the second and third 
conditionals by seeing how other forms can be used in 
either clause.
Second or third conditional?
The point to emphasize here is that the second conditional 
refers to a hypothetical situation in the present or future, 
which can sometimes be changed and sometimes not, 
e.g. If she were taller, she could get a job as a model (situation 
can’t be changed). If you studied more, you would pass the 
exam (situation could be changed).
The third conditional refers to hypothetical situations in 
the past which didn’t happen, e.g. If we had known you 
were in hospital, we would have visited you (we didn’t know, 
so we didn’t visit you).
Mixed conditionals
Sometimes the second and third conditionals are mixed. 
We suggest that you draw Sts’ attention to this for passive 
recognition, but this is not practised in the exercises.
	 Focus on the example sentences for second conditional 
sentences: if + past simple, would / wouldn’t + 
infinitive and play audio e 5.14 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for third conditional sentences: if + past 
perfect, would / wouldn’t have + past participle e 5.15 
and second or third conditional? e 5.16.
	 Now go through the Mixed conditionals box with Sts.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 I wouldn’t have made so much food if you’d told me you 
weren’t hungry.
2	 If I were you, I wouldn’t lend money to members of your family.
3	 If Jack were here, I’d / would ask him to help me.
4	 Joe wouldn’t have had an accident if he hadn’t been driving 
so fast.
5	 I’d run a half-marathon if I were / was a bit fitter.
6	 If you’d / had looked (or had been looking) where you were 
going, you wouldn’t have fallen over.
7	 I’m sure you’d / would enjoy dancing if you came to the 
classes with me.
8	 We’d go to the local restaurant more often if they changed 
the menu from time to time.
9	 Nina wouldn’t have gone abroad if she’d / had been able to 
find a job here.
10	 If you’d / had asked for a discount in the shop, they might 
have given you one.
e 5.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
As soon as Kevin felt well enough, he went to a Bolivian army base 
and asked them to look for Yossi. The army officer he spoke to was 
sure that Yossi must be dead, but in the end, Kevin persuaded them 
to take him up in a plane and fly over the part of the rainforest 
where Yossi might be. But the plane had to fly too high over the 
rainforest, and the forest was too dense. They couldn’t see anything 
at all. It was a hopeless search. Kevin felt terribly guilty. He was 
convinced that it was all his fault that Yossi was going to die in the 
jungle. Kevin’s last hope was to pay a local man with a boat to take 
him up the river to look for his friend.
	 e 5.13  Repeat the process for Part 6. Encourage Sts to 
use must have, might have, etc. when they speculate about 
what happened to Marcus and Karl.
12	 Three weeks. He was starving, exhausted, and losing his mind.
13	 A bee. It was the engine of the boat Kevin was in.
e 5.13
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
By now, Yossi had been on his own in the jungle for nearly three 
weeks. He hadn’t eaten for days. He was starving, exhausted, and 
slowly losing his mind. It was evening. He lay down by the side of the 
river, ready for another night alone in the jungle.
Suddenly, he heard the sound of a bee buzzing in his ear. He 
thought a bee had got inside his mosquito net. But when he opened 
his eyes, he saw that the buzzing noise wasn’t a bee…
It was a boat. Yossi was too weak to shout, but Kevin had already 
seen him. It was a one-in-a-million chance that Kevin would find his 
friend, but he did – Yossi was saved.
When Yossi had recovered, he and Kevin flew to the city of La Paz 
and they went directly to the hotel where they had agreed to meet 
Marcus and Karl.
But Marcus and Karl were not at the hotel. The two men had never 
arrived back in the town of Apolo. The Bolivian army organized a 
search of the rainforest, but Marcus and Karl were never seen again.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again to all parts of the audio with the scripts on p.126, 
so they can see exactly what they understood / didn’t 
understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 You might like to tell Sts that Yossi Ghinsberg now works 
giving talks at conferences about motivation, based on his 
experience. He has also devoted a lot of time and raised 
money to help protect the rainforest where he got lost. 
He lives in both Australia and Israel. Kevin Gale works as 
a manager of a gym. The documentary made about their 
experience is based on Yossi’s book Lost in the Jungle and 
can be seen on the Discovery Channel as part of the series 
called I Shouldn’t Be Alive.
5	GRAMMAR  unreal conditionals
a	 Focus on the task and tell Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  were hiking, got lost    ​2  ’d / would call, wouldn’t confront    ​
3  had been    ​4  would have died
b	 Either get Sts to do this individually, or do it as a whole-
class activity. Before they start, make sure Sts know the 
meaning of hypothetical.
	 If Sts worked alone, check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 78@@
78 5A
e	 Focus on the Useful language: giving advice box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Then either get Sts to write their article in class (set a time 
limit of, e.g. 20 minutes), or get them to write it at home 
for homework.
f	 Sts should check their blog post for mistakes before giving 
it in.
b
1	 If Luke hadn’t missed the train, he wouldn’t have been late 
for the interview.
2	 Millie would have bought the top if she’d / had had enough 
money.
3	 If it hadn’t started snowing, we’d / would have reached the 
top.
4	 If Rebecca didn’t drink so much coffee, she wouldn’t sleep 
(so) badly.
5	 I’d drive / would drive to work if there weren’t / wasn’t so 
much traffic.
6	 If Matt worked harder, he’d / would get promoted.
7	 If we hadn’t run for the bus, we wouldn’t have caught it.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the task and the example. Point out the chain – 
the end of one sentence becomes the beginning of the 
next, with a change in the verb form.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to complete the two 
conditional story chains. Remind them that one should be 
in the second conditional and the other in the third.
	 Monitor and help with verb forms if necessary.
e	 Put two pairs together and get them to read their stories 
to each other.
	 Get various groups to read their favourite story to the 
class.
6	WRITING  a blog post
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A blog post on p.118.
a	 Focus on the task and the three pictures.
	 Elicit ideas from the class, or get Sts to discuss the 
question in pairs.
	 If Sts worked in pairs, elicit ideas, but don’t tell them if they 
are correct or not.
	 Now give Sts time to read the blog to check.
	 Check answers.
The parents should have kept the knives in drawers that children 
can’t reach. 
They shouldn’t have put a bed under a window. 
They shouldn’t have put medicine where children can reach it.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. Point out that the first one (the blue slash 
after …to prevent accidents) has been done for them.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
New paragraph after …the child falls out.
New paragraph after …keep them in a locked cupboard.
New paragraph after …liquids are in high or locked cupboards.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time, in pairs, to choose 
which topic they want to write about in their blog.
d	 Focus on the task and go through points 1 and 2 with the 
class.
	 Give Sts time, in pairs, to brainstorm possible tips and an 
introductory sentence.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 79@@
79
5B
 G   wish for present / future, wish for past regrets
 V   expressing feelings with verbs or -ed / -ing adjectives
 P   sentence rhythm and intonation
Lesson plan
The topics in this lesson are things that people would like 
to be different, or which annoy them in their daily lives, and 
regrets people have about the present and the past. They 
provide the context for Sts to learn to use I wish… To make it 
easier for Sts to assimilate the grammar, it has been split into 
two separate presentations, and so there are two visits to the 
Grammar Bank in this lesson. This is quite a tricky grammar 
point, especially the difference between wish + past simple 
and wish + would, so do not expect your Sts to assimilate 
how it is used immediately.
The first half of the lesson starts with the grammar 
presentation of the construction I wish + past simple, using 
different kinds of social media to express things you would 
like to be different, and wish + would to express annoyance. 
This is followed by a vocabulary and speaking focus on 
different ways of expressing feelings, with a verb or with 
an -ed or -ing adjective, e.g. It annoys me. / I’m annoyed. / It’s 
annoying.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read an article in which a 
journalist asked people to tweet about their biggest regrets, 
followed by the second grammar focus using wish + past 
perfect to express past regrets. The pronunciation focus is 
on sentence rhythm and intonation, and Sts then practise 
the new structure talking in small groups about some past 
regrets. The lesson ends with a poem about regret, which Sts 
listen to before writing their own.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  wish for present / future, wish for past regrets  
p.171 
Communicative  Wishes pp.201–202 (instructions p.186)
For students
Workbook  5B
Online Practice  5B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.50 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Jim Rohn (1930–2009) was also an 
author and motivational speaker.
Ask Sts what his quote means and if they agree with it.
1	GRAMMAR  wish for the present / future
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what Pinterest 
is (a photo-bookmarking website).
	 Give Sts time to read all the wishes and see if they can 
identify with them.
	 Get some feedback. You could tell the class if you ever 
wish any of the things in the posts, and if so, which ones.
b	 Focus on the messages and ask Sts if they have any 
groups on social media like WhatsApp which they share 
with friends.
	 Then focus on the task and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of annoy (= to make sb irritated or angry).
	 Give Sts time to read the WhatsApp messages and tick the 
ones that also annoy them.
c	 Focus on the Expressing annoyance box and go through 
it with the class. Elicit or model the intonation in the three 
phrases which express annoyance.
	 Get Sts to choose their top three and then to compare 
with a partner, using the expressions in Expressing 
annoyance.
	 Get some feedback and tell the class your top three, too. 
You could find out which is the top annoying habit for the 
whole class.
d	 Focus on the task and explain that Sts should compare 
the structure after wish in the Pinterest posts and in the 
WhatsApp messages. Give Sts time to complete the two 
rules.
	 Check answers.
1  past simple    ​2  would / wouldn’t + infinitive
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.141.
Grammar notes
wish for present / future
Sts often have problems distinguishing between these 
two structures, and it may help them to compare how 
they express the different concepts in their L1.
wish + past simple
You may want to point out that unlike with wish + would, 
this structure is often used with I or we for things you 
would like to be different for you, e.g. I wish I / we could / 
had / was…, etc.
Point out to Sts that the use of the past simple with a 
future meaning is the same as in second conditionals, e.g. 
I wish I had more money. If I had more money, I’d buy a new 
phone.
wish + would / wouldn’t
The contracted form of would (’d) is often used after wish.
Highlight the fact that we only use this structure to talk 
about things we would like other people (or things) to do 
or not to do. We don’t use this structure with I or we, e.g. 
NOT I wish I would have more money.
	5B	 Wish you were here
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 80@@
80 5B
	 Give Sts time to do the task either individually or in pairs.
b	 e 5.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Elicit or model any adjectives your Sts might 
find difficult to pronounce. You could use the audio to do 
this, or model and drill them yourself. Remind Sts that the 
rules for pronouncing -ed adjectives are the same as for 
regular past tense verbs, e.g. annoyed = /d/, irritated = /ɪd/, 
and depressed = /t/.
	 You could focus on stress and intonation in feelings here.
2  frustrated    ​3  embarrassing    ​4  exhausting    5  disappointed ​
6  amazes    ​7  terrifying    8  inspired    9  confuse    10  thrilled   
e 5.19
1	 It really infuriates me when people drive close behind me.
2	 I get very frustrated when something goes wrong with my 
internet connection and I don’t know how to fix it.
3	 It’s so embarrassing when I can’t remember someone’s name, but 
they can remember mine.
4	 I used to love shopping in the sales, but now I find it exhausting. 
After an hour, I just want to go home.
5	 I’m often disappointed with my birthday presents. My 
expectations are obviously too high!
6	 It amazes me that some people still don’t do their banking online.
7	 I find speaking in public absolutely terrifying. I hate doing it.
8	 I’ve often been inspired by reading about how some successful 
people have overcome difficulties.
9	 I never find instructions for electronic devices helpful – in fact, 
usually they just confuse me.
 10	 When I travel, I’m always thrilled if I manage to communicate 
something in a foreign language.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at each sentence and 
say whether or not it is true for them. They should give 
examples or reasons whenever possible.
	 Get some feedback.
c	 Focus on the Feelings adjectives that have an -ed form, 
but not an -ing form box and go through it with Sts.
	 Now look at the example (number 1) together and 
elicit the meaning. Elicit or model pronunciation of the 
two adjectives and elicit which syllable is stressed (the 
second).
	 Give Sts time to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers, and elicit which syllable is stressed. Elicit 
or model the pronunciation of the adjectives.
2  stressful    ​3  scary    ​4  delightful    ​5  offensive
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could call out the sentences in c in 
random order, saying blank instead of the adjective / verb 
and getting the class to call out the missing word, e.g.
T	 	 I get very stressed at work. My new job is very BLANK. 
Sts	 stressful
d	 Focus on the task, which activates orally some of the 
adjectives in a and c.
	 Give Sts a couple of minutes to think about which three of 
the subjects they can talk about.
	 Now put them in pairs and tell them to take turns to talk. 
The first student can start by saying I’m going to tell you 
about…
	 Monitor and help.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Focus on the example sentences for wish + past simple 
and play audio e 5.17 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for wish + would / wouldn’t e 5.18.
	 Focus on a only, and get Sts to do it individually or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 I wish I was / were fitter.
2	 I wish my sister didn’t share a room with me.
3	 I wish I could / was able to dance.
4	 I wish my grandmother wasn’t dead.
5	 I wish I lived in a country with a better climate.
6	 I wish shop assistants would be more polite.
7	 I wish you wouldn’t turn the heating up all the time.
8	 I wish my brother would tidy our room.
9	 I wish the neighbour’s dog wouldn’t bark at night.
10	 I wish it would stop raining.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
!   Don’t use the Grammar photocopiable activity at this 
point, as it includes wish for past regrets, which Sts see in the 
second half of the lesson.
f	 Focus on the task. Tell Sts individually to first think of two 
things which annoy them and that they would like people 
to change, and to write messages similar to the ones in 
b for each one, using I wish + person / thing + would / 
wouldn’t.
	 Then they should think of two things they would like to 
be different about themselves and write two posts similar 
to the Pinterest ones in a, using I wish + I / we + past 
simple.
	 Help with any vocabulary Sts may need.
g	 Now put Sts in pairs or small groups to compare what 
they’ve written.
	 Get feedback from the whole class and write some of 
the best examples on the board. You could tell Sts about 
things that annoy you or that you would like to be 
different about yourself.
2	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  expressing 
feelings with verbs or -ed / -ing adjectives
	 In the previous lesson, Sts learned adjectives for 
describing how people feel (shocked, disappointed, etc.). 
In this lesson, other ways of talking about feelings are 
covered, e.g. using It structures with verbs like annoy (It 
really annoys me when…).
a	 Focus on the Ways of talking about how we feel box 
and go through it with the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts another example, as follows:
verb: to bore; adjectives: bored / boring, e.g. This programme 
bores me. / This programme is boring. = I’m bored with 
watching this programme.
	 Then focus on the instructions, making sure Sts know the 
meaning of all the verbs in bold. Highlight that the bold 
words are all verbs. Do the first one with the class as an 
example (It really infuriates me when people drive close 
behind me).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 81@@
81
5B
prefer not to say. Tell Sts they can use this here or they 
could simply choose a regret they are happy to talk about.
	 Put Sts in small groups or get them to mingle, telling each 
other their biggest regret.
	 Find out if any Sts found a classmate with the same or 
similar regret.
4	GRAMMAR  wish for past regrets
a	 e 5.20  Focus on the task and play the audio for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Speaker 1	
Not asking a girl out
Speaker 2	
Not spending more time with her grandmother
Speaker 3	
Not changing schools
e 5.20
(script in Student’s Book on p.126)
1
One thing I really regret is not being brave enough to ask out a girl 
who I met at a party last summer. I really liked her, but I was just too 
scared to invite her on a date in case she said no. I wish I’d tried. I’m 
absolutely positive we would have got on well. Now it’s too late – 
she’s engaged to another guy!
2
Um, I wish I’d had more time with my grandmother. She died when I 
was twelve, and since then, I’ve discovered that she must have been 
a really fascinating person, and there are so many things I would 
love to have been able to talk to her about. She was Polish, but 
she was in Russia, in St Petersburg, during the Russian Revolution, 
and she knew all sorts of interesting people at the time: painters, 
writers – people like that. I was only a kid, so I never asked her 
much about her own life. Now I’m discovering all about her through 
reading her old letters and papers, but I wish she’d lived longer so 
that I could have talked to her about those times face-to-face.
3
When I was sixteen, I got the chance to change schools and go 
to a better school to do my last two years. My parents were really 
keen for me to change because they thought I’d probably get 
better marks in the exams and so have a better chance of going to 
university. But I was totally against the idea because I didn’t want to 
leave all my friends behind and I didn’t know anyone at the other 
school. So, in the end, I managed to convince them and I stayed at 
my old school. I did OK in my exams, but not brilliantly. Um, now I 
wish I’d listened to my parents. It would have been much better for 
my future career, but at the time I just couldn't see it.
b	 Focus on the task and then play the audio again for Sts to 
listen and complete each sentence stem. Pause the audio 
after each speaker to give Sts time to write.
	 Check answers.
1	 I wish I’d tried.
2	 I wish I’d had more time with my grandmother.
	
I wish she’d lived longer.
3	 I wish I’d listened to my parents.
	 Now ask Sts which tense is used after wish to talk about a 
regret.
The past perfect
	 Find out if any pairs felt exactly the same way about 
certain things.
	 You could tell Sts some of your own experiences / 
feelings, too.
3	READING & SPEAKING  checking hypotheses
a	 Focus on the task and the words in the list.
	 Now give Sts time to choose the three areas of life they 
think people might have most regrets about.
	 Elicit some ideas, asking Sts to explain why.
b	 Give Sts time to read the article to check their answers to 
a and to find out how the writer changed someone’s life.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
education, career, love
By retweeting one of the replies to someone who had very few 
followers; she now has more than 900.
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again and to complete gaps 1–6 
with tweets A–F. You might want to check Sts know the 
meaning of dyslexic in D.
	 Check answers.
1  D    ​2  E    ​3  B    ​4  F    ​5  C    ​6  A
	 Then tell Sts to read all the tweets again and try to work 
out what kind of words have been left out in some of the 
tweets.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Pronouns, e.g. I (in A, Moved to France… instead of I moved…); it 
(in A, Still scary… instead of It’s still scary).
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. Highlight that after 
regret, you can use an infinitive or perfect infinitive (I regret 
doing / having done…) or a that-clause (I regret that I 
didn’t…).
d	 Tell Sts to look at the eight highlighted words in the 
article and decide whether they are nouns or adjectives. 
If it is a noun, they must write the adjective, and if it is an 
adjective, they must write the noun.
	 Now give Sts time to do the task individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   First, go through the article with the class, 
eliciting whether each highlighted word is a noun or an 
adjective. Then put Sts in pairs and get them to write the 
other version of the word.
Nouns: sorrow (adj: sad), anger (adj: angry), fear (adj: afraid)
Adjectives: honest (n: honesty), brave (n: bravery), encouraging 
(n: encouragement), excited (n: excitement), enthusiastic  
(n: enthusiasm)
e	 Focus on the task and example.
	 Give Sts time to think of their biggest regret.
	 Remind Sts that when they are asked a personal question 
that they don’t want to answer, they can say Actually, I 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 82@@
82 5B
e 5.22
1	 I wish I hadn’t eaten two pieces of cake.
2	 I wish I’d gone to university.
3	 I wish I’d bought those shoes I saw in the sales.
4	 I wish I hadn’t told Anna about seeing her boyfriend with another 
woman.
5	 I wish we hadn’t said we’d go to Simon’s party tonight.
6	 I wish I’d been at the match!
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat 
the sentences, trying to copy the rhythm.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to match the six I wish 
sentences they wrote in a to A–F. You could do the first 
one with the class as an example (1D).
c	 e 5.23  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  D    ​2  C    ​3  E    ​4  F    ​5  A    ​6  B
e 5.23
1 D	
A	 I wish I hadn’t eaten two pieces of cake.
B	 Yes, you should have had more self-control!
2 C
A	 I wish I’d gone to university.
B	 Well, it isn’t too late. You’re only twenty-two.
3 E
A	 I wish I’d bought those shoes I saw in the sales.
B	 Why don’t you go back to the shop and see if they still have them?
4 F	
A	 I wish I hadn’t told Anna about seeing her boyfriend with another 
woman.
B	 Yes, it was a bit tactless. I hope she’s not too upset.
5 A	
A	 I wish we hadn’t said we’d go to Simon’s party tonight.
B	 Do you want me to phone and make an excuse?
6 B	
A	 I wish I’d been at the match!
B	 Yes, watching it on TV is never as exciting.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to practise the six 
two-line conversations. Encourage them to concentrate 
on getting the rhythm correct by stressing the longer 
‘content’ words, especially in the I wish… sentences.
	 Get some pairs to practise in front of the class.
d	 Focus on the topics and make sure Sts can remember 
what a live event is (= of a performance, given or made 
when people are watching, not recorded).
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss a few of their regrets. Encourage them to give 
reasons for their answers.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get some feedback from the class about some of their 
regrets. You could tell Sts about some of your regrets, too.
6	LISTENING & WRITING  understanding a 
poem
a	 e 5.24  Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what 
a verse in a poem is (= a group of lines that form a unit).
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and write the first line of each verse.
	 Check the answer.
I wish I had said
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 5B on p.141.
Grammar notes
wish for past regrets
Remind Sts that both would and had can be contracted to 
’d, so they will need to focus on the main verb to see what 
the structure is. Compare:
I wish he’d come. (= would come – you want him to come)
I wish he’d come! (= had come – you’re sorry that he didn’t 
come)
Point out to Sts that the use of the past perfect here is 
similar to its use in third conditionals, e.g. I wish we hadn’t 
bought such an expensive car. If we hadn’t bought it, we 
wouldn’t have got into debt.
The information about if only in the box applies to all 
uses of wish. If only is a stronger and more dramatic way 
of expressing a wish, e.g. If only it would stop raining! We 
normally use an exclamation mark after If only…!
	 Focus on the example sentences for wish + past perfect 
and play audio e 5.21 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on b and get Sts to do it individually or in pairs.
	 Check answers, getting Sts to read the full sentences.
b
1	 I wish I’d / had seen Prince live.
2	 He wishes he’d / had learned to cook at school.
3	 Do you wish you hadn’t bought a second-hand car?
4	 Jenny wishes she hadn’t married her first husband.
5	 My parents wish they hadn’t moved to the country.
6	 Does Tom wish he’d / had studied law?
7	 I wish I hadn’t had my hair cut so short.
8	 They wish they’d / had gone to the wedding.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 5B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to write their four 
regrets. Remind Sts that these regrets must be about the 
past. You could give an example for the first one, e.g. I wish 
I’d been kinder to my sister when we were growing up.
	 Get Sts to exchange pieces of paper, so they can read 
each other’s regrets.
	 Get feedback. You could find out if any Sts had the same 
regrets or if they found any regrets surprising.
5	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  sentence 
rhythm and intonation
a	 e 5.22  Focus on the task and play the audio once the 
whole way through for Sts just to listen.
	 Then play it again, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Finally, play the audio once more for Sts to check their 
sentences.
	 Check answers by writing the sentences on the board.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 83@@
83
5B
d	 Finally, play the audio again for Sts to listen and check 
their version.
	 Check answers by eliciting the poem onto the board line 
by line.
See script 5.24
e	 In their pairs, Sts now write their own poem with at least 
three verses starting with I wish I had / hadn’t. They could 
use the first verse of the poem as an example of how they 
could construct their own.
	 Monitor and help if necessary whilst Sts write their poems.
f	 Ask each pair to read their poem aloud to the class – they 
can take turns to read the verses, as on the audio.
	 With a show of hands, get Sts to vote for their 
favourite poem.
EXTRA IDEA   If you don’t have time for Sts to read their 
poems, or if you think they might not want to, you could 
get Sts to hand in their poems. Number them and put them 
around the classroom for Sts to read.
e 5.24
I wish
I wish I had said
Nothing at all
Everything that came out
Of my mouth was wrong
The words didn’t help much
I wish I had said
That I love you
Everything that I said
Was not what I meant
All I want is for you to
Forgive me
I wish I had said
Something to make everything
Go right
The only thing I should have
Said was what I really felt
I wish I had said
That I love you with all my heart
And that I’m sorry for
Everything that went wrong
Between us
b	 Play the audio again, pausing after each verse to give Sts 
time to write as many words as they can.
c	 Put Sts in pairs. Get them to compare what they have 
written and try to reconstruct the poem.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the skeleton of the poem with 
the first word(s) of each line on the board for Sts to try to 
complete:
I WISH I HAD SAID
NOTHING _____ _____
EVERYTHING _____ _____ _____
OF MY _____ _____ _____
THE WORDS _____ _____ _____
I WISH I HAD SAID
THAT _____ _____ _____
EVERYTHING _____ _____ _____
WAS NOT _____ _____ _____
ALL _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
_____ _____
I WISH I HAD SAID
SOMETHING TO _____ _____
_____ _____
THE ONLY THING _____ _____ _____
SAID WAS WHAT _____ _____ _____
I WISH I HAD SAID
THAT _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
AND THAT _____ _____ _____
EVERYTHING _____ _____ _____
_____ _____
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 84@@
84 CE4&5
I = interviewer, C = Candida Brady
Part 1
I	 What were you hoping to do by making the film Trashed?
C	 Well, I think, um, the role of the film, um, for me was to raise 
awareness, um, on the topic and get it into the press so that 
people could start having a…a meaningful conversation about 
waste, which, um, is not a particularly, um, attractive subject, let’s 
say.
I	 How many countries did you film in?
C	 We ended up actually filming in eleven countries, um, but the 
stories that I’ve chosen are universal, and obviously I spoke to…
to people in communities, um, in more countries, um, than we 
actually filmed in. Um, but their stories are certainly not isolated: 
they were repeated around the world, sadly, wherever you kind of 
want to pick, actually.
I	 How did you persuade Jeremy Irons to get involved in the film?
C	 I had worked with Jeremy some years ago on a…on a different 
film, and I was generally aware that he doesn’t like waste, either. 
Um, he will, you know, wear his jumpers until they’re worn out; 
he’ll keep his cars until they’re falling apart, you know; he’ll repair 
everything – so he’s always seen, you know, the value in reusing 
things. It’s just something natural to him as well, so he just felt 
like a natural, um, first approach, and…and so I sent him the 
treatment and amazingly he…he loved it.
I	 How did you get Vangelis to write the soundtrack?
C	 Well, Jeremy and Vangelis have been friends for years, so, um, 
Jeremy sent him the rough cut of the film and Vangelis absolutely 
loved it. He…he is also a committed environmentalist, so he’s 
always been aware. Um, he was aware because he worked with, 
um, Cousteau – sort of various people, you know – he was aware of 
issues for the seas and so on, um, but generally, again, he was very 
shocked, um, by the film and really wanted to get involved, so…
I	 What research did you do before you started making the film?
C	 I spent about a year, um, talking to communities, talking to 
experts, um, you know, obviously reading an awful lot, um, and, 
um, just ingesting it all, because obviously, again, it’s such an 
enormous topic to take on.
c	 Focus on the task and play the video again the whole way 
through for Sts to correct sentences 2, 4, and 6.
	 Check answers.
2	 Jeremy Irons keeps things a long time, until they are worn 
out, e.g. jumpers, car. He doesn’t like waste.
4	 Vangelis is Jeremy’s friend.
6	 She spent a year talking to people – communities and 
experts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could demonstrate 
the activity by telling Sts about any documentaries on the 
environment that you have seen, and what you learned.
Lesson plan
In The Interview, the person interviewed is Candida Brady, a 
British journalist and film-maker.
In The Conversation, Sts watch three people discussing 
whether they think we will ever be plastic free. Sts then 
discuss this question as well as a couple of other questions 
related to the topic, focusing on different ways that people 
respond to what another person has said. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Colloquial English 4&5 
Quick Test 5 
File 5 Test 
Progress Test Files 1–5
For students
Workbook  Colloquial English 4&5 
Can you remember? 4&5
Online Practice  Colloquial English 4&5 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Write the name JEREMY IRONS on the board and ask Sts if they 
know him and what nationality he is (he is a British actor), 
and if they have seen him in any films or TV series (e.g. The 
Borgias, The Man in the Iron Mask, The Kingdom of Heaven, 
Eragon, Beautiful Creatures, The Man Who Knew Infinity, 
Assassin’s Creed, Red Sparrow, Watchmen, etc.)
1	r THE INTERVIEW  Part 1
a	 Books open. Focus on the biographical information about 
Candida Brady. Either read it out loud, or give Sts time to 
read it.
	 Focus on the question and do it as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–6. 
Remind Sts that they do not need to correct the false ones 
at this stage.
	 Go through the Glossary with the class.
	 Play the video (Part 1) once the whole way through for 
Sts to watch the interview and write T (true) or F (false) for 
each sentence.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they watch.
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F
	4&5	Colloquial English  Talking about…
waste
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 85@@
85
CE4&5
	 r Part 3
a	 Give Sts time to read the three questions, making sure 
they know the meaning of blame. Go through the 
Glossary with the class.
	 Play the video (Part 3) once the whole way through for 
Sts to watch and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at appropriate 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare answers.
1	 She tries not to blame one person.
2	 Because San Francisco shows that zero waste can be achieved 
on a big scale.
3	 No.
Part 3
I	 Who do you think is mostly to blame for the problems we have 
with waste?
C	 I tried very hard, actually, not to blame one person or things, 
um, in the film – actually quite deliberately, because I think in a 
way, um, it lets us off the hook, um, and it also, um…I think we 
all need to work on the…the problem together because it’s too 
complicated to blame one person or one thing or one act, or, um, 
you know, I think it’s…it’s multi-faceted, unfortunately.
I	 Your film finishes on an optimistic note with the example of San 
Francisco’s zero-waste policy. Can you tell us a bit about that?
C	 Well, I…I actually in the film ended up, um, using San Francisco 
as the example because I wanted to show…er…that zero waste 
could be achieved on a big scale. When you go and stay in San 
Francisco in your hotel room, you’ll have four different bins, and 
you’ll have signs on the wall of what goes into each bin, so it’s 
very, very easy to…to recycle, and I think that’s a huge part of 
what we should be doing.
I	 Has the film changed your own habits regarding waste?
C	 I don’t think the film has particularly changed my own habits 
dramatically, um, because I’ve always been thrifty, um, by nature 
because, um, I was lucky enough to spend a lot of time with my 
grandparents when I was growing up, and the post-war, sort of, 
philosophy of never wasting anything, it just, you know, it was 
instilled in me.
	
I ride the same bicycle that I’ve had since I was fifteen years old, 
and over the years obviously had it repaired and repaired, but 
I take tremendous pride in the fact that I’ve always, um, ridden 
the same bike, and, you know, I have lovely memories of it, so – 
and with it – so, um, I think…I think we need a slight change of 
mindset to make things cool the longer you have them, in a way, 
than actually this perpetual thing of buying new things for the 
sake of it.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time, in pairs, to see if they 
can remember why Candida mentioned the three things.
	 Play the video again the whole way through.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pause the video at appropriate 
places and, in pairs, get Sts to compare orally what they have 
understood.
1	 They have four different bins, and signs on the wall of what 
goes into each bin, so it’s very easy to recycle.
2	 She spent a lot of time with her grandparents when she was 
growing up. They taught her not to waste anything, as they 
had lived through the war.
3	 She still rides the bike she got when she was 15.
	 r Part 2
a	 Give Sts time to read the two questions and play the video 
(Part 2) once the whole way through for Sts to watch and 
answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
1  trying not to make it too depressing    ​2  sea
Part 2
I	 Rubbish isn’t very attractive visually. Was that a problem for you 
as a film-maker?
C	 Er…yes and no, um, strangely enough. Obviously, I had a 
wonderful, um, DOP – Director of Photography – so, um, he can 
pretty much make anything look beautiful, I think. But, um, I 
wanted to choose – as…as I’ve said earlier, um, you know, I did a 
lot of research, and so sadly, these things were repeatable and…
and in every country around the world – so I wanted to choose, 
um, beautiful places wherever possible, um, that had been ruined, 
unfortunately, by, um, man-made rubbish. So, um, the ancient 
port of Saida in Lebanon – um, the fact that, you know, you’ve 
got this huge mountain of waste which was formerly a flat sandy 
beach.
I	 Documentaries about how we’re destroying the planet can be 
very depressing. Was that also a challenge for you?
C	 A huge challenge, yes. Um, I would have preferred to make a 
much more cheerful, um, documentary than, um, I think Trashed 
is. I think it has got hope, um, I think ’cos we were very much 
aware that we wanted to offer solutions at the end of it, but you 
are…um, the subject is not a cheerful subject. Um, I could have 
gone further, I think, with it, but I didn’t want to because actually, 
you know, you could sort of end up feeling that you just want to 
go and shoot yourself, which is not what I wanted. I wanted to 
feel that, you know, people feel that they can make a difference to 
this topic.
I	 In the film, you focus on air pollution, land pollution, and water 
pollution – which do you think is the most worrying?
C	 Um, if I had to pick one, um, which I would be reluctant to do…
er…it would be water, without a doubt. I think that what has 
happened to all of the oceans – and beaches, actually, as well – 
um, in the world in the last thirty years is astonishing in the scale 
and the speed. Um, you know, there are certain places in the 
world, that, you know…that you have to dig down on a beach, 
um, over a foot before you’ll find sand that doesn’t have plastic in 
it. Unfortunately, what’s happened with the way that soft plastic 
degrades in water is that, um, the pieces become so fragmented 
that they’re the same size as the zooplankton, um, which 
obviously is in the food chain.
b	 Go through the six sentences and the Glossary with the 
class.
	 Play the video again the whole way through for Sts to 
complete the gaps. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When playing the video the second time, 
pause after each question has been answered to give Sts 
time to write the missing words.
1  wonderful    ​2  ruined    ​3  cheerful    ​4  solutions    ​5  plastic    ​
6  food
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do the question as a whole-class activity.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 86@@
86 CE4&5
I = interviewer, J = Joanne, S = Simon, Sy = Syinat
I	 Do you think we will ever be plastic free?
J	 That’s such a huge topic…
S	 That’s a massive topic.
J	 ...isn’t it? But actually it’s an area − we’ve got to be plastic free 
ultimately. We've certainly, if we don’t, if we’re not plastic free, we 
need to find an alternative, don’t we?
S	 I think, um, businesses particularly − perhaps in the food and 
beverages industry − are already starting. I noticed in a pub the 
other day, they’ve changed the straws from plastic to cardboard − 
sorry, to, to paper − which is a step in the right direction…
J	 It’s a step, it’s a step.
S	 It’s a small step, but it’s a step, but at least they’re taking notice 
and doing things like that.
J	 Yeah, agreed. I think it’s got to be customer-led though, don’t 
you?
S	 Yeah.
Sy	 Yeah, yeah.
J	 We consumers have got to push it.
Sy	 Yeah, yeah.
J	 Because if we don’t demand paper straws and we keep saying 
actually no we have to have plastic… 
S	 Yeah absolutely.
J	 …they’re going to keep producing plastic.
S	 I mean, I don’t know about you, but I recycle, it seems like a bag a 
week of plastic − I can’t believe how much plastic there is.
J	 I know, mmm. It’s really awful actually.
Sy	 Yeah. And it’s very hard to be plastic free.
J	 It is actually.
S	 It is.
J	 I mean, if you try really hard − and I do try hard − um, if you go 
and you shop in supermarkets, it’s incredibly hard to… 
Sy	 Yeah.
J	 …buy organic in non-plastic.
Sy	 Everything is wrapped.
S	 I think there are some businesses now that you can take your 
plastic items with you to the shop and fill up with goods rather 
than taking plastic away from − I think that’s a good start, but it’s 
such a small thing. It needs to be much bigger.
Sy	 But that’d be very difficult on a large scale, I believe.
S	 It would be a lot − it would be difficult because mass consumers 
wouldn’t want to do that. Especially…
Sy	 Yeah, no, but if you think about it, eight billion people, three 
meals a day…yeah, so, food and beverages would be… 
S	 I was reading a story the other day − apparently, we sent some 
plastic to China and they’ve now sent it back to us in containers 
saying ‘Actually, we’re not recycling your plastic, you need to, you 
need to do it where you are rather than sending it to us.’
J	 Yes, and that gets us onto the other topic: it’s not just stopping 
using new plastic, it’s recycling what’s already out there, because 
the the, amount that’s out there at the moment is just scary.
S	 And the amount that’s killing whales or getting caught in whales 
or, or dolphins or fish is just… 
Sy	 Turtles, yeah.
J	 Oh my goodness and did you see, the, you know the Mariana 
Trench?
Sy	 Yeah!
J	 The deepest place on the planet…
S	 It’s full of plastic.
J	 …and they found plastic. I mean, that’s just so depressing, isn’t it?
S	 It’s depressing. So…
J	 I think, I think the awareness is there now and that’s got to be 
positive, right?
Sy	 Yeah!
S	 So plastic free, I think there has to be some sort of − if you said 
plastic free five years, that’s never going to happen, if you said ten 
years, that’s probably not gonna happen, but if you said maybe 
twenty years, potentially it could happen, but there has to be new 
ways of recycling plastic − and then not just not using it, that’s 
the hardest thing I suppose.
Sy	 I’m sure, I’m sure you guys have heard the fact that there’s more 
plastic in the sea by weight than there are fish.
J	 Yes, isn’t that awful?
S	 Yeah, it’s very scary!
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback.
2	r LOOKING AT LANGUAGE
	 This exercise focuses on a common feature of spoken 
English – the use of comment adverbs. Focus on the 
Comment adverbs box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
extracts 1–7.
	 Play the video, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write the missing adverbs.
	 Check answers.
1  actually    ​2  obviously    ​3  amazingly    ​4  generally    ​
5  strangely    ​6  sadly    ​7  Unfortunately
1	 We ended up actually filming in eleven countries…
2	 …but the stories that I’ve chosen are universal and, obviously, I 
spoke to, to people in communities, um, in more countries, um, 
than we actually filmed in…
3	 …and so I sent him the treatment and amazingly he, um, he 
loved it.
4	 …but generally, again, he was very shocked, um, by the film and 
really wanted to get involved.
5	 …yes and no, um, strangely enough. Obviously, I had a wonderful 
DOP – Director of Photography, so, um, he can pretty much make 
anything look beautiful…
6	 I did a lot of research, and so sadly, these things were repeatable 
and, and in every country around the world…
7	 Unfortunately, what’s happened with the way that soft 
plastic degrades in water is that, um, the pieces become so 
fragmented…
3	r THE CONVERSATION
a	 Focus on the photo and tell Sts they are going to watch 
these three people answer a question, which they will 
see on the screen. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
	 Play the video and pause after the question. Elicit / Explain 
that plastic free = will not be contaminated by plastic 
because people will have stopped using it. 
	 Then play the video once the whole way through for Sts 
to circle the correct option in the conclusion.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening script and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
possible but difficult
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 87@@
 
87
e	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to put responses A–G 
into the appropriate category.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
	 Check answers.
Responding to sth positive  B, F, G    ​
Responding to sth negative   A, C, D, E
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in groups of three. Sts A (book open) 
read an extract from d, Sts B and C (books closed) respond 
with an appropriate expression. Make sure they swap roles.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit more possible responses to 
something positive or negative, e.g.
+
How / That’s fantastic / brilliant / really good, etc.
What a great idea, etc.
–
How / That’s awful / terrible / sad, etc.
What a pity / a shame / a nightmare / bad luck, etc.
f	 Put Sts in small groups of three if possible. Focus on the 
questions, and check Sts understand them. Then set a 
time limit for Sts to discuss them. Monitor and help, and 
encourage them to respond to what other people say.
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
J	 Actually, it’s the time frame, I think, is quite significant as well. 
That actually this has happened really since my grandmother was 
a child − she never had plastic.
Sy	 Yeah, we’re talking past century.
J	 Yeah! Really, less. More like a half-century. I can’t remember the 
exact date, but something like that − it’s a reasonably short time, 
and we’ve really got less than that, a lot less than that to turn it 
around, so we have to come up with alternatives. But surely we 
can do that!
Sy	 I have some positive news for you.
S	 Go on.
Sy	 So they have found bacteria that have evolved to digest nylon 
plastic…
S	 Yes, I knew about that.
Sy	 …just naturally. That’s amazing!
J	 So we could get there.
S	 So plastic munchers that can munch plastic − is that what you’re 
saying?
Sy	 Yes.
J	 Yeah.
S	 Cool!
J	 And you can get plastic bottles − I read you can get plastic 
bottles now − that are on sale somewhere in London, one of the 
museums I think − plastic bottles that actually you can then eat 
the plastic.
S	 Oh wow. OK.
Sy	 Really?
J	 I think that’s just so amazing.
S	 That sounds pretty, that sounds pretty cool.
J	 So yes, we think we could be plastic free, it’s possible, but…
Sy	 But it’d take a lot of work.
S	 I think it will. Cool.
S	 Yeah.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the nine 
questions, and make sure they understand them.  
	 Play the video again for Sts to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  S    ​2  J    ​3  J    ​4  S    ​5  S    ​6  Sy    ​7  J    ​8  Sy    ​9  J
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts 
in pairs and then get some feedback.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–3 and A–G.
	 Play the video for Sts to listen and do the matching task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
​1  E, C    ​2  A, D    ​3  B, F, G    ​
1	 J	
The deepest place on the planet…
	
S	 It’s full of plastic.
	
J	
…and they found plastic. I mean, that’s just so depressing, isn’t 
it?
	
S	 It’s depressing. So…
2	 Sy	 …there’s more plastic in the sea by weight than there are fish.
	
J	
Yes, isn’t that awful?
	
S	 Yes, it’s very scary!
3	 J	
…plastic bottles that actually you can then eat the plastic.
	
S	 Oh wow. 
	
Sy	 Really?
	
J	
I think that’s just so amazing.
	
S	 That sounds pretty, that sounds pretty cool.
CE4&5
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 88@@
6A
88
	6A	 Night night
 G   used to, be used to, get used to
 V   sleep
 P   /s/ and /z/
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is several different angles on sleep.
At the start of the first half of the lesson, Sts listen to 
three people who all have some kind of sleep problem. 
Sentences taken from the listening provide the context for 
the grammar presentation, which revises the use of used to 
to talk about repeated past actions, and introduces be used 
to and get used to (doing something) to talk about actions 
or activities which have become, or are becoming, familiar. 
The pronunciation focus is on the sounds /s/ and /z/ in used 
to. Sts then read an article about the benefits of segmented 
sleep (i.e. sleeping for a few hours, waking up for a couple of 
hours, and going back to sleep), followed by short articles, 
which they read separately and tell each other about, on 
what some people do in their waking hours in the middle of 
the night.
The second half of the lesson starts with a vocabulary focus 
on words and phrases related to sleep (e.g. yawn, be a light 
sleeper). This is followed by a listening podcast given by a 
sleep expert. Finally, the lesson finishes with a speaking 
activity to recycle the new lexis.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  used to, be used to, get used to p.172 
Communicative  usually, used to, get used to p.203 
(instructions p.186)
For students
Workbook  6A
Online Practice  6A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.56 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Anthony Burgess (1917–1993) is best 
known for his novel A Clockwork Orange, which was made 
into a famous film.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and if they think it’s 
funny. Do they agree with it?
1	GRAMMAR  used to, be used to, get used to
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
b	 e 6.1  Focus on the task and the two questions.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
Speaker 1 (Rafa)	  Because his bedroom isn’t completely dark.
Speaker 2 (Mike)	  Because he does shift work (one weeknights, 
the next weekdays).
Speaker 3 (Steph)	  Because she takes a lot of long-haul flights.
None of them have really solved the problem.
e 6.1
(script in Student’s Book on pp.126–127)
I = interviewer, R = Rafa, M = Mike, S = Steph
1	 Rafa
I	 Why do you have problems sleeping?
R	 Well, I’m Spanish, but I moved to London a few years ago when 
I married a British woman. I’ve been living here for three years 
now. I have a lot of problems getting to sleep at night because 
our bedroom just isn’t dark enough. I can’t get used to sleeping 
in a bedroom where there’s light coming in from the streetlights 
outside. In Spain, I always used to sleep in complete darkness, 
because my bedroom window had blinds and when I went to bed 
I used to close the blinds completely. But here in England, our 
bedroom window just has curtains, and curtains don’t block out 
the light properly. It takes me a long time to get to sleep at night, 
and I always wake up more often than I used to do in Spain.
I	 So why don’t you just get thicker curtains?
R	 Because my wife doesn’t like sleeping in a completely dark room. 
She says that she feels claustrophobic if the room is too dark.
I	 Ah yes, some people do feel like that.
2	 Mike
I	 Why do you have problems sleeping?
M	 Well, I’m a policeman, so I have to do shift work, which means I 
work at night every other week – so I start work at ten o’clock at 
night and finish at six in the morning the following day. The main 
problem is that my body’s used to sleeping at night, not during 
the day. So it’s very hard to get used to being awake all night and 
trying to work and concentrate when your body is just telling you 
to go to bed.
I	 But isn’t it something you eventually get used to?
M	 Actually, no, because I work during the day for one week and 
then the next week I work at night – which means that just when 
my body has got used to being awake at night, then I go back to 
working in the day. And then of course I can’t get to sleep at night 
because my body thinks it’s going to have to work all night.
	
The other problem is that when I get home after working a night 
shift, everyone else is just starting to wake up, so that means that 
it can be really noisy. The neighbours put on the radio, and bang 
doors, and shout to wake their children up. So even though I’m 
really tired, it’s just very hard to get to sleep.
I	 How many hours do you usually sleep?
M	 Before I became a policeman, I used to sleep about eight or nine 
hours a night, but I think now I probably don’t sleep more than six 
hours.
3	 Steph
I	 Why do you have problems sleeping?
S	 I have a lot of problems sleeping because of jet lag. I have to 
travel a lot in my job, and I take a lot of long-haul flights. I fly to 
New York quite often and I arrive maybe at six in the evening my 
time, but when it’s only one o’clock in the afternoon in New York. 
So at five in the afternoon New York time, I’ll be feeling tired and 
ready for bed because it’s my bedtime, but I can’t go to sleep 
because I’m probably still working or having dinner with my 
American colleagues. Then when I do finally get to bed at, say, 
midnight, I find that I wake up in the middle of the night because 
my body thinks that it’s morning, because it’s still working on UK 
time.
I	 And can you get back to sleep when you wake up?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 89@@
6A
89
S	 No, that’s the problem – I can’t get back to sleep. And then the 
next day, when I have meetings, I feel really sleepy. It’s very hard 
to stay awake all day. And just when I’m finally used to being on 
New York time, then it’s time to fly back to the UK. And flying west 
to east is even worse.
I	 Oh! Why’s that?
S	 Because when I get off the plane, it’s early morning in the UK. But 
for me, on New York time, it’s the middle of the night. It takes me 
four or five days to recover from one of those trips.
I	 Gosh, that must be really difficult for you.
S	 Yeah, it is.
c	 e 6.2  Focus on the six gapped extracts and give Sts time 
to read them.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write. They should complete each gap with a phrase.
	 Check answers.
1  sleeping in a bedroom    ​2  sleep in complete darkness    ​
3  sleeping at night    ​4  being awake    ​5  sleep about eight or 
nine    ​6  being on New York time
e 6.2
Rafa
I can’t get used to sleeping in a bedroom where there’s light coming 
in from the streetlights outside.
I always used to sleep in complete darkness.
Mike
The main problem is that my body’s used to sleeping at night, not 
during the day.
It’s very hard to get used to being awake all night.
Before I became a policeman, I used to sleep about eight or nine 
hours a night.
Steph
And just when I’m finally used to being on New York time, then it’s 
time to fly back to the UK.
d	 Put Sts in pairs to focus on the target grammar. Tell 
them to look at the highlighted phrases in c and answer 
questions 1–3. Make sure Sts understand accustomed to if 
this is not an L1 cognate.
	 Check answers.
1	 b
2	 be old, etc. = you are like this
	
get old, etc. = you are becoming like this
3	 We use the infinitive after used to and the -ing form after be / 
get used to.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6A on p.142.
Grammar notes
used to / didn’t use to + infinitive
At this level, Sts should be confident about using used 
to (do sth) to talk about past habits. They may still make 
mistakes with usage, like using I use to… instead of  
I usually… to describe a present habit, which can cause 
misunderstanding, as a listener may understand I used 
to… (i.e. a past habit). Sts may also make mistakes with 
form, e.g. I didn’t used to…
•	 Rule 2: would
	 Remind Sts of the contraction of would to ’d, i.e. in 
example sentence 2, We’d buy them every morning…
be used to / get used to + gerund
These structures are introduced for the first time. Their 
similarity in form to used to means that they sometimes 
get mixed up in Sts’ minds. 
be used to / get used to + gerund
These structures are introduced for the first time. Their 
similarity in form to used to means that they sometimes 
get mixed up in Sts’ minds. A very common mistake is 
to use these structures with the infinitive instead of the 
gerund (e.g. I’m used to wake up early). Point out to Sts that 
to here is a preposition, and can be followed by either a 
gerund or a noun (e.g. I’m used to living in London now; I’m 
used to the weather here now).
The meaning of be used to doing something may not be 
immediately obvious to Sts. A formal equivalent would be 
be accustomed to doing something.
You may also want to point out that the difference 
between be used to and get used to is like the difference 
between be angry and get angry, and that get here = 
become.
	 Focus on the example sentences for used to / didn’t use 
to + infinitive and play audio e 6.3 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for be used to / get used to + gerund e 6.4.
	 Now focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them 
individually or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 ✗ we didn’t use to like
2	 ✗ we couldn’t get used to having
3	 ✓
4	 ✓
5	 ✓
6	 ✗ Paul used to have / had
7	 ✗ I usually get up
8	 ✓
9	 ✗ to get used to living
10	 ✓
b
1	 When Nathan started his first job, he couldn’t get used to 
getting up at 6 a.m.
2	 I didn’t recognize you! You used to have blonde hair, didn’t 
you?
3	 Isabelle used to rent a flat when she was at university, but 
now she has a house of her own.
4	 When we were children, we used to spend all day playing 
football in the park.
5	 Jasmine has been a nurse all her life, so she is used to 
working nights.
6	 I’ve never worn glasses before, but now I’ll have to get used 
to wearing them.
7	 Ameila is an only child. She isn’t used to sharing her things.
8	 Although I’ve lived in Spain for years, I’ve never got used to 
having dinner at nine or ten o’clock at night.
9	 I didn’t use to like spinach, but now I love it.
10	 If you want to get fit, then you’ll have to get used to 
exercising more.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 90@@
6A
90
c	 e 6.7  Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts 
understand that in sentences 1–4, the extra information 
will help them work out which word they are hearing, but 
that in 5–8 both meanings would fit the context, so they 
have to really concentrate on the sounds.
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen to the sentences and 
choose which word from b they hear.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  a    ​7  b    ​8  b
e 6.7
1	 Pyjamas should always be loose, never tight.
2	 There was a real buzz when she arrived.
3	 Who’s doing this course?
4	 She has nice eyes.
5	 Are we going to have a race?
6	 They made peace.
7	 The prize was a hundred pounds.
8	 We saw the plays last week.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. For each pair of words, Sts A say 
one of the words, and Sts B have to say if they heard word 
a or word b. Then Sts swap roles.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre.
3	READING  using contextual clues
a	 Focus on the task and either read the title and first 
paragraph as a class, or give Sts time to do it alone.
	 Elicit what segmented sleep is.
It is a sleep pattern when you go to bed, then wake up for a few 
hours during the night, then go back to sleep again.
b	 Tell Sts to read the whole article and to answer 
questions 1–3.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article, check whether 
you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Meditate, think about vivid dreams, visit sick family, do 
housework, steal from the neighbours
2	 Yes, doctors thought it had medical benefits. And people 
thought it was a good thing, as it was a time when they could 
do whatever they wanted, undisturbed.
3	 Because of artificial light
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read Brennan’ s 
text and to answer the two questions. Tell them not to 
worry about the gaps. Point out to Sts that the text is in 
American English, but their answers should be in British 
English.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
f	 This exercise recycles the grammar orally. Put Sts in pairs 
and get them to discuss 1–3, encouraging them to give as 
much information as possible.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Demonstrate the activity by answering 
some of the questions yourself.
2	PRONUNCIATION  /s/ and /z/
Pronunciation notes
At lower levels, Sts will have been exposed to the sounds 
/s/ and /z/, especially in plural noun endings and third 
person verb endings; however, the focus will have been 
more on recognizing when es = /ɪz/, as in pieces, or just 
/z/, as in lives. 
Although the difference between these two sounds is 
small, there are pairs of words where the only difference is 
whether there is a /s/ or /z/ sound, and this section raises 
awareness of the comprehension problems that might 
occur if Sts don’t discriminate successfully between the 
sounds when they hear them, or if they don’t produce 
them precisely.
Sts start by focusing on the difference in meaning 
between used to with /s/, e.g. We used to live in the country, 
and used to with /z/, e.g. It’s used to make furniture. They 
then practise final /s/ or final /z/ sounds in pairs of words 
with very different meanings, and finally they have a go at 
pronouncing specific words accurately.
a	 e 6.5  Focus on the task.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen.
e 6.5
See sentences in Student’s Book on p.56
	 Now ask Sts to identify the sentence in which used is 
pronounced differently, and then to explain the difference 
in meaning.
3 is pronounced /juːzd tuː/ (= this is what we use it for), but 
1 and 2 are pronounced /juːstuː/ (1 = past habit, 2 = get 
accustomed to).
b	 e 6.6  Focus on the list of words and make sure Sts know 
the different meanings in each pair.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and repeat.
e 6.6
See words in Student’s Book on p.56
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You might want to point out that there 
are a few words where the difference in pronunciation 
between /s/ and /z/ marks the difference between the 
noun and the verb, e.g. use /s/ = noun, use /z/ = verb. Other 
examples are abuse, excuse, and advice / advise.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise 
saying all the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 91@@
6A
91
yawn /jɔːn/ = open your mouth wide and breathe in deeply 
through it, usually because you are tired or bored
nap /næp/ = a short sleep, especially during the day
sleepy /ˈsliːpi/ = needing sleep; ready to go to sleep
snore /snɔː/ = breathe noisily through your nose and mouth 
while you are asleep
blankets /ˈblæŋkɪts/ = large covers, often made of wool, used 
especially on beds to keep people warm
sheets /ʃiːts/ = large pieces of thin cloth used on a bed to lie on 
or lie under
pillow /ˈpɪləʊ/ = a square or rectangular piece of cloth filled 
with soft material, used to rest your head on in bed
duvet /ˈduːveɪ/ = a large cloth bag that is filled with feathers or 
other soft material and that you have on top of you in bed to 
keep yourself warm
insomnia /ɪnˈsɒmniə/ = the condition of being unable to sleep
sleeping pills /ˈsliːpɪŋ pɪlz/ = pills containing a drug that helps 
you to sleep
c	 Tell Sts that the words and phrases in the list are all related 
to sleep. In pairs, they must try to work out what they 
think they mean. Tell them to use individual words or 
parts of words in the phrases to help them.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Elicit or model pronunciation. Point out that we can 
also say be a heavy sleeper. You could tell Sts that people 
sometimes say sleep like a baby instead of sleep like a log.
be a light sleeper = be easily woken up
fall asleep = go / get to sleep
be fast asleep = be sleeping deeply
have nightmares = have unpleasant or frightening dreams
keep you awake = make you stay awake
oversleep = sleep longer than you intended
set the alarm = prepare or arrange the alarm clock so that it is 
ready to wake you up at the time you need
sleep like a log = sleep very well, sleep deeply
sleepwalk = walk around while you are asleep
d	 Vocabulary race  Put Sts in pairs. Focus on the task and 
the example word (sleepy). Elicit / Explain the difference 
between sleepy and tired. Then demonstrate the activity, 
pointing out that the example word sleepy comes from 
the text in a.
	 Say Go and wait for the first finishing pair to put their 
hands up. Then stop the activity.
e	 e 6.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts understand all the 
words and phrases.
2  yawn    ​3  pillow    ​4  duvet    ​5  sheets, blankets    ​6  insomnia  ​
7  sleeping pills    ​8  snore    ​9  nap    ​10  sleeps like a log    ​
11  light sleeper    ​12  have nightmares    ​13  keep you awake    ​
14  fast asleep    ​15  sleepwalk    ​16  set the alarm    ​17  oversleep  ​
18  fall asleep
e 6.8
1	 Most people start feeling sleepy at around eleven p.m.
2	 When people are tired, they often open their mouth and yawn.
3	 When they get into bed, they put their head on the pillow.
4	 In bed, many people sleep under a duvet filled with feathers or 
synthetic material.
5	 Other people prefer to sleep under sheets and blankets.
6	 Some people can’t sleep because they suffer from insomnia.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the text, check whether you 
need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Three or four hours
2	 He takes photographs in San Francisco, frames his photos, 
marks (grades) students’ work, watches a film, runs.
d	 Tell Sts to read the text again and complete gaps 1–9.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  used    ​2  between    ​3  got    ​4  would    ​5  light    ​6  myself    ​
7  windy    ​8  leave    ​9  ended   
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
e	 Focus on the task and get Sts, in pairs, to tell each other 
why Brennan mentioned each item in the list.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts to cover the text and 
look at the words and phrases in the list, or write them on 
the board and get Sts to close their books.
	 Get feedback for each item.
the sun: When he lived in Bolivia, the people used to follow the 
patterns of the sun, i.e. go to bed when it is dark and get up 
when it got light again.
100 pages: He would sometimes read 100 pages of a book 
between midnight and 3.00 a.m.
one bedroom: He and his wife lived in a one-bedroom 
apartment in San Francisco.
the woods: He sometimes went to the woods in the middle of 
the night.
Angel Island: One of his favourite photos is of Angel Island.
grading: He is a teacher, so has to grade (= mark) students’ 
work.
the street corner: He would meet his running partner at the 
street corner and run for an hour.
young kids: He has young kids, who depend on him, so he can’ t 
follow his sleep pattern.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could tell the class 
what you think you would do.
	 Elicit whether Sts think segmented sleep is generally a 
good or a bad idea.
4	VOCABULARY  sleep
a	 Ask Sts whether they think that men yawn more than 
women, or the other way round. Tell Sts they are going to 
read some facts about sleep.
	 Give Sts time to read all the facts.
	 Find out which fact(s) Sts found the most surprising and if 
they already knew some of them.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to look at the bold words 
in a. Get Sts to decide what part of speech they are, and 
then work out what they mean from the context.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries. 
Elicit or model pronunciation.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 92@@
6A
92
find a cool spot. To sleep well, we need to lose one degree of body 
temperature, and cotton is excellent at keeping us cool.
Number three: I’m obsessive about pillows.
Pillows are really necessary for good sleep. It’s essential that your 
body is in the right position, and a pillow should fill the gap between 
your shoulder and neck, to keep the neck and spine aligned when 
you lie on your side. I have two pillows because I’m tall and that 
works for me, but if one pillow holds you in the correct position, 
that’s fine, too. I wash my pillows every six months and dry them 
outside.
Number four: I sleep with the window open.
Fresh air is good for sleep, and a build-up of carbon dioxide disturbs 
it. It’s the warmth under the duvet that’s important, not the warmth 
of the room. So keep your bedroom door open, and open the 
window at least a centimetre every night, all year round. Even if it’s 
minus five degrees, I keep the window open, and curl up with a hot-
water bottle.
Number five: I don’t have dinner late.
I prefer to eat before seven p.m. If you have a large meal too close to 
bedtime, your body will still be working to digest it, and not resting. 
Eating your main meal three or four hours before bed is ideal.
Number six: I drink coffee in the evenings.
After dinner in a restaurant, I will happily order an espresso. Many 
people are insensitive to caffeine. Unless you know that you are 
sensitive to caffeine, it’s actually the worrying that you’ve drunk 
caffeine that keeps you awake, not the caffeine itself.
Number seven: I need nine and a half hours’ sleep.
It’s a myth that you need an average of eight hours’ sleep. Sleep 
need is genetic – some people might need four hours, others eleven. 
The right amount of sleep for you is something you can work out 
based on how many hours you need to feel alert during the day. 
That figure stays the same for you throughout your life. I always 
wake up at the same time early every morning, so to get the amount 
of sleep I need, I know I need to be in bed by nine thirty p.m.
Number eight: I read a book before going to sleep.
Everyone should have a way to relax before going to sleep. I read 
a non-thrilling book, often short stories, or a book with short 
chapters. You don’t want something where every chapter ends on a 
cliffhanger, because that makes you want to read on.
	 Now ask Sts if they are surprised by any of the things Dr 
Neil Stanley does, and elicit some answers.
	 Finally, elicit what kind of person they think Dr Neil Stanley 
is (e.g. fussy, rich, annoying, etc.). You could tell the class 
what you think, too.
c	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the podcast again and 
this time they need to complete Dr Stanley’s reasons for 
his bedtime routine. Point out that reasons 1–8 here are 
related to sentences 1–8 in a.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each prompt to give 
Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 get disturbed / have to listen to your partner snoring.
2	 you’re really hot, and cotton is cooler.
3	 sleep in the right position.
4	 fresh air, even if it’s cold outside.
5	 will still be digesting the meal when you go to bed.
6	 affected by caffeine.
7	 that’s right for him; everybody needs a different amount.
8	 relaxing before going to sleep.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could focus on some of the 
language related to sleep problems from the podcast, e.g. 
sweaty man-made fibres, fill the gap, curl up with a hot-water 
bottle, insensitive to caffeine, feel alert, a cliffhanger, etc.
7	 People sometimes have to take sleeping pills to help them go to 
sleep.
8	 Some people who are asleep make a loud noise when they 
breathe, i.e. they snore.
9	 In hot countries, it’s common to have a short nap in the 
afternoon.
 10	 A person who sleeps well ‘sleeps like a log’.
 11	 Someone who doesn’t sleep very deeply is a light sleeper.
 12	 Some children have nightmares if they watch scary films before 
bedtime.
 13	 If you drink coffee in the evening, it may keep you awake.
 14	 In the middle of the night, most people are fast asleep.
 15	 As many as fifteen per cent of people sleepwalk during the night, 
getting out of bed and even getting dressed or eating.
 16	 When people need to get up early, they often set the alarm.
 17	 If you don’t hear your alarm, you might oversleep.
 18	 According to one study, four point seven per cent of Americans 
fall asleep while driving.
	 Finally, ask the pair who finished first how many answers 
they got correct. Then find out if any other pairs got more 
correct answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words in the right-
hand column, and then to try to remember them by reading 
sentences 1–18 again and saying the missing words from 
memory. Alternatively, if there’s time, you could quickly elicit 
the words from the whole class to wrap up the activity.
5	LISTENING  understanding reasons
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know what a 
podcast /ˈpɒdkɑːst/ is (= a digital audio file that can be 
downloaded or streamed from the internet and played on 
a computer, smartphone, iPod, etc.). Explain that they’re 
going to think about what a sleep expert might say about 
a good bedtime routine.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss how to 
complete the gaps in 1–8. You might want to point out 
that all the missing words are nouns except for 7, which is 
a number. Tell Sts not to write the words in yet.
b	 e 6.9  Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts 
to listen and complete the gaps in 1–8 in a.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Find out if Sts had guessed any correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  bedroom    ​2  materials    ​3  pillows    ​4  window    ​5  dinner    ​
6  coffee    ​7  9.5    ​8  read a book
e 6.9
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
I know a lot about sleep. I’ve been involved in sleep research for over 
thirty-six years. I call myself a sleep expert, and I think that if you are 
going to give advice about sleep, you should follow your own rules. 
So here are some things you should know about my sleep habits.
Number one: I sleep in a different bedroom from my partner.
Everyone should sleep alone. It’s much better, if you can, to have 
your own room. You can wake refreshed, rather than be cross 
because your partner snored all night. My partner wasn’t offended 
when I suggested we had separate rooms. In fact, she found she 
slept much better. Apparently, I make funny noises in my sleep.
Number two: I sleep under natural materials.
I wouldn’t dream of getting into a bed made with hot, sweaty, man-
made fibres. If you’re really hot, it’s hard to fall asleep or stay asleep. 
This is why we turn over at night – not just to relieve pressure, but to 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 93@@
6A
93
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Give Sts time to look at the list of completed rules in a and 
tick any they normally do. (If you think that Sts might not 
want to give personal information, tell them just to tick 
any that they are comfortable with.) They could underline 
the ones they would like to be able to do.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to compare their lists.
	 Find out if any Sts already follow some of Dr Stanley’s 
rules, and if there are any they would like to be able to do. 
You could tell the class about your own sleeping habits.
6	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the task and the questions. Give Sts time to 
read through them, and check they know all the lexis, e.g. 
blinds, recurring dreams, etc.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A ask Sts B the green 
questions, and Sts B ask Sts A the red ones. Encourage Sts 
to ask for and give plenty of information in their answers. 
If you have time, you could ask Sts to return the questions 
with What about you?
	 Monitor and help whilst Sts ask and answer the questions.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 94@@
6B
94
 G   gerunds and infinitives
 V   music
 P   words from other languages
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is music and how it affects our 
emotions. 
In the first half of the lesson, Sts listen to an interview with 
a music psychologist, who explains why we listen to music 
and how music can affect us emotionally. Sts then talk about 
what kinds of music they listen to when they are in certain 
moods. The lesson continues with a grammar focus on the 
uses of gerunds and infinitives. Sts revise the basic rules 
about when to use a gerund or an infinitive after a verb, and 
then learn about certain verbs (e.g. remember, try) which can 
be followed by either a gerund or an infinitive, but with a 
change in meaning. The vocabulary and pronunciation focus 
is on words related to music, including ‘borrowed’ words 
such as cello, choir, and ballet, and on other foreign words 
which are used in English.
The second half of the lesson begins with a text about some 
research on the importance of finding the right music for 
the right task. Sts then read what four surgeons say about 
playing music while they work. This is followed by a speaking 
activity in which Sts discuss some statements about music. 
The lesson finishes with a documentary about pianist Isata 
Kanneh-Mason and her large family, all of whom are very 
talented musicians.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  gerunds and infinitives p.173 
Communicative  Gerund or infinitive? p.204  
(instructions p.186)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Music in the family
For students
Workbook  6B
Online Practice  6B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.60 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that G.K. Chesterton (1874–1936) is 
probably best known for his series about the priest-detective 
Father Brown, who appeared in 50 stories.
Ask Sts if they agree with the quote.
1	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding a talk 
(explanations and examples)
a	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, giving as much information as possible. You 
could demonstrate the activity by telling Sts about 
yourself.
	 Get some feedback for each question from various Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start talking in pairs, elicit 
different types of music, e.g. classical, hip-hop, rap, reggae, 
jazz, etc.
b	 e 6.10  Tell Sts that they are going to listen to the music 
psychologist John Sloboda talking about why we listen 
to music. Point out that he is the author of the book in 
the photo. Focus on the task and tell Sts that the first 
time they listen, they should try to complete reasons and 
examples 1–3 with key words or phrases. They will then 
compare notes with a partner and listen a second time. 
Make sure Sts know the meaning of intensify.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through and give 
Sts time to write their notes. You could pause after each 
reason and example is given.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 6.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
Part 1
I think it’s very interesting that human beings are the only animals 
which listen to music for pleasure. A lot of research has been done 
to find out why we listen to music, and there seem to be three main 
reasons. Firstly, we listen to music to make us remember important 
moments in the past, for example when we met someone for the 
first time. Think of Humphrey Bogart in the film Casablanca saying, 
‘Darling, they’re playing our song.’  When we hear a certain piece of 
music, we remember hearing it for the first time in some very special 
circumstances. Obviously, this music varies from person to person.
Secondly, we listen to music to help us to change activities. If we 
want to go from one activity to another, we often use music to help 
us make the change. For example, we might play a certain kind 
of music to prepare us to go out in the evening, or we might play 
another kind of music to relax us when we get home from work. 
That’s mainly why people listen to music in cars, and they often 
listen to one kind of music when they’re going to work and another 
kind when they’re coming home. The same is true of people on 
buses and trains.
The third reason why we listen to music is to intensify the emotion 
that we’re feeling. For example, if we’re feeling sad, sometimes we 
want to get even sadder, so we play sad music. Or we’re feeling 
angry and we want to intensify the anger – then we play angry 
music. Or when we’re planning a romantic dinner, we lay the table, 
we light candles, and then we think, ‘What music would make this 
even more romantic?’
EXTRA SUPPORT   Focus on the task and tell Sts that they 
will be listening to the audio twice: the first time they listen, 
they should try to complete sentences 1–3 with a phrase. 
The second time, they should try to listen for at least one 
example for 1–3.
Play the audio and then check answers for reasons 1–3.
	6B	 Music to my ears
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 95@@
6B
95
The human voice:
1	 happy = people speak faster, the voice is higher
2	 sad = people speak more slowly, the voice is lower
3	 angry = people raise their voice or shout
Music copies the human voice:
1	 faster, high-pitched music sounds happy
2	 slow music with falling pitches sounds sad
3	 loud music with irregular rhythms sounds angry
Emotions related to pieces of music:
1	 happy = the Beethoven
2	 angry = the Holst
3	 sad = the Albinoni
4	 terrified = the film music from Psycho
e 6.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
Part 2
Let’s take three important human emotions: happiness, sadness, and 
anger. When people are happy, they speak faster and their voice is 
higher. When they are sad, they speak more slowly and their voice is 
lower, and when people are angry, they raise their voices or shout. 
Babies can tell whether their mother is happy or not simply by the 
sound of her voice, not by her words.
***
What music does is it copies this, and it produces the same 
emotions. So faster, higher-pitched music will sound happy. Slow 
music with lots of falling pitches will sound sad. Loud music with 
irregular rhythms will sound angry. It doesn’t matter how good or 
bad the music is – if it has these characteristics, it will make you 
experience this emotion.
***
Let me give you some examples. For happy, for example, the first 
movement of Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony. For angry, say Mars, 
from The Planets by Holst. And for sad, something like Albinoni’s 
Adagio for Strings.
Of course, the people who exploit this most are the people who 
write film soundtracks. They can take a scene which visually has no 
emotion and they can make the scene either scary or calm or happy, 
just by the music they write to go with it. Think of the music in the 
shower scene in Hitchcock’s film Psycho. All you can see is a woman 
having a shower, but the music makes it absolutely terrifying.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
g	 Focus on the questions and example. Then put Sts in 
pairs and set a time limit for Sts to go through them and 
compare answers and choices of music. Encourage Sts 
to specify not just the kind of music they would play, but 
also the name of the artist or song / piece of music.
	 Monitor and help whilst Sts do the task.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get some feedback from individual Sts.
EXTRA IDEA   If Sts have examples of music on their phones, 
which they would listen to in any of these situations, you 
could get them to play a short extract to the class and see if 
they agree.
2	GRAMMAR  gerunds and infinitives
a	 Focus on the task and extracts 1–3 and give Sts a couple 
of minutes to put the verbs into the infinitive (with or 
without to) or the gerund.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
1	 remember important moments in the past
2	 change activities
3	 the emotion that we’re feeling
Then play the audio again for Sts to listen to the examples.
c	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again for Sts to add any extra information.
	 Check answers.
1	 to make us remember important moments in the past, 
e.g. when we met someone for the first time (like Humphrey 
Bogart in Casablanca saying, ‘Darling, they’re playing our 
song.’).
2	 to help us to change activities, e.g. to prepare us to go out in 
the evening, to relax us when we get home from work.
3	 to intensify the emotion that we’re feeling, e.g. if we’re 
feeling sad, we want to get sadder; if we’re feeling angry, we 
want to intensify the anger; if we’re having a romantic dinner, 
we use music to make it more romantic.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.127, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss the two 
questions.
	 Elicit times Sts listen to music for each of the three reasons 
given in the interview, as well as the various kinds of 
music they listen to.
e	 e 6.11  Focus on the task and the four pieces of music. 
Ask Sts if they know any of the music. Point out that 4 is 
a piece of film music, and ask Sts if they have heard of or 
seen the film.
	 Now play the audio, pausing after each piece of music, 
and ask Sts how it makes them feel.
e 6.11
See the four pieces of music in Student’s Book on p.60
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the music extracts, elicit 
from Sts how music can make you feel, e.g. happy, sad, angry, 
frightened, etc. Write all the adjectives they suggest on the 
board. Then play each piece of music one at a time.
f	 e 6.12  Focus on the task and give Sts time to look at 
the incomplete notes. Make sure they understand the 
meaning of the noun pitch in music (= how high or low 
a sound is, especially a musical note). Explain that the 
purpose of the activity is to try to get as much information 
as they can in one listening. Point out that in the third 
section (Emotions related to pieces of music), they should 
be looking for the emotion word / how you feel (sad, etc.).
	 Play the audio, pausing between each section to give Sts 
time to complete their notes (see *** in script 6. 12).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner. If Sts really need to 
listen again, play the audio a second time.
	 Check answers. You might want to remind Sts in answer 4, 
under Emotions related to pieces of music, of the difference 
between terrifying, which they heard on the audio (…the 
music makes it absolutely terrifying), and the answer terrified, 
which is how the music makes people feel.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 96@@
6B
96
	 Focus on the example sentences for verbs followed by 
the gerund and verbs followed by the infinitive and 
play audio e 6.14 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. 
	 Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the like, love, hate, and prefer box and go 
through it with the class. You could give Sts the additional 
example: I prefer cycling to driving. (general) You don’t need 
to give me a lift to the station. I prefer to walk. (specific)
	 Repeat for verbs that can be followed by the gerund or 
infinitive with a change in meaning e 6.15. 
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 I suggest taking a taxi to the airport tomorrow.
2	 Even though the snow was really deep, we managed to drive 
to the local shop and back.
3	 We’d better do some shopping…
4	 i’m very impatient. I can’t stand waiting in queues.
5	 A young man kindly offered to carry my bags.
6	 My parents used to make me tidy my room.
7	 We threatened to call the police if the boys didn’t stop 
throwing stones.
8	 Do you feel like coming to the gym with me?
9	 I’d prefer to eat out instead of getting a takeaway.
10	 I don’t mind working late tonight if you want me to.
b
1  seeing    ​2  to call    ​3  taking    ​4  locking    ​5  to turn    ​
6  painting    ​7  to send    ​8  to reach
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 6B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
e	 Put Sts in pairs for this oral grammar practice activity and 
focus on the task. Give Sts time to think and plan what 
they are going to say, before getting them to speak.
	 Monitor and help Sts, correcting any errors with gerunds 
and infinitives.
	 Get some feedback.
3	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  music; 
words from other languages
a	 e 6.16  Tell Sts they are going to hear some musical 
extracts and they have to match them to the words in the 
two lists, instruments or musicians.
	 Play the audio once or twice as necessary.
e 6.16
(sounds for the following:) 
1	 a cello
2	 drums
3	 a bass guitar
4	 a saxophone
5	 a flute
6	 a keyboard 
7	 a violin
8	 a conductor
9	 a choir
10	 a soprano
11	 an orchestra
b	 e 6.13  Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
1  remember    ​2  hearing    ​3  to go, make
e 6.13
1	 Firstly, we listen to music to make us remember important 
moments in the past.
2	 When we hear a certain piece of music, we remember hearing it 
for the first time…
3	 If we want to go from one activity to another, we often use music 
to help us make the change.
c	 This exercise introduces a new grammar point, i.e. that certain 
verbs can use either the gerund or the infinitive, but that the 
meaning changes depending on which form is used.
	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to try and work out 
the difference between the two sentences.
	 Check answers.
A  2    B  1
d	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 6B on p.143.
Grammar notes
Sts have previously learned about the use of gerunds and 
infinitives (with and without to) after certain verbs. Here 
they revise and expand their knowledge of verbs which 
can take the gerund and those which take the infinitive 
with or without to – something that even the most 
advanced Sts make mistakes with. They then learn to use 
verbs which can take either form, but with a change in 
meaning.
Verbs followed by the gerund and verbs followed by 
the infinitive
•	 Rules 1–5
	 A full list of the most common verbs which take the 
gerund or infinitive is included in the Appendix – Verb 
patterns: verbs followed by the gerund or the 
infinitive on p.164. After reminding Sts of the three verb 
patterns (rules 1–4), take a few minutes to go through 
the Appendix and make sure Sts know the meaning of 
the verbs. You could ask Sts to revise the three groups as 
self-study and test them on the material.
•	 Rule 4: make and let
	 Highlight that the verb form following make depends 
on whether the sentence is active or passive. In the 
passive, make is followed by the infinitive with to. 
Compare:
	 They made us wear a uniform at school.
	 We were made to wear a uniform at school.
Verbs that can be followed by the gerund or infinitive 
with a change in meaning
This rule for verbs where the meaning changes will be 
new to most Sts. In Sts’ L1, some of these concepts may 
be covered by using two different verbs, so if you know 
your Sts’ L1, you can use it to make the meaning clear.
•	 Rule 3: try + gerund is often used in advice, e.g. Why 
don’t you try changing the battery?
•	 Rule 4: with need to do / needs doing, highlight that 
needs doing is an alternative to a passive construction, 
e.g. The house needs painting / to be painted.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 97@@
6B
97
e 6.18
See words in Student’s Book on p.61
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words. Elicit how the pink letters are pronounced. Refer 
Sts to the phonetics for each word.
The second letter c in concerto is pronounced /tʃ/.
The letters zz in mezzo are pronounced /ts/.
The letters ch in chorus are pronounced /k/.
The letters rhy in rhythm are pronounced /rɪ/.
The letters ph in symphony are pronounced /f/.
The letters et in ballet are pronounced /eɪ/.
The letters en in encore are pronounced /ɒŋ/.
The letter gen in genre are pronounced /ʒɒn/.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
e	 Focus on the task and point out that these words are not 
related to music. You might want to highlight that Sts 
have seen a lot of these words in previous lessons.
	 Put Sts in pairs, get them to say the words to each other 
using an ‘English’ pronunciation if possible, and then guess 
their origin. Tell Sts that there are six words in each group.
	 Say each word in turn and ask Sts which language 
they come from and their meaning. Elicit or model 
pronunciation as necessary.
f	 e 6.19  Now play the audio for Sts to find out which 
language the words come from.
	 Check answers.
e 6.19
From Italian	
barista, cappuccino, graffiti, macchiato, paparazzi, 
villa
From Greek	
architecture, hypochondriac, microphone, 
philosophy, psychic, psychologist
From French	
bouquet, chauffeur, chef, chic, croissant, fiancé
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each group of words 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
	 Finally, give Sts time to practise saying them.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   You might like to extend the speaking 
practice by asking more questions using words from other 
languages, e.g. Have you ever been to see a live performance 
of a ballet? Do you know anyone who can play the cello? How 
long should people be with their fiancé / fiancée before getting 
married? When was the last time you bought someone a 
bouquet of flowers? etc. With a strong class, Sts could write 
and ask their own questions.
4	READING  scanning across several texts
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could get a show 
of hands for how many Sts in class listen to music when 
working / studying. Elicit whether any Sts never listen to 
music in these situations.
b	 Focus on the task and then set a short time limit for Sts to 
read the article once and choose the best summary for 
the results of the research mentioned. Tell them not to 
worry about the gaps.
b	 e 6.17  Now play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 6.17
1	 (sound effects) a cello
2	 (sound effects) drums
3	 (sound effects) a bass guitar
4	 (sound effects) a saxophone
5	 (sound effects) a flute
6	 (sound effects) a keyboard
7	 (sound effects) a violin
8	 (sound effects) a conductor
9	 (sound effects) a choir
10	 (sound effects) a soprano
11	 (sound effects) an orchestra
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to practise saying the words.
	 Give Sts, in their pairs, a few minutes to think of any other 
words they know for instruments and musicians.
	 Elicit answers on the board in two columns headed 
INSTRUMENTS and MUSICIANS. Get Sts to spell the words, and 
then elicit / model pronunciation where necessary.
Possible suggestions
Instruments: trumpet, triangle, recorder, harp, harmonica, 
banjo, trombone, clarinet, organ, etc.
Musicians: cellist, drummer, bass guitarist, pianist, violinist, 
keyboard player, saxophonist, rapper, tenor, singer-songwriter, 
composer, lead singer, band, etc.
	 Finally, find out if Sts can play any of the instruments 
mentioned, or if they sing.
Pronunciation notes
English has borrowed many words from other languages. 
Some of them have been anglicized, e.g. boeuf (French) to 
beef. Others are unchanged, e.g. cello. Where English uses 
a foreign word, the consonants are often pronounced 
in a way which is similar to the language of origin, e.g. 
in cello the c is pronounced /tʃ/ – similar to the Italian 
pronunciation. On the other hand, vowels are usually 
anglicized, e.g. the final o in cello is pronounced /əʊ/, as in 
English.
Note: in borrowed French words which include the letters 
en, e.g. genre, the vowel is pronounced in a similar way to 
French, and sounds like the o in on /ɒn/.
c	 Focus on the Foreign words that are used in English 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and tell them to look at all the words 
in the Borrowed from… chart, try to say them to each 
other using an ‘English’ pronunciation, and underline the 
stressed syllable.
d	 e 6.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
concerto  mezzo-soprano  
chorus  rhythm  symphony  
ballet  encore  genre
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 98@@
6B
98
h	 Put Sts in pairs and then give them time to create a 
playlist. Tell them to be as precise as possible, e.g. they 
should name the specific song and singer, etc., that they 
would like to listen to.
	 Get Sts to mingle and share their playlists, or put them on 
the classroom walls and get Sts to read them.
	 You might want to ask Sts to (create and) present their 
playlists to the class, and explain their choices using 
because clauses.
5	SPEAKING
	 Focus on the questions, making sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, e.g. lyrics, decade, etc.
	 Before Sts start the activity, give them time to think about 
their own individual opinions for each statement, e.g. 
by marking each one on a scale from ‘strongly agree’ to 
‘strongly disagree’.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and tell them to 
take turns to start the discussion for each statement.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts start the discussion, remind 
them of the expressions they saw for Managing 
discussions and Politely disagreeing in Lesson 2B.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Finally, get some quick feedback from various groups on 
some of the statements.
6 r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch an interview with a 
famous pianist called Isata Kanneh-Mason. Give Sts time 
to read the two questions.  
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
watch and answer the questions.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Her parents and siblings are all talented musicians.
Because they are all professional musicians or about to become 
professionals.
Music in the family
N = narrator, I = Isata
N	
This is Isata Kanneh-Mason. A talented pianist studying at 
London’s prestigious Royal Academy of Music. She’s quickly gaining 
a strong reputation in the world of classical music. It’s easy to see, 
and hear, why, but how did this young prize-winning artist first 
become interested in classical music?
I	
So, I first became interested in music because my parents were 
massive classical music fans. And they were always playing 
classical music around the house and I just always listened to it. 
And it was always part of my childhood so, I feel like I’ve always 
been interested in music.
N	
Isata herself started playing an instrument when she was very 
young.
I	
Well, I actually started playing the recorder when I was three 
years old. And then when I was six, I had my first piano lesson, 
and I’ve been playing since then.
N	
It wasn’t long before Isata’s remarkable talent was noticed. At the 
age of nine she started studying at the Junior Royal Academy of 
Music. When she was seventeen, she was awarded the Elton John 
scholarship to continue her undergraduate studies at the Royal 
Academy of Music, and actually performed with the pop legend.
	 Check the answer. Focus on paragraph 3 and elicit the 
difference between what the research calls divergent 
thinking (thinking creatively, spontaneously coming up 
with new ideas) and convergent thinking (doing problem-
solving, using logic to solve existing problems).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
2
c	 Quickly go through phrases A–F, checking Sts know the 
meaning of all the lexis, e.g. stimulate, mood, uplifting, etc.
	 Now get Sts to read the article again and complete 
gaps 1–6.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  B    ​2  F    ​3  D    ​4  A    ​5  C    ​6  E
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
d	 Do this as a whole-class activity and elicit opinions from 
various Sts.
e	 Focus on the task. Put Sts in pairs and get them to look at 
the photo and answer questions 1–2.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. For question 1, you 
could get a show of hands for Sts’ opinions. For question 2, 
you could elicit all the advantages and disadvantages 
onto the board to help Sts with f.
f	 Focus on the first part of the task, and before Sts read the 
article, you could focus on the four different surgeons and 
check Sts know what kind of surgery they do.
	 Give Sts time to read the article to check their 
answers to e.
	 Elicit whether the article mentioned any of the points Sts 
talked about in e.
	 Now focus on the second part of the task. Elicit / Explain 
the meaning of general consensus /ˈdʒenrəl kənˈsensəs/ 
(= the opinion that most or all members of a group agree 
with). Then ask what the general consensus is regarding 
playing music whilst operating.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
The consensus would probably be ‘have music while you work’.
	 You might like to focus on some of the words and phrases 
in the text that refer to types of music: crowd-pleasers  
(= music that everyone likes), easy listening (= pleasant 
or relaxing music, but that some people think is quite 
boring), sing-along tracks (= songs that people enjoy 
singing out loud to), playlist (= a personal selection of 
songs and pieces of music), lift music (= background 
music of the kind you hear in a lift, usually very bland / 
uninteresting).
g	 Focus on the task and point out that the letters are the 
surgeons’ initials.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and do the task.
	 Check answers.
1  SN    ​2  RT    ​3  RT    ​4  SA    ​5  GW    ​6  SA    ​7  SN    ​8  GW
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 99@@
6B
99
1	 When she was growing up her parents were always playing 
classical music around the house.
2	 She won the Elton John scholarship, so she could continue 
her studies at the Royal Academy of Music. She also 
performed with Elton John.
3	 She is the eldest child.
4	 He plays the cello. He won the BBC Young Musician Award 
in 2016 and performed at Prince Harry and Meghan Markle’s 
wedding.
5	 They have a very good relationship. as they give each other 
advice and help each other.
6	 They couldn’t always go out or go to parties. They got used to 
it.
7	 The emotion because she thinks people want to listen to 
music to make them feel something special.
8	 She feels she is lucky that her job is also what helps her 
escape everyday life.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch again with 
subtitles, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words 
or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback. You could also tell the class if 
you know any such people or families.
I	
Playing with Elton John was amazing. I was seventeen years old 
and I played with him in LA, I actually played the viola for that 
concert. And it was, it was just such a fun experience because it 
wasn’t classical music so, it was nice to do something different. 
And it was also just amazing to be part of that energy on stage. 
He’s a very charismatic person and I just really enjoyed the 
whole thing.
N	
But Isata hasn’t made this journey alone. Incredibly, she is the 
eldest of seven siblings that all share Isata’s talent and passion for 
classical music. There’s Braimah, Sheku, Konya, Jeneba, Aminata, 
and Mariatu. Between them they play a variety of instruments, 
in fact, her brother Sheku, who is a cellist, won the BBC Young 
Musician Award in twenty sixteen and performed at the royal 
wedding in twenty eighteen. What was it like growing up in such a 
musical family?
I	
I’ve always loved growing up in a musical family, but it’s quite 
hard to say what it was like because I don’t really know it 
any other way. But, I do know that it was always very noisy, 
very busy, um, and the house is just always full of music. I 
think growing up in a musical family definitely helps me as a 
musician because I think it’s so important to just be surrounded 
by music, and to always be listening. And also my siblings and I, 
we always give each other advice and help each other with our 
practice. So, I’d definitely say that being part of a musical family 
has really helped me grow as a musician.
N	
With so many talented siblings, are they competitive?
I	
I wouldn’t say we’re competitive because we were lucky enough 
that we all chose different instruments. And, although several 
of us play the piano, the ages are quite far apart so there’s 
never been any competition. There’s always just been a sense of 
spurring each other on and a sense of support.
N	
Isata and several of her siblings are already well on the road to 
being professional musicians – but it is not an easy career choice.
I	
I think if you have a career in classical music, it’s always going 
to be a sacrifice. For my siblings and I, we definitely felt that at 
school, sometimes you can’t go out with your friends or go to 
parties because you have to practice. And not everyone may 
always understand that but I think if you love music enough, 
which we all definitely did, then the sacrifice is so worth it. And 
I think if you want to succeed in anything, you have to make 
sacrifices, so, I think we got used to that.
N	
What is the most important thing for you when you’re choosing a 
piece to perform? 
I	
For me, the emotion of a piece is extremely important. I think 
there’s of course, a massive intellectual side to classical music, 
and you need to analyse the music you’re playing. But at the end 
of the day, when you go to a concert, you go because you want 
to feel something special. So, I think the emotion of the piece 
completely defines it for me.
N	
And the importance of emotion is easy to hear in Isata’s playing.
I	
I think for me, playing has always been a release from everyday 
life. I think there’s so much emotion and there’s just so much in 
music and so playing has always been kind of an escape for me. 
So, I’m just so lucky that my escape is what I do.
N	
This piece, by nineteenth century composer Clara Schumann, 
appears on Isata’s debut album. Both Isata and Sheku already 
have contracts with the prestigious record label Decca, and it 
seems likely that other siblings will follow in their footsteps. For the 
Kanneh-Mason family, the future looks bright.
b	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–8 and make sure that 
they understand all the lexis. 
	 Play the video again, pausing if necessary for Sts to write 
their answers.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   First, put Sts in pairs and tell them to try 
to remember any of the answers. Then play the video again.
	 Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 100@@
Revise and Check
100 Revise and Check
e 6.20
1
I = interviewer, C = Christopher
I	
How well do you think you’d survive if you were left alone on a 
desert island?
C	
Not very! I did the boy scouts, and so I know a little bit of basic 
survival. But it would be, I would, hopefully, hopefully be found 
rather quickly after my, my abandonment there.
I	
What would you do?
C	
Um, probably, kind of what you see in all the movies – build a 
bonfire, and see if I had any mirror or anything to attract a plane 
or a passing boat. Just try to find shelter and, and whatever 
type of food’s on the island.
2
I = interviewer, L = Lemuel
I	
What kind of things do people do that really annoy you?
L	
Walking slowly in public. Um, tapping their pencils on tables 
during lectures as well, yeah.
I	
Do you think you do anything that annoys other people?
L	
Um, biting my nails. Um, yeah, not much else.
3
I = interviewer, M = Mary
I	
Do you ever have problems sleeping?
M	
Most of the time I don’t have a problem sleeping, but 
sometimes if I, I’m either really cold or I'm really excited about 
something that’s happening, or I’m really sad about something 
that has happened, then I have problems sleeping.
I	
What do you do if you can’t sleep?
M	
I normally read a book, because any time I read a book in bed I 
will fall asleep.
4
I = interviewer, M = Martina
I	
On a typical day, do you listen to music?
M	
Yes, I listen to music every day.
I	
When and where?
M	
First thing in the morning, outside on my patio.
I	
Do you listen to different kinds of music at different times of 
day?
M	
I listen to different types of music no matter what time of day.
I	
What makes you choose one kind of music over another?
M	
Um, I choose sort of spa, new age music in the morning to wake 
up. I choose country to just get going during the day and a little 
soul at night.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.41.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 5&6 
Quick Test 6 
File 6 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
a
1  hadn’t found    ​2  didn’t work    ​3  wouldn’t have gone    ​
4  wouldn’t be    ​5  I could speak    ​6  ’d learned to play    ​7  you 
wouldn’t leave    ​8  used to driving    ​9  to have    ​10  to getting 
up
b
1  meeting    ​2  cutting    ​3  to get    ​4  not to be    ​5  working
VOCABULARY
a
1  proud    ​2  homesick    ​3  grateful    ​4  guilty    ​5  stunned
b
1  exhausting    ​2  shocked    ​3  embarrassed    ​4  stressful    ​
5  annoys    ​6  disappointing    ​7  amazes    ​8  horrified    ​
9  offensive    ​10  scary
c
1  pillow    ​2  snore    ​3  nap    ​4  nightmare    ​5  set
d
1  a conductor    ​2  a band / a choir    ​3  a cello    ​4  a soprano    ​
5  a keyboard
PRONUNCIATION
a
1  delighted /ɪ/    ​2  yawn /ɔː/    ​3  eyes /z/    ​4  homesick /s/    ​
5  chic /ʃ/
b
1  absolutely    ​2  devastated    ​3  infuriating    ​4  insomnia    ​
5  sleepwalk
CAN YOU  understand this text?
a	
Music that has a rhythm of 60–80 beats, without lyrics
b
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  a    ​5  b    ​6  a    ​7  b    ​8  b    ​9  c    ​10  c
r CAN YOU  understand these people?
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  a    ​4  b
	5&6	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 101@@
7A
101
	7A	 Let’s not argue
 G   past modals: must have, etc.; would rather
 V   verbs often confused
 P   weak form of have
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is arguments: what causes them, 
how to argue, and how to win online arguments.
The first half of the lesson starts with the grammar 
presentation, where Sts listen to some people arguing, a 
context in which past modals of deduction can naturally 
occur. Your Sts will have learned to use present modals of 
deduction (must / might / can’t + infinitive) and should (+ 
infinitive) for advice at Intermediate level. In this lesson, 
they learn how to use these same modals to make 
deductions or speculate about the past (e.g. You must have 
taken a wrong turning, Somebody might have stolen it) and 
to make criticisms (e.g. You shouldn’t have said that). The 
pronunciation focus is on weak forms of have in sentences 
with past modals (e.g. You should have told me). Then in 
Reading & Speaking, Sts read an article aimed at helping 
students in shared accommodation avoid arguments, and 
discuss the solutions.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts start by role-playing 
an argument. They then listen to a psychologist talking 
about how to argue in a sensible and controlled way, and 
then Sts put the advice into action in another role-play. 
Grammar in Context focuses on the use of would rather, 
and is followed by a vocabulary focus on verbs which are 
sometimes confused, e.g. argue and discuss. The lesson 
finishes with an article about the best ways to win an online 
argument, which Sts put into practice by simulating an 
online discussion.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  past modals p.174 
Communicative  Guess my verb p.205 (instructions p.187) 
Vocabulary  Verbs often confused p.224  
(instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  7A
Online Practice  7A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.66 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Desmond Tutu is a South African 
Anglican archbishop and human rights activist.
Ask Sts to tell you what the quote means.
1	GRAMMAR  past modals: must have, etc.
a	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to focus on the photo and 
guess who the people are, where they are, and what they 
might be arguing about. Encourage them to follow the 
style of the example and use can’t be, must be, or could be.
	 Elicit ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct or not.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity. Either 
focus on the example, or write CAN’T BE, COULD BE, and MUST BE 
on the board to help Sts.
b	 e 7.1  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Ask Sts who the ‘guilty’ person is.
The people are flatmates, and they are in the kitchen of their 
shared house. One girl is accusing the others of using her milk. 
The others defend themselves, but in the end, it is established 
that Jack (M2) used her milk in his coffee.
e 7.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.127)
W = woman, M = man
W1	 Where’s my milk? It’s not here.
M1	 I haven’t seen it. You must have finished it.
W1	 I definitely didn’t finish it. I was keeping a bit for my cereal this 
morning. One of you must have used it.
W2	 It can’t have been me. I only drink my soya milk. Could you have 
drunk it last night and then forgotten? Did you have something 
before going to bed?
W1	 No, I didn’t. I just drank a glass of water.
M1	 Someone might have given it to the cat.
W1	 Oh, come on. We all know she drinks water, not milk. I’m telling 
you, last night I know there was some milk in the fridge. My 
milk.
M1	 Well, I don’t know what’s happened to it. In any case, you should 
have put your name on it.
W1	 I did put my name on it! In capital letters!
W3	 And it wasn’t me, because I stayed at Mike’s last night, and I had 
breakfast there before getting back here.
W1	 What are you drinking, Jack?
M2	 Just coffee.
W1	 Yes, white coffee. That’s where my milk went. You didn’t have 
any milk of your own in the fridge.
W2	 Ooh, Jack, you naughty boy!
W1	 Well, you can go to the supermarket and get me some more.
M2	 OK, OK, calm down. I’ll go and get you some milk.
c	 e 7.2  Focus on the instructions and the gapped extracts.
	 Give Sts time to read the extracts. Then play the audio, 
pausing after each extract for Sts to complete the 
sentences. Play the audio again, as necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  must have    ​2  must have    ​3  can’t have    ​4  Could…have    ​
5  might have    ​6  should have
e 7.2
1	 You must have finished it.
2	 One of you must have used it.
3	 It can’t have been me.
4	 Could you have drunk it last night…?
5	 Someone might have given it to the cat.
6	 …you should have put your name on it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 102@@
7A
102
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to do it in pairs.
	 Check answers and elicit that A = must have, B = could or 
might have, C = can’t have, and D = should have.
A  1, 2    B  4, 5    C  3    D  6
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could play audio e 7.2 again and get 
Sts to listen and repeat, copying the rhythm and intonation.
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7A on p.144.
Grammar notes
must, may / might / could, can’t / couldn’t + have + 
past participle
Sts have previously seen these modal verbs to make 
deductions about the present, e.g. John must be ill. She 
might be French. Here they learn to use the same modals 
to make deductions about the past (You must have made 
a mistake).
•	 Rule 1: must have
Sts may sometimes try to use mustn’t have (which doesn’t 
exist) instead of can’t have, e.g. You can’t have seen me 
yesterday. I was in bed all day. NOT You mustn’t have…
•	 Rule 2: might / may / could + have
Remind Sts that may have and might have in these 
sentences are interchangeable (although might have 
must be used in reported speech). Highlight also that 
could have is interchangeable with might / may have, but 
couldn’t have (see rule 3) isn’t interchangeable with might / 
may not have.
should have / ought to have + past participle
Sts are familiar with should and ought to to give advice 
or to express an opinion (You should get a new phone. The 
government ought to change the law). Here they learn to 
use should have / ought to have to criticize somebody’s 
actions (You should have turned left. You ought not to have 
spoken to her like that).
	 Focus on the example sentences for must, may / might / 
could, can’t / couldn’t + have + past participle and 
play audio e 7.3 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Repeat for should have / ought to have + past participle 
e 7.4.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 She might have had an argument with her boyfriend.
2	 Ben must have read my email.
3	 They can’t have got lost.
4	 You can’t have seen Ellie yesterday.
5	 John might not have seen you.
6	 Lucy must have bought a new car.
7	 Alex can’t have been very ill.
8	 They might not have been invited.
9	 You must have used too much sugar.
10	 It can’t have been my phone.
b
1	 You should have / ought to have written it down.
2	 You shouldn’t have / oughtn’t to have driven here.
3	 You shouldn’t have / oughtn’t to have invited her.
4	 You shouldn’t have / oughtn’t to have bought so many 
shoes. 
5	 I should have / ought to have gone to bed earlier last night. 
6	 You should have / ought to have taken it out of the freezer 
earlier.
7	 You shouldn’t have / oughtn’t to have sat in the sun all 
afternoon without any sunscreen.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
2	PRONUNCIATION  weak form of have
Pronunciation notes
When have is an auxiliary verb, not a main verb, it 
usually has a weak pronunciation, e.g. I might have lost it 
(have = /əv/). Sts may sometimes misunderstand this as 
the weak form of of, and many native speakers sometimes 
misspell weak have as of.
To encourage Sts to use the weak form of have, tell them 
that the most important thing for Sts is to stress the 
modal and the participle strongly, and not to stress have 
at all.
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity. Elicit ideas. 
	 Now focus on the Weak form of have box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Check the answer.
Because the weak (unstressed) form of have, e.g. in must have, 
sounds like the weak form of of.
b	 e 7.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and repeat the six 
sentences.
e 7.5
1	 He must have left his bag at school.
2	 You must have known it would happen.
3	 It can’t have been a very good concert.
4	 Could you have left it on the bus?
5	 There might have been some witnesses.
6	 You should have phoned me.
c	 e 7.6  Focus on the task and play the audio, pausing after 
each sentence to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers by eliciting the sentences onto the board. 
Remind Sts that they can only understand whether it’s 
have or of from the meaning and context of the sentence, 
not from the pronunciation.
e 7.6
1	 Where have you been all morning?
2	 I woke up in the middle of the night.
3	 Of course I’ll be there on time!
4	 We can’t have gone the wrong way!
5	 I’ll have finished in about ten minutes.
6	 What’s the point of arguing?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 103@@
7A
103
c	 Focus on sentences A–H, making sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, e.g. ear plugs, wax, and rota.
	 Now set a time limit for Sts to read the article again and 
to match the solutions (A–H) to the problems. Encourage 
them to look at each problem and then choose an 
appropriate solution from the list.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  B    ​2  E    ​3  H    ​4  A    ​5  F    ​6  D    ​7  G    ​8  C
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the two questions.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 For question 1, find out which solution Sts thought was 
better for each problem – you could simply do this with 
a show of hands and ask a couple of Sts to give reasons. 
Then elicit from the class if there are any other solutions. 
For question 2, elicit a few opinions and experiences from 
various Sts.
4	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding 
advice
a	 Focus on the situation and read it as a class.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication Argument!, A on p.109, B on 
p.113.
	 Get Sts to read their role in the role-play and decide what 
they are going to say. When they are ready, tell Sts A to 
start.
	 Stop the role-play when you think it has gone on long 
enough. Elicit whether any pairs managed to agree on a 
course of action for resolving the problems.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
b	 e 7.7  Tell Sts they’re now going to listen to some advice 
about how to argue better. Focus on the task and make 
sure Sts understand it.
	 Give Sts time to read sentences 1–4. You might want to 
check Sts know the meaning of mediate (= try to end a 
disagreement between two or more people or groups by 
talking to them and trying to find things that everyone 
can agree on).
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and choose the two general points the psychologist 
makes.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
Sts should have ticked 2 and 3.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to underline the stressed words. Check 
answers and elicit that the auxiliaries have and of are never 
stressed.
1	 Where have you been all morning?
2	 I woke up in the middle of the night.
3	 Of course I’ll be there on time!
4	 We can’t have gone the wrong way!
5	 I’ll have finished in about ten minutes.
6	 What’s the point of arguing?
d	 Focus on the task and the example. Highlight that in 2–4, 
Sts are given the modal verb, but in 5–8 they have to 
choose an appropriate one. Point out that Sts can use may 
have instead of might have.
	 Give Sts time in pairs to complete B’s responses.
	 Elicit ideas from different pairs. Accept responses which 
are grammatically correct and make sense in the context.
Possible answers
2	 left it at work
3	 forgotten
4	 gone to bed so late last night
5	 You should have practised more.
6	 One of them might have met someone else.
7	 He might have been ill.
8	 We should have left earlier.
	 Then get Sts to read their conversations in pairs, practising 
stressing the correct words and using the weak form 
of have.
	 Finally, check their pronunciation by getting a different 
pair to read each conversation.
3	READING & SPEAKING  identifying solutions 
to problems
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time, individually, to 
number the words in the list, from 1 = least likely to cause 
an argument to 5 = most likely to cause an argument. If 
Sts don’t have any experience of sharing a flat or house 
with friends, get them to think of things that cause 
problems in their family home.
	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups and get them to share their 
opinions.
	 Find out if any pairs / groups disagreed.
b	 Focus on the title of the article, Classic student house 
arguments – and how to avoid them, and elicit a synonym 
for classic here (= typical ).
	 Now focus on the task and the Glossary.
	 Give Sts time to read the article to find the answer to the 
question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
who gets the biggest room, taking too long in the bathroom
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 104@@
7A
104
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 ✗ Because you’re beginning the conversation in a very 
negative way.
2	 ✓ It’s more constructive.
3	 ✓ If you’re the person who’s in the wrong, just admit it.
4	 ✗ Because it may only have happened once, and it will make 
the other person get very defensive.
5	 ✓ If you can talk calmly and quietly, the other person will be 
more responsive.
6	 ✗ Concentrate on solving the problem you’re having now.
7	 ✓ This can stop an argument that’s getting out of control.
EXTRA SUPPORT   The first time Sts listen, tell them just to tick 
or cross 1–7 according to the psychologist’s advice. Check 
answers. Then play the audio again and get Sts to write 
down the reasons the psychologist gives.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.127–128, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
d	 Give Sts time to look at the sentences they ticked in c 
(2, 3, 5, and 7) and remind them that the psychologist 
recommends using these sentences in an argument.
	 Now tell Sts they are going to do the role-play they did in 
a again. Elicit the situation in a from the class.
	 Put Sts in new pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell 
them to go to Communication Argument!, A on p.109, 
B on p.113. The focus is on arguing better, so ideally, Sts 
should take the same A or B role as they did last time 
round, and try to improve their approach.
	 Get Sts to re-read their role in the role-play. Then tell 
Sts B to start. Monitor to see if Sts are doing what the 
psychologist said they should.
	 Stop the role-play when you think it has gone on long 
enough, and get feedback to see if Sts think they were 
able to solve their issues better this time.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
GRAMMAR IN CONTEXT
e	 Focus on the two examples and read the rules with the 
class.
	 Now give Sts time to rewrite sentences 1–5 with would 
rather.
	 Check answers.
1	 I’d rather go to the cinema
2	 I’d rather not go to the party
3	 Would you rather meet
4	 I’d rather you didn’t
5	 I’d rather your parents stayed
EXTRA IDEA   To give Sts more oral practice, get them, in pairs 
or round the class, to take turns to look again at sentences 
1–5 and say them aloud using would rather.
f	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs. Tell them to take 
turns asking and answering each question. Remind 
them to start with Would you rather…? when asking their 
partner a question, and to answer with I’d rather, and give 
a reason.
e 7.7
(script in Student’s Book on pp.127–128)
In life, we sometimes have disagreements with people. It could 
be with your partner, with your boss, with your parents, or with a 
friend. When this happens, the important thing is to try not to let a 
difference of opinion turn into a heated argument. But of course, it’s 
easier said than done.
The first thing I would say is that the way you begin the conversation 
is very important.
Imagine you live with your partner, and you’re feeling annoyed 
because you feel that you always do most of the housework. If 
you say, 'Look, you’re not doing your share of the housework,’ 
you’re beginning the conversation in a very negative way, and the 
discussion will very soon turn into an argument. It’s much more 
constructive to say something like, ‘I think we’d better have another 
look about how we divide up the housework. Maybe there’s a better 
way of doing it.’
My second piece of advice is simple. If you’re the person who’s in 
the wrong, just admit it! This is the easiest and best way to avoid an 
argument. Just apologize – say to your flatmate, your parents, or 
your husband, ‘Sorry, it was my fault,’ and move on. The other person 
will have more much respect for you if you do that.
The next tip is, don't exaggerate. Try not to say things like, 'You 
always forget our wedding anniversary,' when perhaps this has only 
happened once before, or, 'You never ever remember to turn the 
lights off.' This will just make the other person get very defensive 
because what you're saying about them just isn't true.
If you follow these tips, you may often be able to avoid an argument. 
But if an argument does start, it’s important to keep things under 
control, and there are ways to do this.
The most important thing is not to raise your voice. Raising your 
voice will just make the other person lose their temper, too. If you 
find yourself raising your voice, stop for a moment and take a deep 
breath. Say, ‘I didn’t mean to shout. I’d rather we didn’t argue, but 
this is very important to me,' and continue calmly. If you can talk 
calmly and quietly, you’ll find the other person will be more ready to 
think about what you’re saying.
It’s also very important to stick to the point. Try to keep to the topic 
you’re talking about. Don’t bring up old arguments, or try to bring 
in other issues. Just concentrate on solving the one problem you’re 
having, and leave the other things for another time. So, for example, 
if you’re arguing about the housework, don't suddenly say, ‘And 
another thing, I was really disappointed with my birthday present – 
you didn’t make any effort at all.’
And my final tip is that, if necessary, call ‘Time out,’ like in a sports 
match. If you think that an argument is getting out of control, then 
you can say to the other person, ‘Listen, I’d rather talk about this 
tomorrow, when we’ve both calmed down.’ You can then continue 
talking about it the next day, when perhaps both of you are feeling 
less tense and angry. That way, there’s much more chance that 
you’ll be able to reach an agreement. You’ll also probably find that 
the problem is much easier to solve when you’ve both had a good 
night’s sleep.
But I want to say one last thing which I think is very important. Some 
people think that arguing is always bad, but that isn’t true. Conflict 
is a normal part of life, and dealing with conflict is an important part 
of any relationship, whether it’s three people sharing a flat, a married 
couple, or just two good friends. If you don’t learn to argue properly, 
then when a real problem comes along, you won’t be prepared 
to face it together. Think of all the smaller arguments as training 
sessions. Learn how to argue cleanly and fairly. It will help your 
relationships become stronger and last longer.
c	 Get Sts to focus on the seven sentences from typical 
arguments and see if they can remember what the 
psychologist said about each.
	 Play the audio again the whole way through. You might 
want to pause it from time to time to give Sts time to tick 
or cross the sentences and note why each item is correct 
or wrong.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 105@@
7A
105
Vocabulary notes
There are various reasons why Sts may confuse different 
pairs of verbs, e.g. L1 interference, different verbs existing 
in English where Sts’ L1 just uses one, or the fact that the 
form of two different verbs is very similar.
Make sure Sts get as much practice as possible with the 
verbs which are confusing for them.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Remind them they 
might need to change the form of the verb and to write 
their answers in the verbs column.
	 e 7.9  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.9
Verbs often confused
1	 I need to discuss the problem with my boss.
2	 I often argue with my parents about doing housework.
3	 I didn’t realize you were so unhappy.
4	 I didn’t notice that Karen had changed her hair colour.
5	 Jack always tries to avoid arguing with me.
6	 My dad can’t prevent me from seeing my friends.
7	 When are you going to pay me back the fifty pounds that I 
lent you?
8	 Could I borrow your car tonight? I know you’re not using it.
9	 My parents don’t mind if I stay out late.
10	 It doesn’t matter if we’re five minutes late.
11	 Can you remind me to call my mum later?
12	 Remember to turn off the lights before you go.
13	 I expect that Daniel will forget our anniversary. He always does.
14	 We’ll have to wait half an hour for the next train.
15	 I wish I was a bit taller!
16	 I hope that you can come on Friday. I haven’t seen you for ages.
17	 Arsenal won the match five–two.
18	 Arsenal beat Manchester United five–two.
19	 Tom always refuses to discuss the problem.
20	 Tom always denies that he has a problem.
21	 The cost of living is going to rise again this month.
22	 It’s hard not to raise your voice when you’re arguing with 
someone.
23	 Go and lie on the bed if you’re tired.
24	 I usually lay my baby on the bed to change his nappy.
25	 The men had been planning to rob the bank.
26	 If you leave your bike unlocked, somebody might steal it.
27	 I think I should warn you that Liam doesn’t always tell the truth.
28	 My teachers are going to advise me what subjects to study 
next year.
	 Now focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the 
verbs column, look at the sentences, and see if they can 
remember the missing verbs.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts a few minutes, either in 
pairs or individually, to complete the gaps with the bold 
verbs. Remind them that they may need to change the 
form of the verb.
	 Check answers.
1  mind, matter    ​2  remember, remind    ​3  robbed, stolen    ​
4  advise, warn    ​5  prevent, avoid    ​6  borrow, lent    ​7  won, 
beaten
	 Monitor and help, correcting any errors of the use of 
would rather.
	 Get some feedback.
5	VOCABULARY  verbs often confused
a	 e 7.8  Focus on the task and explain to Sts that they are 
going to hear six extracts of conversations, and for each 
one, they must write a sentence using a verb in the list.  
Go through the list, making sure Sts know the meaning of 
all the verbs.
	 Focus on the example and ask Sts what they might hear 
on the audio (e.g. a man saying ‘I didn’t do it’).
	 Play the first extract and then pause the audio to make 
sure Sts understand what they have to do.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each extract to give Sts 
time to write their sentences.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2	 They’re discussing something.
3	 She’s warning someone about something.
4	 They’re arguing about something.
5	 She’s advising someone about something.
6	 He’s refusing to do something.
e 7.8
1
A	 So what do you have to say for yourself?
B	 I didn’t do it! It definitely wasn’t me that did it. It must have been 
somebody else who stole the phone.
2
A	 OK, so who would like to go first? James?
B	 Well, one idea is to make this new marketing campaign entirely 
digital, and just have online advertisements.
C	 Interesting. Though I’m not sure that would work. What do you 
think, Sarah?
D	 Well, I'm not too sure about that...
3
A	 Don’t even think of swimming here. There are crocodiles! Look, 
there’s a sign over there.
B	 What?! Let’s get out of here…
4
A	 The A-two-four-five? Oh no! We must have gone the wrong way.
B	 Of course we’ve gone the wrong way. You should have taken 
the second exit at the roundabout. What’s the point of having a 
satnav if you don’t do what it says?
A	 Well, if you knew the way to your cousin’s house, then we 
wouldn’t have to use the satnav. Why didn’t you phone her before 
we left? It’s always me who has the responsibility.
B	 That is so not true...
5
A	 …so I just don’t know what to do.
B	 Well, I think maybe you ought to talk to her. She probably doesn’t 
realize how much she upset you and how offended you feel.
6
A	 OK, so lunch with my parents next Sunday.
B	 Sorry, but no. I’m not going. You can go if you like, but I’m 
absolutely not prepared to go to another family Sunday lunch.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs to do the activity.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Do the activity orally, and elicit sentences 
from Sts after pausing the audio.
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Verbs often confused 
on p.158.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 106@@
7A
106
	 Repeat this process three more times, until Sts get 
back their original piece of paper. Remind Sts that they 
can respond not only to the original post, but to other 
comments in the thread as well (as in an authentic online 
forum discussion).
	 Now give Sts time to read all the comments. They should 
decide who wrote the best arguments and why they were 
effective.
	 Get some feedback from various groups.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and get them to ask each other the 
questions. Encourage them to ask for more information 
where appropriate.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get feedback from different pairs.
6	READING & WRITING  contributing effectively 
in online exchanges
a	 Before Sts look at the article, ask them if they ever read 
any comments people have made online, e.g. in forums, in 
response to news articles, or on social media sites. Do they 
ever write any comments / take part in online discussions? 
Elicit examples of things they’ve commented on, if any.
	 Focus on the task and the title of the article, How to win an 
online argument. Go through the Glossary with the class. 
Elicit or model the pronunciation of thread /θred/.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and answer the two 
questions.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts to cover the article, 
and elicit some ideas, before they read.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Suggested answers
Get your timing right  Be polite  Use evidence 
Show consideration for others’ opinions  Know when to give up
	 Now ask Sts which tips they think are the most important 
and why.
b	 Focus on the task and elicit from the class what 
ChangeMyView is (a website where users invite others to 
challenge their views and present alternative opinions).
	 Give Sts time, in pairs or individually, to improve the 
highlighted phrases.
	 Check answers.
Suggested answers
1	 Be polite. ➔ ‘I’m sorry, I don’t agree.’
2	 Use evidence. ➔ ‘According to some research I read,…’
3	 Show consideration for others’ opinions. ➔ ‘It may be true that 
a lot of young people…’
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Focus on sentences 1–4 and make sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, e.g. private school, abolish, vegan, etc.
	 Now put Sts in groups of four. Assign each student a 
number 1–4, and make sure they have a piece of paper 
each to write on.
	 Tell Sts to either write the number of the statement or 
the statement itself at the top of the paper. Then tell each 
student to look at the argument for their number and to 
write a short response. They can agree or disagree with 
the statement, and they should give a brief reason. 
	 Monitor and help with vocabulary. Remind Sts to try to 
use the advice from the article they’ve just read in their 
responses.
d	 Now tell Sts to pass their piece of paper to the next 
person in their group. They must read their classmate’s 
comment and respond to it.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 107@@
7B
107
	7B	 It’s all an act
1	GRAMMAR  verbs of the senses
a	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do.
	 Give Sts a few minutes to choose an adjective or two from 
the list and think how they are going to mime it.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to do the activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Tell Sts to go to the Vocabulary Bank 
Feelings on p.157 if they can’t remember the meaning of 
some of the adjectives.
b	 Focus on the task and the film still at the top. If Sts 
don’t know Keira Knightley, tell them that she is a very 
successful and popular British actress.
	 Ask Sts what kind of film they think it is, and if anyone has 
seen it. Don’t tell them if they are correct or not at this 
point.
	 Then get Sts to look closely at the film still and, in pairs, 
choose the best options to complete sentences 1–3. Tell 
them that more than one option may be possible.
	 Elicit some opinions, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct 
or not.
c	 e 7.10  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Elicit some of the details about the scene 
from various Sts to check that Sts have understood the 
‘story’.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts listen, write the following proper 
names from the film on the board and say them aloud: 
CECILIA TALLIS /səˈsiːlɪə tælɪs/, CAMBRIDGE /ˈkeɪmbrɪdʒ/,  
ROBBIE /ˈrɒbi/, BRIONY /ˈbraɪəni/.
1  a    ​2  a    ​3  c
e 7.10
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
This still is from the film Atonement, a period drama set in the 
nineteen thirties. It shows Keira Knightley, who plays Cecilia Tallis, 
the elder daughter of a wealthy family, and James McAvoy who 
plays Robbie, the son of the family’s housekeeper. Cecilia is studying 
at Cambridge University, and, unusually, Robbie is too, his studies 
being paid for by Cecilia’s father. Despite moving in very different 
circles at university, they have always been close and they are now 
back at the family home for the holidays. This evening, there’s going 
to be a dinner party, to which Robbie has been invited. In this shot, 
he is following her in to dinner. She is feeling anxious and indecisive, 
because she has just realized that she is in love with him, but knows 
that their relationship would be frowned on given their difference in 
status. Despite this, soon after they declare their love for each other. 
The film was one of Knightley’s first big starring roles. It won several 
awards and was nominated for several others, including costume 
design. This green dress is one of the stunning outfits she appears in.
d	 Focus on the task and do it as a whole-class activity.
looks like + noun
looks + adjective
looks as if + clause
e	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 7B on p.145.
 G   verbs of the senses
 V   the body
 P   silent consonants
Lesson plan
The general topic of this lesson is body language.
The first half of the lesson starts with the grammar 
presentation on verbs of the senses and how they are used 
grammatically. Sts also look at uses of as, e.g. He works as a 
builder. She’s as slim as me. I enjoy activities such as swimming 
and jogging, etc. They then look at film stills of actors in 
well-known films and discuss who the people are, how they 
are feeling, and what they are doing, using She looks…, 
He looks like…, She looks as if…. Sts then practise using 
the same structures with sounds, feels, tastes, etc. This is 
followed by Reading & Listening, where Sts read an exercise 
on how to improve their acting skills, and then try it out. 
They then listen to three more exercises and complete the 
instructions. Finally, Sts do the three acting exercises which 
they listened to.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts extend their vocabulary 
related to the body, first revising facial features, and then 
learning, in addition to new body parts, verbs and verb 
phrases connected to the body. Sts then do a speaking 
activity where they describe photos to each other and 
put the grammar and vocabulary into practice. The 
pronunciation focus which follows is on silent consonants, 
e.g. in calf and thumb. Then Sts read an article about how 
to spot a liar, and do a speaking activity in which they have 
to work out if their partner is telling the truth or lying. The 
lesson ends with Sts writing a description of a photo.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  verbs of the senses p.175 
Communicative  Two photos p.206 (instructions p.187) 
Vocabulary  The body p.225 (instructions p.215)
For students
Workbook  7B
Online Practice  7B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.70 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
Check Sts understand the meaning of the quote.
Ask Sts if they agree with Rachel Weisz.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 108@@
7B
108
A	 historical drama (The Queen)
B	 fantasy (Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them)
C	 comedy (Burn after Reading)
D	 horror (Get Out)
Sts’ own answers (see script 7.12)
e 7.12
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
A
Helen Mirren won a well-deserved Oscar for her performance as 
Queen Elizabeth II in The Queen. The film is about how the Royal 
Family responds to the tragic death of Diana, Princess of Wales, in a 
car crash in nineteen ninety-seven. The Queen had had a troubled 
relationship with Diana, who had divorced Prince Charles. When 
Diana dies, she feels the death is a private affair, and wants to protect 
her grandchildren, Princes William and Harry, from the paparazzi, 
so she keeps them at her castle in Scotland. However, there is a 
massive outpouring of grief from the general public, who surround 
Buckingham Palace with flowers, and both the Prime Minister and 
Prince Charles think the Queen should return to London. At first, she 
refuses, but in the end, she is persuaded to come back, and in this 
scene, the climax of the film, she inspects the thousands of flowers 
outside the palace. Her expression shows a mixture of feelings: 
sadness, perhaps some surprise at the strength of the public’s love 
for Diana, and perhaps relief that she had made the right decision in 
the end to come back to London.
B
This is a scene from the fantasy film Fantastic Beasts and Where 
to Find Them, which is a prequel to the Harry Potter films. Set in 
nineteen twenty-six, the film stars Eddie Redmayne as the wizard 
Newt Scamander, who comes to New York with a suitcase containing 
several magical creatures. When he’s at the bank, one of the 
creatures escapes from the suitcase. In this scene, he is desperately 
trying to recapture it, and is watching, horrified, as it starts stealing 
things from people in the bank. J.K. Rowling herself both wrote the 
script and co-produced the film, and it was the first film set in Harry 
Potter’s wizarding world to win an Oscar.
C
Frances McDormand, who won an Oscar for best actress in Three 
Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri, is without doubt one of the 
most versatile actresses of her generation. This still is from the 
Coen brother’s black comedy Burn After Reading, which also starred 
George Clooney and Brad Pitt. McDormand plays the role of Linda 
Litzke, a personal trainer who, with her co-worker Chad, tries to 
steal money from a retired CIA worker. Linda is in desperate need 
of money, mainly because she’s obsessed with expensive cosmetic 
surgery. In this scene, she’s discussing with the doctor the work 
she wants done. During the discussion, the doctor has suggested 
that she have an operation to get rid of her crows’ feet – the lines 
and wrinkles around the eyes. Linda protests that they’re baby, tiny 
crow’s feet, and as the doctor explains the procedure, she feels more 
and more unsure and indecisive about what to do. The genius of 
McDormand’s acting is that although the character of Linda is self-
centred, superficial, and not very bright, McDormand manages to 
portray her as a true American heroine.
D
This still shows Daniel Kaluuya in the two-thousand-seventeen 
American horror movie Get Out. Daniel plays the role of Chris, a 
young black photographer who goes to meet the parents of his 
white girlfriend Rose, who live in a large house in the country. 
Although the parents try to make it clear that they are not at all 
racist, Chris quickly realizes that there is something very strange 
about them, and about the black servants they employ. In this 
scene, Rose’s mother, a psychiatrist who practises hypnotherapy, 
is hypnotizing him. Although in theory it is to help him to stop 
smoking, here she gets him to relive the horror and the shock of the 
evening when he was six years old and his mother was killed in a car 
accident. Kaluuya was nominated for an Oscar for his performance, 
and the movie won the Oscar for best screenplay.
Grammar notes
look / feel / smell / sound / taste
Sts have previously studied look + adjective and look like 
+ noun. Here Sts learn to use these structures with the 
other verbs of the senses and also the structure as if (e.g. 
He looks as if he needs a holiday). They also focus on the 
difference between look and seem.
•	 Rule 3:  look, feel, etc. + as if + clause
Point out to Sts that we sometimes use like instead of as 
if (e.g. He looks like he needs a holiday) in conversation. In 
written English, as if or as though are usually preferred.
You may want to point out that smell and taste are also 
often used with of when we think something really is 
what it smells / tastes of, e.g. Open the window – it smells 
of gas in here. This strawberry ice cream really tastes of 
strawberries. When we use these verbs with like, we 
are saying that something smells or tastes similar to 
something else, e.g. Does rabbit taste like chicken?
	 Focus on the example sentences for look / feel / smell / 
sound / taste and play audio e 7.11 for Sts to listen and 
repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Go through the feel like and as box with the class.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
2  G    ​3  A    ​4  L    ​5  K    ​6  J    ​7  C    ​8  E    ​9  D    ​10  I    ​11  H    ​
12  B
b
1  look as if    ​2  smells    ​3  sounds like    ​4  taste like    ​5  sound 
as if    ​6  feels    ​7  seem    ​8  feels like    ​9  tastes    ​10  smells as if
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
f	 Put Sts in pairs, and get them to match the stills to the film 
genres in the list. Tell them to guess if they don’t know.
	 Elicit ideas, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct yet. Ask 
them if they know the names of the films the stills are 
from, and anything about any of them.
g	 Now, with Sts in the same pairs, focus on the instructions. 
Give Sts time to read 1–3, and then check they understand 
what they have to do.
	 Monitor, checking for correct use of the target language 
structures.
h	 e 7.12  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
ideas in f and g.
	 Play the audio again if necessary.
	 Elicit some of the ideas from the class for each film still, 
and check who got the closest answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 109@@
7B
109
c	 Focus on Exercise 1 Developing your imagination and give 
Sts time to read it. Check they have understood by eliciting 
exactly what you have to do in this exercise. Now focus on 
the photo and elicit what the emotion is (surprise / shock).
	 Put Sts in groups of four or five. Set a time limit for them 
to come up with as many reasons as possible as to why he 
might be feeling this emotion. One person in each group 
should be the secretary and make a note of their ideas.
	 Elicit some ideas from each group to see which has been 
the most imaginative.
d	 e 7.14  Focus on the task and tell Sts they are now 
going to listen to a drama teacher explaining three more 
exercises. Play the audio for Sts to listen and match each 
exercise to what it is for.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
paying attention to details  3 (What were they wearing?)
showing emotions  4 (The ‘magic’ image)
using body language  2 (Stroking an animal)
e 7.14
(script in Student’s Book on p.128)
Exercise two is called Stroking an animal.
This exercise is often used in drama classes for beginners, to help 
them to develop their body language. It should be done in a group.
Each person must think of an animal they really like. It can be a wild 
or tame animal, big or small. Then imagine stroking it. Think about 
where it is: in your hand, in your arms, standing or sitting next to 
you. Now, one by one, mime the action to the rest of the group. They 
have to guess which animal it is.
***
OK, now, exercise three is called What were they wearing?
This exercise is aimed at developing attention. Attention is very 
important for an actor, as you have to be able to observe every detail 
of other people.
The exercise is done in a group, with one person acting as the host. 
In a group, sit in a circle and, for three minutes, try to focus on what 
everyone is wearing. It’s important to remember as many details 
as you can: clothes, accessories, etc. After three minutes, close 
your eyes unless you are the host of the game, and the host asks 
questions, for example, ‘Anna, tell me, please, what’s Helen wearing?’, 
‘John, what colour are Anna’s shoes?’, etc. At the end, everyone 
opens their eyes and checks the answers.
***
The last exercise we’re going to do today is exercise four, The ‘magic’ 
image.
Showing emotions onstage or on camera can be very hard for some 
beginners. One trick, which this exercise helps with, is to develop a 
way of recalling the desired emotion.
The exercise can be done individually or in groups. Choose one 
emotion, for example  ‘anger ‘, and then on a piece of paper, write 
down some situations that make you angry – for example, noisy 
neighbours, or bad drivers. If you are doing this in a group, show each 
other what you’ve written down – you may want to choose some ideas 
from another person’s list to add to your own list. Choose no more 
than five situations in total. When you have your final list, think of an 
image for each situation. For example, for noisy neighbours, it could be 
a dog; for bad drivers, a car, and so on. Now the important part – you 
need to create one new image on the sheet of paper which combines 
your separate anger images, for example, a car with a dog in the back, 
etc. This is your ‘magic image’ of anger. Recalling this image will help 
you to show anger when you ‘re acting. You can do the same thing 
with other emotions, such as happiness, sorrow, and so on. So now 
let’s actually do these exercises. We’ll start with number two, stroking 
an animal. So if you can get into groups of five or six, we'll get going.
i	 e 7.13  Focus on the instructions. Tell Sts they are going 
to hear some sounds which they have to identify. You 
could do this as a whole-class activity and get Sts to call 
out answers as you play each sound, or get Sts in pairs to 
silently write down their answers, and check answers at 
the end.
	 Point out that Sts may feel they are missing some of the 
vocabulary they need to describe the sounds accurately 
(engine, cheer, etc.). Encourage them to think laterally and 
use the words that they know to describe what they think 
is happening.
Possible answers
1	 It sounds as if / like they’ve just had an argument.
2	 It sounds as if / like a player has just missed a goal.
3	 It sounds as if / like the plane has just landed.
4	 It sounds as if / like they’re opening a bag of crisps.
5	 It sounds as if / like they’re brushing their teeth.
6	 It sounds like a lift.
7	 It sounds as if / like they’re cooking / cutting vegetables.
8	 It sounds as if / like they’re making tea.
9	 It sounds as if / like they’re turning on the computer.
10	 It sounds like a dog eating its dinner.
e 7.13
(Sound effects for the following:)
1	 car pulling up, two people getting out and slamming the doors, 
opening front door, woman says, ‘I’m going to bed.’
2	 a football crowd reacting to a near miss
3	 a plane’s engines being turned off after the plane has landed
4	 somebody opening a bag of crisps
5	 someone cleaning their teeth with an electric toothbrush
6	 a lift going up (or down)
7	 somebody cutting vegetables
8	 water boiling, mugs and spoons being taken out
9	 somebody turning on a computer
10	 a dog eating dry dog food
j	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Guess what it is, A on p.109, B on p.113.
	 Go through the instructions, making sure Sts understand 
they mustn’t say what the picture is, but they must say 
what type of things it is, e.g. a vegetable, a kind of fruit, etc., 
and describe it using look / smell / feel / taste like or  
as if…, etc. Point out the example, but do not read it aloud 
as it is the first one they need to tell their partner.
	 When Sts are ready, focus on the instructions in b–d.
	 Get feedback and find out who got the most correct 
answers.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
2	READING & LISTENING  understanding 
instructions
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Give Sts time to read the introduction to How to improve 
your acting skills and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
In a group
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 110@@
7B
110
e 7.15
b
1	 eye
2	 stubble
3	 wrinkles
4	 lips
5	 neck
6	 cheek
7	 forehead
8	 chin
c
eyebrow, eyelash, eyelid
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. 
e	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The body on p.159.
Vocabulary notes
Sts should know all the basic parts of the body, and here 
they expand their knowledge and also learn the words for 
organs, some of which they may have already seen when 
doing the vocabulary for illnesses and injuries.
The verbs related to parts of the body will probably all be 
new and will require extra practice.
	 Focus on 1 Parts of the body and organs and get Sts to 
do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 7.16  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.16
The body
1 Parts of the body and organs
4	 ankle
1	 calf
2	 heel
3	 knee
7	 elbow
6	 fist
9	 nails
5	 palm
8	 wrist
13	 bottom
10	 chest
14	 hip
12	 thigh
11	 waist
15	 brain
18	 heart
17	 kidneys
16	 liver
19	 lungs
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
!   Don’t focus on silent consonants at this point, as Sts are 
going to practise this in the next section.
	 Now do Activation and get Sts to cover the words, look 
at the pictures, and try to remember the words.
	 Focus on 2 Verbs and verb phrases and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
e	 Now focus on the instructions for how to do the three 
exercises.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each exercise has been 
mentioned (see *** in script 7. 14), to give Sts time to 
complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  an animal    ​2  imagine stroking it    ​3  mime the action to 
the rest of the group    4  is the host    ​5  in a circle    ​6  what 
everyone is wearing    ​7  close your eyes    ​8  you’re the host    ​
9  asks questions    ​10  one emotion    ​11  anger    ​12  situations 
that make you feel angry    ​13  your list    ​14  five situations​    ​
15  your final list    ​16  an image for each situation    ​17  one new 
image    ​18  your separate images
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.128, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Put Sts back in the groups of four or five they were in for 
Exercise 1 Developing your imagination in c. Give them time 
to do the three exercises.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback. For Exercise 2 Stroking an animal, you 
could get a couple of Sts to mime in front of the class. 
For Exercise 3 What were they wearing?, you could find out 
which Sts were best at remembering the details.  
For Exercise 4 The ‘magic’ image, you could ask some Sts to 
share their images with the class.
3	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  the body
a	 Focus on the two photos and do the questions as a 
whole-class activity.
The photos are ’mug shots’ and would have been taken when 
the man was arrested by the police.
b	 Focus on the task and go through the words in the list 
to elicit the pronunciation of forehead /ˈfɔːhed/, stubble 
/ˈstʌbl/, and wrinkles (silent w). You could point out that 
forehead is also sometimes pronounced /ˈfɒrɪd/, but that 
/ˈfɔːhed/ is more common.
	 Point out that chin (8) has been done for them, and then 
get Sts, in pairs or individually, to match the words to the 
features in the photos.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before you start the exercise, you could 
revise the basic vocabulary of the face. Quickly sketch a face 
on the board with nose, ears, head, hair, and mouth, and 
check Sts can remember and pronounce these words.
c	 Get Sts, in pairs or individually, to answer the questions.
d	 e 7.15  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
answers to b and c.
	 Check answers. For c, you could point to the three words 
on yourself, or get Sts to show you on themselves, before 
checking where the features are in the photos.
b  see script 7.15    c  eye
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 111@@
7B
111
4	PRONUNCIATION  silent consonants
Pronunciation notes
Many English words have a silent consonant which is 
not pronounced. Emphasize to your Sts that when they 
check the pronunciation of a new word in a dictionary, 
the phonetic transcript will help them to see when a 
consonant (or syllable) is not pronounced.
a	 Focus on the task. Remind Sts to say the words aloud to 
help them.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Elicit answers before playing the audio.
b	 e 7.19  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by getting Sts to write the words on 
the board and cross out the silent consonants (they are 
marked in orange in the key).
calf  comb  kneel  palm  thumb  wrinkles  wrist
e 7.19
See words in Student’s Book on p.72
	 Then ask Sts the two questions.
At the beginning of a word, kn is pronounced /n/, and wr is 
pronounced /r/.
At the end of a word, mb is pronounced /m/.
EXTRA IDEA   Elicit more words beginning with kn and wr, 
e.g. know, knife, wrong, wrap, write, and ending in mb, e.g. 
bomb, lamb, etc., but not the words in c.
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to do it in pairs. You 
could do the first two with the class (1 honest, 2 fasten). 
Tell Sts not to write the words.
d	 e 7.20  Tell Sts to match the words A–L to the phonetics 
in c .
	 Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
e 7.20
1	 H	 honest 
2	 F	 fasten
3	 J	 muscle
4	 K	 whistle 
5	 A	 aisle
6	 E	 doubt 
7	 D	 design 
8	 G	 half 
9	 L	 whole 
10	 B	 calm 
11	 C	 climb 
12	 I	 knock 
	 Now play the audio again and tell Sts to cross out the 
silent consonant in each word.
	 Check answers (see the bold consonants in orange in the 
key) and make sure Sts can remember the meaning of all 
the words.
1  honest    ​2  fasten    ​3  muscle    ​4  whistle    ​5  aisle    ​
6  doubt    ​7  design    ​8  half    ​9  whole    ​10  calm    ​11  climb    ​
12  knock
EXTRA SUPPORT   Give Sts time to practise saying the words. 
You could also play the audio again, pausing after each word 
for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 e 7.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.17
2 Verbs and verb phrases, b
1	 bite your nails
2	 blow your nose
3	 brush your hair / brush your teeth
4	 comb your hair
5	 fold your arms
6	 hold somebody’s hand
7	 touch your toes
8	 suck your thumb
9	 shake hands / shake your head
10	 shrug your shoulders
11	 raise your eyebrows
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of the 
verb phrases, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA IDEA   Pause the audio after each line and get Sts to 
mime the action.
	 Now focus on c. Explain that these verbs describe the 
movement of a part of the body, e.g. wink (demonstrate 
it). Then get Sts, individually or in pairs, to do the exercise.
	 e 7.18  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 7.18
d
1	 He winked at me to show that he was only joking.  eye
2	 The steak was tough and difficult to chew.  teeth
3	 When we met, we were so happy, we hugged each other.  arms
4	 Don’t scratch the mosquito bite. You’ll only make it worse.  nails
5	 She waved goodbye sadly to her boyfriend as the train left the 
station.  hand
6	 These days, men don’t always kneel down when they propose 
marriage.  knee
7	 The teacher frowned when she saw all the mistakes I had 
made.  forehead
8	 The painting was so strange I stared at it for a long time.  eyes
9	 She got out of bed, and yawned and stretched.  mouth / arms
10	 If you don’t know the word for something, just point at what you 
want.  finger
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A 
(book open) say a verb phrase to Sts B, who mime the 
action. Sts then swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 7B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
EXTRA IDEA   Tell Sts you are going to give them some 
instructions and they have to mime the action. Demonstrate 
by saying Shake hands with the person next to you, and check 
Sts are all doing the correct thing.
Read out some or all of the instructions, pausing after each 
imperative and checking that Sts are doing it correctly:
Fold your arms.  Raise your hand.  Scratch your head.  Bite 
your nails.  Wink.  ​Wave goodbye.  ​Stare at the person next 
to you.  Point at the board.  Stretch your arms.  Shrug your 
shoulders.  Touch your toes.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 112@@
7B
112
	 Sts now swap roles and repeat the process for question 2.
	 They then repeat the process for questions 3 and 4.
e	 Find out, with a show of hands, how many Sts guessed 
correctly for both situations in d. 
	 Then ask if Sts think Thomas Ormerod’s techniques 
helped them.
6	WRITING  describing a photo
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Describing a photo on p.119.
a	 Focus on the first photo and give Sts time to read the 
description. Tell them not to worry about the gaps.
	 Elicit some opinions.
b	 Focus on the task and the words and phrases in the list. 
Point out that the first one (In the foreground) has been 
done for them.
	 Get Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Check answers.
2  In the centre    ​3  in front of    ​4  On the left    ​5  outside    ​ 
6  In the background    ​7  behind    ​8  opposite
c	 Go through the instructions. Put Sts in pairs to discuss 
what they think the people in photo 2 are thinking or 
feeling. Tell them also to discuss how they will divide the 
information into paragraphs.
	 Focus on the Useful language: describing a photo or 
picture box and go through it with Sts.
d	 Either get Sts to write the description in class (set a time 
limit of, e.g. 20 minutes), or get them to write at home for 
homework.
e	 Sts should check their description for mistakes before 
giving it in.
e	 Now focus on the phrases and get Sts to practise saying 
them in pairs.
	 Get some Sts to say the phrases to the class.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read each phrase to the class, getting Sts 
to repeat it after you. Then put Sts in pairs and get them to 
practise saying them.
5	READING & SPEAKING  understanding the 
principles of an experiment
a	 Focus on the title of the article, The best way to spot a liar…
or is it?, and remind Sts what the verb to spot means (= to 
see or notice sth, especially suddenly).
	 Give Sts time to read the first paragraph and answer the 
questions.
	 Check answers.
The accepted ‘best way’ is using body language clues such 
as avoiding eye contact, blushing, fidgeting, and laughing 
nervously.
The purpose of Ormerod’s experiment was to develop a more 
reliable method of lie detection which relied on people’s 
words, not their body language.
b	 Focus on phrases A–E and make sure Sts understand all 
the lexis, e.g. open questions, rapport, contradictions, etc.
	 Give Sts time to read the rest of the article and complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1  B    ​2  A    ​3  E    ​4  D    ​5  C
c	 Focus on statements 1–6 and make sure Sts understand 
all the lexis.
	 Give Sts time to read the article again and mark the 
statements T (true) or F (false). Remind them to correct the 
false ones.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 T
2	 F (They had to prepare their own cover story.)
3	 F (The officers randomly selected passengers for questioning.)
4	 T
5	 F (Only if passengers suddenly began to give much shorter 
answers, or began to avoid answering directly.)
6	 F (The experiment proved that verbal clues are far more 
effective than body language in helping to identify a liar.)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Go through the instructions 
and make sure Sts know what to do. Sts A start by 
asking Sts B the first question. Sts B must reply Yes, I have 
irrespective of whether it is true or not. Then Sts A must 
use some of the techniques mentioned in the article to 
get information and work out whether Sts B are telling 
the truth or not. When Sts A have finished, they should tell 
their partner whether they think they are lying or telling 
the truth. Sts B should then ‘confess’.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 113@@
CE6&7
113
	6&7	Colloquial English  Talking about…
performances
Lesson plan
In The Interview, the person interviewed is Simon Callow, a 
British actor, stage director, and author.
In The Conversation, Sts watch three people discussing 
whether a live performance is always better than a recorded 
one. Sts then discuss this question as well as a couple of 
other questions related to the topic, focusing on phrases 
for giving yourself time to think, checking others agree with 
you, and phrases for apologizing for interrupting. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Colloquial English 6&7 
Quick Test 7 
File 7 Test
For students
Workbook  Colloquial English 6&7 
Can you remember? 6&7
Online Practice  Colloquial English 6&7 
Check your progress
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts that they are going to watch an interview with an 
actor who has worked in the theatre and in the cinema. 
Write on the board:
ACTING IN THE THEATRE / ACTING IN THE CINEMA
Give Sts two or three minutes, in pairs, to think of some of 
the differences between these two kinds of acting.
Get feedback from the class and write their ideas on the board.
1	r THE INTERVIEW  Part 1
a	 Books open. Focus on the biographical information 
about Simon Callow. Either read it out loud, or give Sts 
time to read it. You might want to point out that a CBE 
(Commander of the Order of the British Empire) is an 
award given by the Queen to someone who has made a 
distinguished contribution in their area of activity.
	 Focus on the question and do it as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–5. 
Remind Sts that they do not need to correct the false ones 
at this stage.
	 Go through the Glossary with the class.
	 Play the video (Part 1) once the whole way through for 
Sts to mark the sentences T (true) or F (false).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they watch.
1  F    ​2  T    ​3  T    ​4  T    ​5  F
I = interviewer, S = Simon Callow
Part 1
I	 How did you get into acting?
S	 I was about eighteen; it was my first real job, and it was a very 
unusual job because I was working in the box office of the Old Vic 
theatre. Then, not only did I get to see an awful lot of plays, but 
I also met the actors and I was able to sneak into rehearsals, in the 
theatre – quite illegally – and I became fascinated by the work of 
the theatre.
I	 What in particular fascinated you?
S	 The thing that fascinated me, as I said, was when I was in 
rehearsals, there was this…the work of the theatre, the sort of 
work it was. So, I’d stand at the back of the Old Vic theatre when 
the actors were rehearsing, but mostly it consisted of people 
sitting rather glumly about saying, ‘Well, I don’t know how to do 
this, I don’t know how to do this, I don’t know how to make this 
scene work, I don’t understand my character,’ and the director 
would try to help them to understand the character or suggest 
a move here or a move there, or maybe they’d try walking in 
a different way or putting on a different hat, and bit by bit it 
started to fall into place. And I thought, ‘What a wonderful job, 
what a fantastically interesting job to wrestle with these kinds of 
problems, try to understand the characters, trying to find out how 
best to express them and show them off.’ So I…I came to acting 
very much from that point of view.
I	 The role that first made you famous as a young actor was playing 
Mozart in the original theatre production of Amadeus, which later 
went on to become a film. What was the most challenging thing 
about playing the part of Mozart?
S	 What was a challenge was that Mozart was a person who’d 
actually lived and was indeed one of the greatest artistic geniuses 
of the whole of Western civilization, and I was a great lover and 
admirer of Mozart’s music, so there was a tremendous…er…
challenge to bridge the character that Peter Shaffer had written. 
Peter Shaffer knows all about Mozart; he could so that Mozart 
was…was…er…er…sort of a smutty…er…hysterical child, 
really…er…in a lot of the play. My job was to reconcile that 
with the fact that he wrote The Marriage of Figaro, and that was 
tremendously hard.
I	 Was Mozart one of your most satisfying roles?
S	 No, I wouldn’t say that…that it was the most satisfying. It was 
the most exciting because its…its fame…er…almost from the 
moment it was announced was overwhelmingly greater than 
anything I had ever done, and to be honest, ever have done 
since. The fact that the play was very, very controversial when 
it opened proved to be…er…very, um, um, shocking for many 
people, only increased the excitement around it, and it was…
er…er…astonishing to look out into the auditorium every night 
and to see Paul Red-Newman, or, or, or, or Robert Redford, or, or, 
or Ava Gardner, or Margaret Thatcher sitting out there, because 
everybody had to see that play.
c	 Before Sts watch again, put them in pairs to discuss why 
they think 1 and 5 are false.
	 Play the video again the whole way through, pausing as 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 His first job was in the box office of the Old Vic theatre.
5	 It was the most exciting role he has had because it made him 
famous.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 114@@
CE6&7
114
1	 He is referring to the audience in a theatre.
2	 He is saying that you can never give the perfect performance 
as a theatre actor.
3	 The film actor can’t do anything, as the editor has all the power.
4	 He is referring to the cameras.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
r Part 3
a	 Focus on the photos and ask Sts if they know either of the 
actors.
	 Now focus on the Glossary and the task.
	 Play the video (Part 3) once the whole way through for 
Sts to do the task. Play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When you play the video the second time, 
pause after each question has been answered and get Sts to 
compare what they have understood.
1	 When they are good, he loves it. When they aren’t good, it is 
painful.
2	 He was very lucky to see them. Most people nowadays have 
forgotten them. They were wonderful onstage.
3	 He is the only modern actor who approaches his roles as the 
great actors used to.
4	 He hates wearing it. It’s uncomfortable and sticky.
5	 He doesn’t get stage fright, but he becomes very self-
conscious.
Part 3
I	 Do you enjoy watching other actors acting?
S	 I love watching other actors acting. I’ve been obsessed by acting 
since I was a child, and I’m a great connoisseur of it, and I think 
I’m quite a good judge of it, and so I adore watching other actors 
work when it’s good. When it’s not, it’s a great pain to me.
I	 Who were the first great actors you saw?
S	 As a young man, and a boy, I was extraordinarily lucky to see 
that fabled generation of actors of…of Gielgud and Richardson, 
Olivier, Edith Evans, Peggy Ashcroft. People now almost all 
completely forgotten. Er…er…er…even if they made movies, 
it’s unlikely that people of a younger generation know who they 
are, but…but…er…when…when they were alive and kicking, 
and…er…doing their extraordinary work onstage, it…it…it was 
something quite…quite remarkable. I mean, it was…it was the 
sort of thing that nobody attempts any more.
I	 Do any modern actors come close to that golden generation?
S	 In movies, not always, but…but sometimes Daniel Day-Lewis 
does…er…I think probably approach a role in the way that a lot 
of them might have approached it.
I	 Is there anything you don’t like about acting?
S	 I don’t much like wearing make-up. I sweat a lot, it comes off, 
it’s uncomfortable, it’s sticky, and I do everything I can to avoid 
wearing make-up.
I	 Do you still get stage fright?
S	 I don’t get stage fright, but I do get self-conscious, and I hate that 
and I wish I didn’t, particularly at events like first nights – because 
I don’t know how it’s impossible to ignore the fact that there are 
at least 100 people sitting out there, judging you. You know, I 
think almost all actors feel tremendous longing for the first night 
to be over, but it has to happen. It’s like a sort of operation – it’s, 
you know, it’s got to happen, it’s going to hurt, but you will feel 
better afterwards.
d	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback.
r Part 2
a	 Focus on the task and Glossary.
	 Give Sts time to read 1–4, making sure they know the 
meaning of crucial and utterly in number 2.
	 Play the video (Part 2) once the whole way through. Then 
play again if necessary.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 He loves them both.
2	 There’s an audience.
	
Every single performance is utterly different.
3	 The director and editor because they can change the way the 
scene or the characters appear by the way they edit it (e.g. they 
can make a sad scene funny or an actor appear to be stupid).
4	 No because when you act in film, you have the cameras right 
in front of you.
Part 2
I	 Over your career, you have acted in the theatre and you have also 
acted in many films. Which do you prefer?
S	 They’re absolutely different media: they require different things 
from you as an actor – I love them both. But they are each of 
them completely different; you bring completely different things 
to them. Obviously, the crucial difference with the theatre is that 
there’s an audience there, and that’s such an important aspect of 
it in every way. It’s important because you have to reach out to 
them – make sure that everybody can hear and see what you’re 
doing. The beauty of the theatre is that every single performance 
is utterly different from every other one.
I	 How do you motivate yourself to play the same character again 
night after night?
S	 I think as you get older, you realize that, um, you never get it right. 
I…I mean, I’ve…I’ve probably about half a dozen times in my 
forty years of acting have thought, ‘Well that was a really good 
performance,’…er…but it can always be better. And so, one goes 
to the theatre every day hoping that it’ll be in some way better. 
Er…er…you know, there is always the possibility you might get it 
right. I mean, you never do; you never can.
I	 So what for you is the main difference with film acting?
S	 Er…in movies or…or television film – which is what almost all 
television is nowadays – um, a lot of those responsibilities are…
lie with the director and the editor. And having directed a film 
myself, I know perfectly well that you can make a sad scene 
funny; you can make a slow scene fast…er…er…in the editing 
suite. It’s…it’s an astonishing…er…power that a director and 
editor have. Um…er…you can make a character seem stupid 
just by editing them a certain way, or make them seem brilliant 
by editing them in a different way. So in that sense, the actor is 
rather powerless.
I	 Anything else?
S	 The other thing that’s very hard about acting on film is that, 
hilariously, it’s regarded as a sort of naturalistic medium, but in no 
sense is it that for the actor, because you’re…you’re, you know, 
first of all, there are some, you know, little metal objects right in 
front of you, sort of, staring at you as you’re doing your love scene 
or whatever else it might be.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–4.
	 Play the video again the whole way through for Sts to 
complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When you play the video the second time, 
pause after each question has been answered and get Sts to 
compare what they have understood.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 115@@
CE6&7
115
I = interviewer, D = Devika, J = John, M = Mark
I	 Do you think it’s always true that a live performance is better than 
a recorded one?
D	 That’s a really difficult question. I love going to the cinema. I will 
happily go to the cinema on a Saturday night and watch a big 
flashy superhero film where there’s really good sound effects and 
music and visuals that obviously have already been made by you 
know, computer graphics and it’s really fun, but I also have a really 
big soft spot in my heart for going to the theatre. Going to the 
theatre to watch some Shakespeare or any modern plays − um, 
live, onstage, maybe with a, a band or an orchestra underneath 
the stage you can see or you definitely hear. I think that has a 
certain magic to it that you can’t replicate on, in the cinema. It’s a 
very different experience. 
J 	 And is it true then that it is better for the, the audience to actually 
enjoy it more if it’s a live performance rather than a pre-recorded 
or a, a film?
D	 That’s the thing − for me personally as an audience member, I, it’s 
really hard − I think it’s difficult to say it’s better or worse or which 
is the ultimate best experience because they’re just very different.
J	 But if you go to a live one though you, then you participate don’t 
you because you’re part of it − there’s the actors and everything 
that’s happening…
D	 True.
J	 …and then you are part of it because they’re bouncing off you 
and it’s, so it is true.
M	 A lot will, a lot will depend on, on factors other than just what’s 
happening in front of you on the stage or the pitch or whatever 
type of event it is. If you’re sitting, let’s say, high up or with a 
slightly obstructed view or the seats are uncomfortable or you 
don’t have enough leg room − you know, there are other factors 
that could sway your enjoyment such that seeing a recorded 
version of the, the live event that you’ve been at would actually 
have been preferable. Um, I think a good example would be 
going to a major sporting event now because they’re nearly 
always oversubscribed, you know, crowds of people everywhere.  
I was at a major rugby match recently and we were sitting 
way, way up in the gods at the very back of the stadium and 
they had giant screens which were kind of showing the match 
simultaneously and in fact, all around me I could see a whole 
sea of heads sort of turned to the screen because you got, you 
got a better view and you could better understand what was 
happening on the pitch by looking at the TV screen rather than 
peering down at what was going on several hundred metres 
down below you.
D	 True. Yeah. It’d say it’s similar…
J	 As a live performance − excuse me, yeah – as a live performance 
though, you are involved if you are in the audience, obviously, 
because you’re watching and seeing what happens and you’re 
looking at the nuances and whatever, so I suppose it is true that 
it’s um, that it is more − it’s better, I suppose.
D	 I think it also really heavily depends on what the audience is 
like that you’re with. So I’ve been − I love live music, and I’ve 
been to plenty of live music events − concerts and festivals and 
things, you know, around the country, and I love them. However, 
sometimes you’ll be in a crowd of other people enjoying the 
music and they’re talking and it’s noisy and actually I couldn’t 
hear anything in the first place − I couldn’t actually hear the band 
or the singer or the musician I wanted to hear, so I could have just 
gone home and listened to a CD.
J	 That’s intriguing isn’t it, the difference between the two.
M	 At the end of the day, it’s very subjective. So much depends on 
the person, the event, the arena, and so on.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–5. Check 
they understand all the lexis, e.g. flashy, sway, etc.
	 Play the video again for Sts to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
b	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback. You could tell the class 
if you have any favourite actors, why you like them, and 
which of their characters you like best.
2	r LOOKING AT LANGUAGE
	 This exercise looks at a feature of spoken English which is 
illustrated by the interviewer – using modifiers to make 
his language more expressive. Focus on the Modifiers 
box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
extracts 1–7.
	 Play the video, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Check answers.
1  fantastically    ​2  hard    ​3  greater    ​4  absolutely    ​
5  completely    ​6  different    ​7  extraordinarily
1	 …I thought, ‘What a wonderful job, what a fantastically 
interesting job…’
2	 My job was to reconcile that with the fact that he wrote The 
Marriage of Figaro, and that was tremendously hard.
3	 …its fame, almost from the moment it was announced was 
overwhelmingly greater than anything I had ever done…
4	 They’re absolutely different media: they require different things 
from you as an actor…
5	 …you bring completely different things to them.
6	 The beauty of the theatre is that every single performance is 
utterly different from every other one.
7	 As a young man, and a boy, I was extraordinarily lucky to see that 
fabled generation of actors of…of, of Gielgud and Richardson, 
Olivier,…
3	r THE CONVERSATION
a	 Focus on the photo and tell Sts they are going to watch 
these three people answer a question, which they will see 
on the screen. 
	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. Give Sts time to read the three options.
	 Play the video and pause after the question. Remind Sts of 
the pronunciation of live when it is an adjective. 
	 Now play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and tick the correct option.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening script and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
3	 it’s impossible to generalize because it depends on the event.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 116@@
CE6&7
116
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
1	 Positive. She loves watching big flashy superhero films in the 
cinema on a Saturday night. She likes the sound effects and 
music and visuals. 
2	 Positive. She likes seeing Shakespeare and modern plays in 
the theatre. They are magical, a very different experience from 
the cinema. 
3	 Negative. Sitting too high up or having a bad view at the 
theatre, uncomfortable seats or not enough legroom.
4	 Negative. He noticed that the crowd were watching the big 
screen because they had a better view rather than looking 
straight at the pitch. 
5	 Negative. They can be noisy, so she can’t hear the music and 
would be better listening to a CD at home. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts 
in pairs and then get some feedback.
d	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the six 
extracts. 
	 Play the video for Sts to listen and complete the missing 
words.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the video 
again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  really difficult question    2  it’s difficult to say    3  don’t you    ​
4  let’s say    ​5  you know    6  isn’t it
1	 That’s a really difficult question. I love going to the cinema. 
2	 I think it’s difficult to say it’s better or worse…
3	 But if you go to a live one though, then you participate, don’t you, 
because you’re part of it…
4	 If you’re sitting, let’s say, high up or with a slightly obstructed 
view…
5	 I’ve been to plenty of live music events − concerts and festivals 
and things, you know, around the country, and I love them. 
6	 That’s intriguing isn’t it, the difference between the two.
e	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to answer the 
question.
	 Check answers.
give themselves time to think 	
1, 2, 4, 5
check the others agree	
3, 6 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   Dictate the following sentence stems:
1	 What's your favourite …?
2	 Which do you prefer, … or …?
3	 What the best … you have ever …?
Put Sts in pairs and get them to ask and answer the 
questions, using phrases from d to give themselves time to 
think.
f	 Put Sts in small groups of three if possible. Focus on the 
questions, and check Sts understand them. Then set a 
time limit for Sts to discuss them. 
	 Monitor and help, and encourage them to use phrases in 
d either to give themselves time to think or to check the 
others agree.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 117@@
8A
117
	8A	 Cutting crime
 G   the passive (all forms); have something done;  
it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc.
 V   crime and punishment
 P   the letter u
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is crime.
The lesson begins with a Metropolitan Police podcast, which 
gives practical tips on how to stay safe in city streets. This is 
followed by a vocabulary focus on crime and punishment, 
presented through a quiz based on information from an 
ex-burglar, and a pronunciation focus on the different 
pronunciations of the letter u. The first half of the lesson 
finishes with Sts talking about local crime in their area, 
witnessing crimes, and any experience they have of crimes 
such as theft and vandalism.
In the second half of the lesson, some light-hearted news 
stories about crimes which went wrong provide a natural 
context for the revision of passive forms, and Sts also learn 
how to use the causative have (I had my bag stolen), as well 
as the structure it is said that… / he is said to… They then 
read an article about a man who was a victim of the modern 
crime of identity theft, after he had posted photos online. 
Sts discuss whether they think certain activities should be 
illegal or not, and how perpetrators should be punished. The 
lesson ends with Sts writing a magazine article expressing 
their opinion on either the legality of downloading music or 
squatters’ rights.
More materials
For teachers 
Photocopiables 
Grammar  the passive (all forms); have something done;  
it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc. p.176 
Communicative  Good laws? p.207 (instructions p.187) 
Vocabulary  Crime and punishment p.226  
(instructions p.216)
For students
Workbook  8A 
Online Practice  8A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.76 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Val McDermid is also a feminist and 
socialist. Most of her writing is crime, but she has also written 
a children’s book as well as non-fiction. Some of her novels 
have been adapted for TV.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and whether they 
agree with it.
1	LISTENING  using your knowledge of the world to 
help you understand formal advice
a	 Focus on the situation and do the questions as a whole-
class activity. You could demonstrate by telling Sts how 
you would feel and what you might do to feel safer.
b	 Focus on the crime prevention website page and the task. 
You could ask Sts if similar websites exist in their country.
	 Either get Sts to read the introduction individually, or read 
it out loud.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Ask Sts some comprehension questions 
to check they have understood the introduction, e.g. What 
does ‘make yourself less of a target’ mean? (Make yourself 
less obvious / visible) Explain ‘moving with purpose’ in your 
own words. (Walking with an aim, knowing where you are 
going) etc.
	 Now put Sts in pairs and set a time limit for them to look 
at each picture and decide what piece of advice they 
think they represent. They should also try to complete the 
gaps in the headings (highlight that there is just one word 
missing in each headline).
	 Elicit some ideas from various pairs, both for the advice 
and the headings, but don’t tell Sts if they are correct 
or not.
c	 e 8.1  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to the police 
podcast. Play the audio, pausing after each piece of advice 
to give Sts time to complete the headings and listen to 
the advice.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then check 
answers. Make sure Sts understand each heading. Elicit or 
model any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  prepared    2  assertive    3  aware    4  Hide    5  against    
6  instincts    7  plan    8  trouble
e 8.1
(script in Student’s Book on pp.128–129)
Stay safe
Street crime is often unplanned, so making yourself less of a target, 
moving with purpose, and being aware of your surroundings will go 
a long way to keeping you safe when you’re out and about. Here are 
eight important pieces of advice.
One: Be prepared. Always plan your route in advance. Carry a fully 
charged mobile phone and some cash, and tell someone where 
you’re going.
Two: Be assertive. From the moment you step out onto the street 
in the morning, you need to look assertive and act and walk with 
confidence. This will always make you appear in control and you will 
seem much less vulnerable.
Three: Be aware. Using a mobile phone, whether you’re calling, 
messaging, or looking up information, reduces your awareness of 
your surroundings. So does listening to loud music on headphones, 
or wearing a hooded jacket or sweatshirt.
Four: Hide it. Keep your valuables hidden either in a bag or under 
your clothes. This includes your phone, other devices such as 
cameras or tablets, and jewellery. Remember – out of sight, out of 
mind. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 118@@
8A
118
Five: Go against the flow. When you’re walking on the pavement, 
always face towards the oncoming traffic. This will make it more 
difficult for thieves on two wheels to ride up from behind and snatch 
your bag. But don’t forget to still be aware of anyone approaching 
from ahead of you. 
Six: Trust your instincts. At night, try to avoid walking alone in places 
such as parks and quiet side streets, or in fact, in any area you don’t 
know. If you do have to walk, keep to busy places where there is 
a lot of activity, good lighting, and CCTV. And if you’re on public 
transport, it’s much better to travel with people you know or stick to 
routes that other people are using.
Seven: Make a plan. Discuss with friends what to do if something 
were to go wrong on your night out together, for example, if you 
were to get separated. Agree on a backup plan and keep an eye on 
each other during the evening. And stick to what you’ve agreed.
Eight: Look out for trouble. Alcohol and drugs make it harder for you 
to assess risks and decide how to deal with them. So, be careful how 
much you drink, and never let your glass or bottle out of your sight, 
in case someone puts something into your drink.
Stay safe!
	 Now find out what advice Sts had predicted correctly in b.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen again and this time they 
must answer questions 1–8.
	 Give Sts time to read the questions, making sure they 
understand them.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each piece of advice to 
give Sts time to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Your route
2	 It makes you appear in control and less vulnerable.
3	 Call, message, look up information
4	 Your phone, camera, iPod, jewellery
5	 It makes it more difficult for thieves on bikes to ride up behind 
you and snatch your bag.
6	 A lot of activity, good lighting, CCTV
7	 Make a plan of what you would do if something went wrong, 
agree a backup plan, keep an eye on each other during the 
evening
8	 Someone might put something into your drink
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.128–129, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Either do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs 
and then elicit some feedback for each question. You 
could also ask Sts if they know of any other advice to 
stay safe.
2	VOCABULARY  crime and punishment
a	 Focus on the task and the title of the quiz, making sure Sts 
know what a burglar is. Elicit or model its pronunciation.
	 Give Sts time to do the quiz individually.
	 Get them to compare their choices with a partner. If they 
have chosen different options, get them to explain their 
choice.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Quickly go through the quiz before Sts 
work individually, to make sure Sts understand all the lexis, 
but not the highlighted words or phrases.
b	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Beat the burglar, A on p.109, B on p.113.
	 Point out to Sts that the answers are from an ex-burglar. 
Give Sts time to read their answers.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
c	 In their pairs, Sts tell each other what they read in 
Communication Beat the burglar.
	 Then give Sts time to go through their quiz in a and check 
how many answers they got correct.
	 Find out with a show of hands how many Sts got all the 
answers correct. You could also ask Sts if they found any 
answers surprising.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
d	 Get Sts to match the highlighted words in the quiz to 
definitions 1–5.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
e	 e 8.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers by writing the words onto the board. 
Elicit or model the pronunciation of burgled, burglar, and 
burglary.
e 8.2
1	 burglar
2	 be burgled
3	 burglary
4	 break into
5	 steal
f	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Crime and 
punishment on p.160.
Vocabulary notes
Crimes and criminals
Point out that:
•	 the words for the criminal and the verb are usually 
another form of the word for the crime. The exceptions 
are drug dealing, where we tend to say sell drugs; fraud, 
where we use the verb to commit fraud; and theft, 
where the verb is steal. The verb terrorize also exists, 
but is normally used to mean ‘to frighten and threaten 
people so that they will not oppose sth or will do as 
they are told’, e.g. Some local gangs are terrorizing the 
neighbourhood. So, terrorize does not exactly equate 
with the crime of terrorism, which refers more to 
setting off bombs, etc.
•	 all the crime verbs are regular except for set (set – set), 
steal, and sell, which Sts should already know.
What happens to a criminal
Highlight:
•	 that charged with sth = formally accused of sth
•	 that trial is used for more serious offences, and court 
case for less serious cases.
•	 that court can refer to the building or to the institution, 
e.g. judge and jury. Common expressions with court are 
to go to court or take sb to court.
•	 the difference between evidence (= things which 
indicate that sb might be guilty) and proof (= things 
that show that sb is definitely guilty).
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 119@@
8A
119
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to look at the words in the two lists 
and try to remember their meaning.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  the letter u
Pronunciation notes
Like all vowels in English, the letter u can be pronounced 
in different ways, and crime vocabulary has several 
examples of the different pronunciations. Highlight to Sts 
that ur, unless followed by an e, is normally pronounced 
/ɜː/, and they should watch out for the ‘hidden’ /j/ in 
words like accuse, music, etc.
Remind Sts also that in gu + vowel, the u is silent, e.g. 
guard, guess, etc.
a	 Focus on the task and elicit the sound and picture word 
for each row: /ʌ/ up, /ʊə/ tourist, and /juː/. 
	 Now get Sts, individually or in pairs, to put the words in 
the correct row. Encourage them to say the words out 
loud before deciding which row they go into.
b	 Now repeat the process and elicit the sound and picture 
word for each row: /ɪ/ fish, /ɜː/ bird, and /ɔː/ horse.
	 Give Sts time to put the words in the correct row.
c	 e 8.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
answers to a and b.
	 Check answers and then elicit answers to the questions.
See script 8.5
1  short    2  caught and court    3  /g/
e 8.5
a
up /ʌ/	
drugs, judge, mugger, punishment, smuggling
tourist /ʊə/	
jury
/juː/	
accuse
b
fish /ɪ/	
guilty
bird /ɜː/	
burglar, murderer
horse /ɔː/	
caught, court, fraud
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each group of 
words for Sts to listen and repeat.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If these sounds are difficult for your Sts, 
it will help to show them the mouth position. You could 
model this yourself or use the Sound Bank videos on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre. 
d	 e 8.6  Tell Sts they must listen and write the five 
sentences they hear.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence to give Sts 
time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers, eliciting the sentences onto the board.
	 Focus on 1 Crimes and criminals and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.3  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.3
Crime and punishment
1 Crimes and criminals
1	 J	 blackmail, blackmailer, blackmail
2	 M	bribery, bribe
3	 E	 burglary, burglar, break in / burgle
4	 G	drug dealing, drug dealer, sell drugs
5	 L	 fraud, fraudster, commit fraud
6	 F	 hacking, hacker, hack
7	 C	 hijacking, hijacker, hijack
8	 A	 kidnapping, kidnapper, kidnap
9	 P	 mugging, mugger, mug
 10	 B	 murder, murderer, murder
 11	 D	rape, rapist, rape
 12	 K	 robbery, robber, rob
 13	 H	smuggling, smuggler, smuggle
 14	 Q	stalking, stalker, stalk
 15	 N	terrorism, terrorist, set off bombs
 16	 O	theft, thief, steal
 17	 I	 vandalism, vandal, vandalize
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the chart, look 
at situations A–Q, and say the crimes.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may want to add other words for 
crimes, e.g. arson, shoplifting, corruption, etc.
	 Now focus on 2 What happens to a criminal and get Sts 
to do a individually or in pairs. 
	 e 8.4  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 8.4
2 What happens to a criminal
The crime
1	 Carl and Adam committed a crime. They robbed a large 
supermarket.
2	 The police investigated the crime.
3	 Carl and Adam were caught driving to the airport in a stolen car.
4	 They were arrested and taken to a police station.
5	 The police questioned them for ten hours.
6	 Finally, they were charged with armed robbery.
The trial
7	 Two months later, Carl and Adam appeared in court.
8	 They were accused of armed robbery and car theft.
9	 Witnesses told the court what they had seen or knew.
 10	 The jury looked at and heard all the evidence.
 11	 After two days, the jury reached their verdict.
 12	 There was no proof that Adam had committed the crime.
 13	 He was acquitted and allowed to go free.
 14	 Carl was found guilty. His fingerprints were on the gun used in 
the robbery.
 15	 The judge decided what Carl’s punishment should be.
 16	 He sentenced him to ten years in prison.
	 	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult 
to pronounce.
	 Get Sts to focus on the bold words under The trial and 
elicit their meaning.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 120@@
8A
120
e 8.7
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
N = newsreader, P = police officer
N	 Police in Stockport are looking for a man who is said to be 
Britain’s most polite armed robber. The robber always says ‘please’ 
and ‘thank you’ when he orders shop staff to give him money 
from the till. It is believed that he is a tall man in his early forties 
and that he wears a mask and washing-up gloves during the 
robberies. It is thought that he has robbed at least four shops in 
Stockport in recent weeks. DI Anderson from Greater Manchester 
Police has given a warning to the public.
P	 He is reported to be polite to his victims, but there’s nothing 
polite about armed robbery. Last week, this man used a knife to 
threaten shop staff and they were terrified. Saying ‘please’ and 
‘thank you’ doesn’t change that.
e	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the four 
extracts from the listening.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each extract is said on 
the audio, for Sts to listen and complete the gaps. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  to be    2  that he is    3  that he has robbed    4  to be polite
	 Now ask Sts how the structure is different between 1 and 
4, and 2 and 3.
After is said and is reported…, use to + infinitive.
After it is believed… and it is thought…, use that + subject + verb.
	 You might want to highlight that after I / you / we / they, 
you also use to + infinitive.
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8A on p.146. 
Grammar notes
The passive (all forms)
Sts at this level should be familiar with all the different 
forms of the passive, but it is likely that they will be more 
confident with the present and past forms that they have 
been using since Pre-intermediate level than with the 
more complex forms (e.g. past continuous, past perfect, 
gerund, and infinitive).
You may want to quickly revise the basic forms with 
a chart which shows that it is the verb be that keeps 
changing in each sentence, e.g.
A new car park
is built every year.
was built last year.
is being built at the moment.
has just been built.
The use of by in passive sentences
Some Sts may tend to overuse by and want to include it 
every time they use the passive. One of the exercises here 
tries to correct this tendency.
have something done (causative have)
The most common use of this structure is to get 
somebody to do something for you, e.g. I need to have 
my car serviced. However, it can also be used to express 
something, usually bad, that has been done to you, e.g.  
I had my wallet stolen.
You may want to tell Sts that, especially in this first use, we 
sometimes use get instead of have, e.g. I need to get my car 
serviced.
e 8.6
1	 Luke was accused of smuggling drugs.
2	 ‘Murderers must be punished,’ said the judge.
3	 The burglar is doing community service.
4	 The jury said he was guilty of fraud.
5	 The mugger was caught and taken to court.
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again, pausing after each 
sentence for Sts to listen and repeat.
e	 Focus on the task and put Sts in small groups.
	 Give them time to ask and answer the questions. 
Encourage them to ask for and give as much information 
as possible.
	 Monitor and correct pronunciation where necessary.
	 Finally, get feedback from individual Sts and contribute 
opinions / experiences of your own if appropriate.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do this as a whole-class activity, 
especially with a small class, eliciting answers from different 
Sts and contributing yourself.
EXTRA IDEA   You could also ask Sts if they know of any 
famous or recent examples of the crimes below, and 
whether they can remember who was involved / what 
happened: 
murder 
kidnapping 
stalking 
blackmail 
 
drug dealing 
fraud 
hijacking
4	GRAMMAR  the passive (all forms); have something 
done; it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc.
a	 Give Sts time to read the three stories and answer the 
question. Tell them not to worry about options 1–9.
	 Check answers.
A  Story 2    B  Story 1    C  Story 3
b	 This exercise revises different forms of the passive and Sts’ 
ability to choose between the active and passive forms.
	 Get Sts to read the stories again and to circle the correct 
form of the verb.
	 Get them to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  being caught    2  landed    3  was spotted    4  snatched    
5  was demonstrating    6  was caught    7  had been broken    
8  called    9  has been charged
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
2
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts, in pairs, to retell the three stories 
from memory. Or put Sts in groups of three and get each 
student to retell one of the stories.
d	 e 8.7  Tell Sts they are going to listen to another crime 
story.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check the 
answer.
He always says ‘please’ and ‘thank you’ when he orders people to 
give him money.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 121@@
8A
121
	 Set a time limit for Sts to read the article once and answer 
the questions. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words or phrases.
1	 Steve and his sister; Martin said it was him and his dead wife.
2	 Because one showed Steve (having breakfast in a hotel) with 
long hair, and one that was supposed to have been taken 
later the same day showed Steve (in a pool) with shorter, 
darker hair. 
3	 Steve had scratched his face; the scammer used it to claim he 
(Martin) had been in a car accident.
c	 Give Sts time to read questions 1–5 and their three 
options.
	 Get Sts to read the article again and answer the questions.
EXTRA IDEA   You could get Sts to underline the parts of the 
text that give them the answers.
	 Check answers.
1  c    2  b    3  b    4  a    5  b
d	 Focus on the highlighted words and phrases related 
to scams. Get Sts, in pairs or individually, to guess their 
meaning. Tell them to read the whole sentence, as the 
context will help them guess. Then they should match 
them to a synonym in the list.
	 Check answers, either explaining in English, translating 
into Sts’ L1, or getting Sts to check in their dictionaries.
1  thought that    2  trick (vb)    3  said that (even though 
it wasn’t true)    4  fraud    5  make use of (in a dishonest 
way)    6  give    7  chosen    8  careful
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
6	SPEAKING
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the instructions and go through each question, 
eliciting the meaning of any words you think your Sts 
don’t know, e.g. threatening, breed, etc.
	 Give Sts time to decide whether they think each ‘situation’ 
is illegal or not, why (not), and if illegal, what they think 
the punishment should be.
c	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. They should 
choose a secretary who will make notes of their decisions. 
You may want to set a time limit, but extend it if they 
need more time.
	 Get feedback. Start with the first question and ask each 
secretary what their group concluded. 
	 If there’s time, do the same with the other ones.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Remind Sts of the language they can 
use for saying what they think, by writing the following 
examples on the board:
I THINK / DON’T THINK IT SHOULD BE ILLEGAL / AGAINST THE LAW 
BECAUSE… 
I THINK PEOPLE WHO…SHOULD BE FINED / SENT TO PRISON / BANNED 
FROM… / MADE TO…
it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc.
These ‘advanced’ passive structures are included more for 
recognition than production, as they are low-frequency 
in spoken English. However, Sts will certainly come across 
them if they read news websites or watch TV in English.
	 Focus on the example sentences for the passive (all 
forms) and play audio e 8.8 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for have something done (causative have) e 8.9 
and it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc. e 8.10. 
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1	 My phone has been stolen.
2	 My house is being painted.
3	 A meeting will be held to discuss the problem.
4	 If the bomb hadn’t been found, it would have exploded.
5	 Miranda thinks she was followed / was being followed last 
night.
6	 I hate being woken up when I’m fast asleep.
7	 The local police station is going to be closed.
b
1	 Tim had his social media account hacked. 
2	 Have you ever had your bag snatched? 
3	 They need to have the CCTV checked to make sure that 
it’s working.
4	 We had our photo taken in front of the Colosseum. 
5	 As a result of the burglary, they’re going to have a safe 
put in.
c
1	 The burglar is believed to be a local man.
2	 It is said that the muggers are very dangerous. 
3	 The robbers are thought to have entered through an open 
window.
4	 It is said that the murderer has disappeared. 
5	 The trial is expected to last three weeks.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
5	READING  understanding truth and lies
a	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss questions 
1–3. You could demonstrate the activity by answering the 
questions yourself.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
b	 Focus on the photos and article, and questions 1–3, 
making sure Sts know the meaning of the adjective 
suspicious /səˈspɪʃəs/ (= feeling that sb has done 
something wrong, illegal, or dishonest, without having 
any proof) and the noun scammer /ˈskæmə/ (= a person 
who illegally tricks sb, usually with the purpose of getting 
money from them). Elicit or model their pronunciation. If 
necessary, elicit / explain that the black market is an illegal 
form of trade in which things that are difficult to obtain 
are bought or sold.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 122@@
8A
122
EXTRA IDEA   You may want to give Sts some more crime-
related topics to discuss that you think are relevant to them, 
e.g. Do you think that…?
trial by jury is a good system
parents should be held responsible for the crimes of children 
under 18, etc.
7	WRITING  expressing your opinion
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing Expressing your opinion on 
p.120.
a	 Focus on the task and read the title of the post out loud 
to the class. Elicit / Explain what a minor offence means 
(= a not very serious crime). Then ask Sts if they agree or 
disagree.
	 Give Sts time to quickly read the post to find out what the 
writer’s opinion of community service is. Tell them not to 
worry about the gaps.
	 Elicit the writer’s opinion.
The writer thinks that, in general, community service is a good 
thing.
b	 Tell Sts to read the post again and this time to complete 
the gaps with words and phrases from the list. 
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
2  In most cases    3  Firstly    4  For instance    5  whereas    
6  Secondly    7  so    8  Finally    9  In addition    10  In conclusion
c	 Focus on the task and the two titles.
	 Give Sts a little time, in pairs, to think about which title 
they want to write about.
d	 Focus on the instructions and go through points 1–3 with 
the class. 
	 Now give Sts time to think of the reasons they are going 
to write about in the main paragraphs. 
EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts could discuss the reasons they are 
going to write about with their partner from c.
e	 Focus on the Useful language: ways of giving your 
opinion, Ways of giving examples, and Sequencing 
words box and go through it with the class.
	 Go through the instructions. Then either get Sts to do the 
writing in class (set a time limit of, e.g. 20 minutes), or get 
them to write at home for homework.
f	 Sts should check their article for mistakes before giving 
it in.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 123@@
8B
123
	8B	 Fake news
c	 e 8.11  Play the audio once the whole way through for 
Sts to listen and check their guesses in b.
	 Elicit what each story is about (without going into any 
detail) and find out if any Sts had guessed correctly.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
e 8.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.129) 
Story 1
And now, some news for wine drinkers. It seems that ‘red’ and ‘white’ 
are no longer the only options. France finally has a wine to match all 
three of the colours on its national flag, as a new blue variety hits the 
shelves. Vindigo is a chardonnay that gets its distinctive blue colour 
by being passed through red grape skins. The grape skins contain 
a natural dye found in blackcurrants, red cabbage, and raspberries. 
The new wine is the responsibility of French entrepreneur René Le 
Bail. He persuaded a company in Almeria in Spain, to produce the 
wine, after he was unable to convince anyone in France to become 
involved. Around thirty-five thousand bottles of Vindigo are now 
on sale in the south of France – in the port city of Sète – for about 
twelve euros a bottle. In an interview with a French newspaper, 
Monsieur Le Bail describes the wine as ‘ideal for the summer’. He 
says that it has aromas of cherry, blackberry, and passionfruit, and 
recommends drinking it on the beach, or around the swimming pool. 
Story 2
And now for our last story today – a zoo in Egypt has denied painting 
a donkey with black stripes in order to make it look like a zebra. 
Egyptian student Mahmoud Sarhan, eighteen, was visiting the zoo in 
Cairo when he noticed the animal, which had strange-looking black 
stripes. Mr Sarhan was suspicious and took a photo of the animal, 
which appeared to have strange black marks on its face, and posted 
it online. He later told the media, ‘I knew that it was a donkey as 
soon as I saw it. I’m an artist. I know the different shape of a donkey 
and a zebra, so it was easy to tell the difference.’ After the image was 
shared on social media, it went viral. Egyptian news site Extranews.tv 
approached a local vet, who agreed to examine the photo. He pointed 
out that zebras usually have a black nose and mouth, whereas the 
animal in Mr Sarhan’s photo appears to be pale in this area. The vet 
added that authentic zebra stripes are usually straighter and clearer 
than those on the animal in Mr Sarhan’s photo. The local radio station 
contacted the zoo’s director, Mohamed Sultan. However, he refused to 
admit that the animal was a donkey.
d	 Now focus on sentence stems 1–8, and give Sts time to 
think about how they might be completed.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after the first story for Sts to 
listen and complete 1–4.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary. Repeat the same process for the second story.
	 Check answers.
1	 red grape skins
2	 Spain (Almeria), he couldn’t get anyone in France to become 
involved
3	 about €12
4	 the summer / drinking on the beach or by a swimming pool
5	 an animal with strange stripes
6	 he’s an artist and he knows what the two animals look like
7	 zebras usually have a black nose and mouth, and this animal didn’t
8	 the animal was a donkey
 G   reporting verbs
 V   the media
 P   word stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is the media, and in particular the 
very current issue of fake news.
The first half starts with Sts talking about the different media 
they use to get the news and which sections of news they 
are interested in. They then listen to two stories from the 
press and read two more stories which provide a context 
to revise the basic rules of reported speech. Sts then decide 
which story is in fact fake, i.e. invented. Extracts from the 
four stories introduce reporting verbs, such as offer, convince, 
admit, deny, etc., which are followed by gerund or infinitive 
constructions. After Sts have been to the Grammar Bank and 
learned more reporting verbs, there is a pronunciation focus 
on word stress in two-syllable verbs.
In the second half of the lesson, the vocabulary of the media 
is developed in the Vocabulary Bank and a speaking activity 
about the media. Sts then read an article about how to spot 
fake news. Finally, they watch a short documentary about 
the history of journalism.
More materials
For teachers 
Photocopiables 
Grammar  reporting verbs p.177 
Communicative  TV political debate p.208  
(instructions p.188) 
Vocabulary  The media p.227 (instructions p.216)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  The speed of news
For students
Workbook  8B
Online Practice  8B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.80 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and whether they 
agree with it. 
1	LISTENING & SPEAKING  identifying the main 
events in news stories
a	 Focus on the title of the lesson, Fake news, and ask 
Sts where they have seen this phrase (on TV news 
programmes and websites). Elicit the meaning (false 
reports of events, written and read on websites).
	 Now focus on questions 1–4 and get Sts to discuss them 
in pairs.
	 Get some feedback. You could do question 4 as a whole-
class activity.
b	 Focus on the task and either do it as a whole-class activity, 
or put Sts in pairs and then elicit some ideas, but don’t tell 
Sts if they are correct or not.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 124@@
8B
124
Emphasize the use of the negative infinitive (not to go) and 
the negative gerund (not going) after these reporting verbs.
Some of these verbs can also be used with that + clause, 
e.g. He admitted that he had stolen the recipe.
	 Focus on the example sentences and play audio e 8.12 
for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage them to copy the 
rhythm. Then go through the rules with the class.
	 Now focus on the Verbs that use a that clause box and 
go through it with the class.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs. If they do them individually, get them to 
compare with a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to 
read the full sentences.
a
1	 Jamie insisted on paying for the meal.
2	 Lauren has agreed to work late next week.
3	 I warned Jane not to wear those shoes to the park.
4	 The man admitted stealing the woman’s handbag.
5	 The doctor advised Lily to give up drinking coffee.
6	 The boss persuaded Megan not to leave the company.
7	 Freya accused me of trying / having tried to steal her phone.
8	 I apologized to Evie for not remembering her birthday.
9	 Did you manage to convince your parents to come tonight 
instead of tomorrow?
10	 My neighbour denies damaging my car, but…
b
1	 Ryan suggested going for a walk.
2	 The teacher accused Simon of copying Anna’s exam.
3	 Sam’s neighbour threatened to call the police if he had any 
more parties.
4	 The children refused to go to bed.
5	 Peter invited me to have dinner with him.
6	 Molly reminded Jack to phone the electrician.
7	 Ricky promised to never do / never to do it again.
8	 Sarah recommended trying Giacobazzi’s.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
3	PRONUNCIATION  word stress
Pronunciation notes
Sts have, by now, built up an instinct for how words in 
English are pronounced and will know that many English 
two-syllable nouns are stressed on the first syllable. 
However, many two-syllable verbs are stressed on the 
second syllable (e.g. depend ). In fact, almost all the 
reporting verbs which Sts learn in this lesson are stressed 
on the second syllable.
Highlight the difference between the /s/ sound in 
convince, persuade, promise, and suggest, and the /z/ 
sound in accuse, advise, and refuse. 
You may also want to point out that when a two-syllable 
verb has the stress on the second syllable and ends 
in consonant–vowel–consonant, the final consonant 
is doubled in the gerund and past simple, e.g. admit–
admitting–admitted, regret–regretting–regretted. If 
the stress is on the first syllable, it is not doubled, e.g. 
threaten–threatening–threatened. However, travel is an 
exception (travelling, travelled ).
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 Now focus on the two news headlines and put Sts in pairs 
to discuss them and predict what each story is about.
	 Elicit some ideas from various pairs, but don’t tell them if 
they are correct or not. 
f	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and tell them to go to 
Communication Strange, but true, A on p.109, B on 
p.113.
	 Sts A will read the first story and Sts B the second. Go 
through the instructions, making sure Sts understand they 
must highlight ten key pieces of information to help them 
retell the story to their partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could put Sts A and Sts B together to 
do a first. Then get them to check they have got the key 
elements of the story before putting them in their pairs, A 
and B.
	 When Sts are ready, focus on the instructions in b and c.
	 Get some Sts to tell the stories to the class, making sure 
they mention the main points.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   As feedback to the class, get Sts A 
to retell the story of Shark baby drama and Sts B to retell 
Football fan gets Word Cup fever.
	 Find out if any Sts had made correct guesses in e. Finally, 
deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model the 
pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
g	 Elicit ideas from the class, e.g. with a show of hands, as 
to which story is invented, getting them to say why they 
don’t think it is true.
	 Then tell Sts that the fake story (which was published on 
a satirical website) is Football fan gets Word Cup fever, and 
find out how many Sts guessed correctly.
2	GRAMMAR  reporting verbs
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to match sentences 
1–6 to the direct speech in A–F.
	 Check answers.
1  E    2  B    3  F    4  A    5  D    6  C
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 8B on p.147. 
Grammar notes
Sts should be familiar with normal reported speech with 
say / tell / ask, e.g.
Direct speech: ‘I’m sorry.’
Reported (or indirect) speech: He said he was sorry.
In this lesson, Sts are introduced to a number of specific 
reporting verbs which are followed by either the infinitive 
or gerund. Some of these verbs and the structure 
following them have already been studied in 6A.
Highlight that using these reporting verbs is an alternative 
and more exact way of reporting what someone says, e.g.
Direct speech: ‘I’m sorry I stole your recipe.’
Reported speech: He said he was sorry he had stolen the recipe.
Reporting verb: He apologized for stealing the recipe.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 125@@
8B
125
4	 Why don’t we go out for dinner? – suggest (pause)
	
She suggested going out for dinner.
5	 Shall I open the window? – offer (pause)
	
He offered to open the window.
6	 You should ask the teacher. – advise (pause)
	
She advised me to ask the teacher.
	 Then repeat the activity, eliciting responses from 
individual Sts.
4	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING  the media
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then check answers.
1  sport    2  politics    3  celebrity gossip    4  business
EXTRA SUPPORT   If Sts can’t remember the different 
categories of news, tell them to look back at 1a on p.80.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to try to guess the meaning 
of the bold verbs in a. Then they should match each verb 
to a word or phrase in the list.
	 Check answers.
1  leaves    2  is predicted    3  is going to marry    4  separate
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Look at the headlines again and ask Sts 
to think how they would say them in normal English. Ask Sts 
What kind of words get left out in headlines? (Elicit that articles 
and auxiliary verbs are often left out, e.g. A man was run over 
by a bus becomes Man run over by bus.) What form or tense is 
used for a) the future b) the passive (all tenses)? (The future is 
expressed by an infinitive, e.g. Becks to go, and passives by a 
past participle, e.g. Man stabbed on Tube.)
c	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank The media on p.161. 
Vocabulary notes
The language of headlines
Highlight that many of the ‘headline’ verbs are not 
commonly used in conversation, especially wed, vow, quiz, 
and axe.
Journalists and people in the media
Highlight the difference between a critic (the person) and 
a review (the article a critic writes), as these may be false 
friends in your Sts’ L1.
	 Focus on 1 The language of headlines and go through 
the information box with the class.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.16  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.16
The media
1 The language of headlines
1	 D  Prime Minister backs his Chancellor in latest scandal
2	 A  Thousands of jobs axed by UK firms
3	 F  Stock market hit by oil fears
4	 C  Astronaut bids to be first man on Mars
5	 E  Ministers clash over new car tax proposal
6	 H  Bayern Munich boss vows to avenge defeat
7	 B  Police quiz witness in murder trial
8	 G  Actress rows with co-star over unfair pay
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time, individually or in pairs, 
to underline the stressed syllable in each verb and to circle 
the four exceptions.
b	 e 8.13  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
Sts should have circled offer, order, promise, and threaten.
e 8.13
accuse, admit, advise, agree, convince, deny, insist, invite, offer, 
order, persuade, promise, refuse, regret, remind, suggest, threaten
	 Focus on the Spelling of two-syllable verbs box and go 
through it with the class. 
c	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to complete the 
sentences with the correct reporting verb. Point out that 
the first one (offered ) has been done for them.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
d	 e 8.14  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.14
1	 He offered to make some coffee.
2	 He refused to go.
3	 He agreed to help me.
4	 He promised to call me. 
5	 He reminded me to lock the door.
6	 He advised me to buy a new car.
7	 He invited me to have dinner.
8	 He denied breaking the window.
9	 He admitted stealing the money.
10	 He regretted marrying Susan.
11	 He suggested going to a club.
12	 The police accused him of killing his boss.
e	 Focus on the Linking box and go through it with Sts.
	 Now focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Highlight that Sts should use the 
pronoun He each time, except with the verb accuse in the 
last one, when they should begin The police…
	 Demonstrate by modelling and drilling the first sentence 
(He offered to make some coffee).
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts work individually, tell them to 
cover the right-hand column in c. Get them to look at 1, 
elicit the corresponding reported sentence from the class or 
individual Sts, and then play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) read 
in any order a direct sentence in c to their partner.  
Sts B (book closed) respond with the corresponding 
reported sentence, but this time if their partner is female, 
they should use She. Then they swap roles.
f	 e 8.15  Focus on the instructions and example.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each sentence for Sts to 
listen and form the corresponding reported speech 
sentence using the verb they hear.
e 8.15
1	 I didn’t steal the wallet! – deny (pause)
	
He denied stealing the wallet.
2	 I wish I hadn’t bought a second-hand car. – regret (pause)
	
She regretted buying a second-hand car.
3	 Of course I’ll come with you. – agree (pause)
	
He agreed to come with me.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 126@@
8B
126
IN MY OPINION / VIEW…,    
IF YOU ASK ME…    
PERSONALLY, I THINK…
I COMPLETELY AGREE / I DON’T AGREE AT ALL.    
I THINK / DON’T THINK YOU’RE RIGHT.
e	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Tell Sts to take 
turns to ask one of the questions in d and then say what 
they think, giving their reasons. Then the other Sts in the 
group should agree or disagree. 
	 Set a time limit for the groups to discuss each question.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback, finding out what the majority opinion 
was on each topic. Deal with any general vocabulary 
problems that arose.
5	READING  using headings to understand the main 
point of a paragraph
a	 Focus on the task and find out if Sts know what the Tour 
de France is (It is an annual multiple-stage bike race for men, 
held mainly in France).
	 Give Sts time to read the news report and answer the 
question. 
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
Because he isn’t experiencing the real France.
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
b	 Focus on the questions and then get Sts to read the article 
again. Elicit any aspects of the article that made Sts think it 
was fake, and ask them at what point they realized this.
EXTRA IDEA   You could find some more stories on The 
Daily Mash website and give Sts just the headlines or the 
beginning of the article, and ask them to guess the story; 
then look at the stories on The Daily Mash.
c	 Focus on the title of the article and check Sts can 
remember the meaning of the verb to spot.
	 Give Sts time to read the article and complete the eight 
headings with the words in the list.
	 Check answers. Elicit or model pronunciation if necessary.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the adjectives in e.
1  sense    2  name    3  addresses    4  date    5  spellings    
6  fake    7  images    8  trust
d	 Give Sts time to read the article again and answer the 
questions about each section.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and get Sts to cover definitions 
A–H, read the headlines, and try to remember what the 
highlighted verbs mean.
	 Focus on 2 Journalists and people in the media and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check. Check answers.
e 8.17
2 Journalists and people in the media
1	 critic	
6	 freelance journalist
2	 commentator	
7	 newsreader
3	 reporter	
8	 paparazzi
4	 editor	
9	 agony aunt
5	 presenter
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover the words in the left-hand 
column, look at the definitions, and try to remember the 
words.
	 Focus on 3 Adjectives to describe the media and get 
Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 8.18  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 8.18
3 Adjectives to describe the media
1	 D  The reporting in the paper was very sensational. 
2	 E  The news on Channel 12 is really biased. 
3	 B  I think The Observer is the most objective of the Sunday papers.
4	 A  The film review was quite accurate.
5	 C  I think the report was censored. 
	 Then get Sts to look at the adjectives and try to guess 
their exact meaning. In a monolingual class, and if you 
know the L1, elicit the meaning in your Sts’ language or 
get them to check with a dictionary. Give further practice 
of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Do Activation as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to cover sentences 1–5, look at 
sentences A–E, and try to remember the bold adjectives. 
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 8B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 The new vocabulary is recycled in this speaking activity. 
Focus on the five questions and the sentence stems. 
	 Give Sts time to read them and think about how they are 
going to answer.
EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts do the speaking activity in groups, 
you could elicit / remind Sts of some useful language for 
saying what you think and agreeing / disagreeing. Write the 
phrases on the board for Sts to use as a reference:
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 127@@
8B
127
The roads were bad, so it was very difficult to send news over long 
distances. By the time most people read these newspapers, the news 
was often very out-of-date.
This all changed when the first telegraph line was built in eighteen 
forty-four. Suddenly, journalists could send stories quickly. The 
telegraph is said to have revolutionized news reporting. This new 
style of journalism came just in time for the American Civil War. 
For the first time, news could be sent at the same time as battles 
were being fought. War correspondents, and the stories they sent, 
became very popular. But there were still problems. These war 
reports were very biased because journalists represented their own 
side in the war. There was no objectivity, and reports were usually 
censored by the army or the government. So, stories were often 
inaccurate and sometimes completely wrong!
It wasn’t until the invention of radio and television that news could 
be broadcast live. This completely transformed news and created 
the age of the mass media, where news could be communicated to 
a huge audience. 
Throughout the twentieth century, demand for news stories 
increased and news technology continued to advance. By the end 
of the century, there were hundreds of cable TV channels, lots 
of twenty-four-hour news channels, and the internet had been 
invented. Suddenly we were in the information age.
This is the HP New Media Gallery. It shows the news as it is today. 
Visitors to this exhibit are placed right at the centre of the digital 
news revolution.
They are instantly connected to the day’s news by live Twitter feeds 
showing the day’s trending news stories. They can also check out 
major news stories which were first reported on social media. These 
pictures of a plane landing on New York’s Hudson River were taken 
on a smartphone and uploaded to Twitter seconds after the incident 
had occurred.
Speaking of smartphones…
Ah, fantastic! A tweet from The White House. Oh! There’s a big 
announcement in twenty-five minutes. I’d better go! Bye!
b	 Tell Sts they are going to watch the documentary again, 
and give them time to read questions 1–7.
	 Play the video again, pausing occasionally to give Sts time 
to answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
video again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to compare their answers 
between the first and second playing of the documentary.
1	 In Washington, DC; 30,000
2	 He was believed to be one of the most dangerous pirates at 
the time; 1718
3	 On horseback; the roads were bad, so it was very difficult to 
send news over long distances.
4	 By telegraph line
5	 They were very biased because journalists represented their 
own side in the war and reports were usually censored by the 
army or the government.
6	 The inventions of radio and television
7	 The plane landing on New York’s Hudson River
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video again 
with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or 
phrases. 
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity. If you don’t come 
from the same country as your Sts, tell them about any 
newspapers or magazines that have existed there for a 
long time. You could also tell them about their reputation 
nowadays and whether or not you read them.
Introduction  For political or personal gain
1	 Because they don’t exist.
2	 There is no such newspaper.
3	 It isn’t the correct URL for ABC news, just deliberately similar.
4	 They were actually of another attack in Russia five years earlier.
5	 Because authentic news sites use editors to check the text is 
accurate.
6	 Because the surname is spelled wrong.
7	 Because these types of images are often used in order to 
make a fake story more likely to go viral.
8	 Check that the information appears on other, reputable news 
sites.
e	 Focus on the task and either get Sts to do it individually or 
in pairs.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know what the adjectives 
mean. Elicit or model pronunciation.
1	 exaggerated, misleading, improbable, doctored
2	 legitimate, reliable, trustworthy
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words. 
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a documentary about the 
history of journalism. Focus on the instructions and then 
give Sts time to read the different ways of delivering news.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and number the ways of delivering the news in the 
order they are mentioned. 
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
1  live Twitter feeds    2  Facebook    3  the Boston newsletter    
4  the telegraph line    5  radio and television    6  cable TV
The speed of news
Hi, my name’s Matt Wilder. I’m a freelance journalist based in 
Washington, D.C. At the moment, I’m trying to find a good story. I 
have a six o’clock deadline…but nothing’s going on. I know, I’ll see 
what topics are trending on Twitter. 
Today we live in the era of new media. People can access the news at 
any time, from any place on all kinds of digital devices.
The internet and social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook 
allow these news consumers to become news producers.
If you want to be a journalist, all you have to do is post an article 
online, and it can be read instantly by anyone anywhere in the 
world.
Journalism has changed a lot during the first days of the newspaper, 
and most of these changes have been driven by technology. There’s 
no better place to discover this than Washington, DC – home of the 
Newseum.
There are over thirty thousand newspapers here, covering over five 
hundred years of news. This is the Boston News-Letter, thought to be 
the first continuously published newspaper in North America.
This edition, from seventeen eighteen, reports on the sensational 
killing of Edward Teach – better known as Blackbeard – believed to 
be one of the most dangerous pirates at the time.
Reporting in the early days of journalism must have been very 
difficult. Journalists would ride their horses to the nearest town 
that had a printing press. Their reports were then published in 
a newspaper, which was often just a single sheet of paper, and 
distributed on horseback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 128@@
128 Revise and Check
r CAN YOU  understand these people?
1  a    2  c    3  b    4  a
e 8.19
1
I = interviewer, M = Melanie
I	
Is there anyone you often have arguments with?
M	
I suppose I often have arguments with my sister, and that is 
mostly about, you know, who’s going to clean the dishes, whose 
turn is it to bring out the trash, who’s going to get the toilet 
paper next, things like that.
I	
Who usually wins the argument? Why?
M	
Depends on who’s more awake at the time, they usually win 
the arguments. Yeah, they’re more, hey just do it, and the other 
person just kind of is like, oh OK fine.
2
I = interviewer, E = Erica
I	
Have you ever acted in a play or a film?
E	
I have acted in both plays and films actually. I, that’s my 
profession, I’m an actor, yeah.
I	
What was your most recent play?
E	
Hmm, OK, so my most recent play was called A Woman’s Worth, 
where I played Jayda who is a wedding planner, whose fiancé 
just refuses to make the commitment and actually get married 
to her.
I	
Did you enjoy the experience?
E	
I did enjoy the experience. I got a chance to perform in front of 
my friends and my family and my boyfriend, so that was really 
cool.
3
I = interviewer, H = Hugo
I	
Have you ever witnessed a crime?
H	
I’ve witnessed someone being sort of mugged in the street. 
So, having their, yeah, threatened unless they didn’t hand over 
their mobile phone and wallet.
I	
What happened?
H	
In the end, the, um, culprit ran off with what he’d sort of taken 
and left the individual just shocked and, yeah, a bit helpless. 
And then I think by the time the police did come it was, it was 
sort of too late.
4
I = interviewer, D = Diarmuid
I	
Where do you get your news from?
D	
Er, I read most of my news online or on my phone. Um, and I do 
use newspaper apps, um, but I’m ashamed to say that a lot of 
my news does also come through social media.
I	
What kind of news are you most interested in?
D	
Er, I’m interested in politics, er, sports, um, and really most news. 
I studied journalism, so I have an interest in it.
I	
Do you mostly believe what you hear or read in the news?
D	
Er, no, I don’t believe anything I read in the news. And I, I 
think, um, you have to filter everything you read through the 
organization that it comes from, because every, er, media outlet 
has some kind of bias.
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.41.
More materials
For teachers 
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 7&8 
Quick Test 8 
File 8 Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  must have left    2  should have told    3  might have got    
4  can’t have been    5  as if    6  tastes like    7  smells awful    
8  was being repaired    9  never be found    10  to be    11  is said  
12  the shower fixed    13  to talk    14  killing her husband    
15  apologized for being
VOCABULARY
a
1  remind    2  matter    3  stole    4  raise    5  argue    6  refuses
b
1	 calf (the others relate to hands)
2	 hip (the others are organs)
3	 wink (the others are things you do with your hand)
4	 vandal (the others are all kinds of thieves)
5	 smuggler (the others are crimes)
6	 evidence (the others are people)
c
1  chew    2  scratch    3  stare    4  frown    5  hack    6  blackmail   
7  bribe    8  quit
d
1  critic    2  biased    3  censored    4  newsreader    5  accurate
PRONUNCIATION
a
1  elbow /əʊ/    2  honest (the h is silent)    3  journalist /ɜː/    
4  shoulder /əʊ/    5  jury /ʊə/
b
1  realize    2  blackmail    3  vandalism    4  commentator    
5  objective
CAN YOU  understand this text?
a	
A web sleuth is a citizen-detective who investigates crimes by 
going online.
b
1  B    2  F    3  D    4  E    5  A    6  C
	7&8	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 129@@
 
129
9A
	9A	 Good business?
 G   clauses of contrast and purpose
 V   advertising, business
 P   changing stress on nouns and verbs
Lesson plan
The topic and lexical area of this lesson is business and 
advertising.
In the first half, the focus is on honesty (or dishonesty) 
in advertising. Sts look at words and phrases related 
to advertising and then discuss famous misleading 
advertisements. This is followed by a speaking activity in 
which Sts discuss various aspects of advertising in general, 
and cover language such as viral adverts, logos, and pop-ups. 
Sts then listen to a radio programme about how companies 
try to trick us through the use of misleading advertisements. 
This leads to the grammar, which is on clauses of contrast 
after expressions like Even though…, In spite of…, etc., and 
clauses of purpose after expressions like so that…, in order 
to…, etc.
The advertising and business topic is continued in the 
second half of the lesson, where Sts read a chapter from a 
book about the razor-and-blades business model, which was 
developed after King Camp Gillette invented the disposable 
razor blade. In Vocabulary, Sts look at words and phrases 
related to business, after which there is a pronunciation 
focus on how stress changes in words that can be used both 
as nouns and verbs, like export, increase, etc. Sts round off by 
talking about aspects of business in their country / region.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  clauses of contrast and purpose p.178 
Communicative  Tell me about… p.209  
(instructions p.188) 
Vocabulary  Business p.228 (instructions p.216)
For students
Workbook  9A
Online Practice  9A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.86 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Mark Twain (1835–1910) is best known 
for writing the classic American novels The Adventures of 
Tom Sawyer and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. He was 
also a riverboat pilot, journalist, lecturer, entrepreneur, and 
inventor.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and if they agree 
with it.
1	VOCABULARY & SPEAKING
a	 Focus on the advert and ask Sts if they have ever tried 
the drink or know what kind of drink it is (a non-alcoholic, 
high-caffeine energy drink). 
	 Then do the questions as a whole-class activity.
b	 Now tell Sts to read the article, check their answers to a, 
and to answer why Benjamin Careathers did what he did.
	 Check answers. You could ask Sts if they think this is 
an example of deliberately misleading advertising, or 
whether the company just miscalculated. Ask them also if 
they think the reaction would have been the same in their 
culture.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words and phrases.
Because Red Bull doesn’t actually give you real wings.
Possibly for the money, or the publicity, or he was really naive.
c	 Focus on the highlighted words and phrases, and give 
Sts time, in pairs, to try and work out what they mean. 
Remind them to read the whole sentence or paragraph.
	 Then point out that the first one (advertisements) has 
been done for them and get Sts to match the highlighted 
words and phrases to definitions 2–9. 
	 Check answers and elicit or model pronunciation. You 
could write ADVERTISEMENT and ADVERT on the board and 
elicit which syllables are stressed in each (advertisement, 
advert). You could also highlight the difference between 
consumer (a marketing / business term), customer (a 
more general word for sb who buys sth from a shop or a 
business), and client (sb who uses the services or advice of 
a professional person or organization).
2  claims    ​3  brands    ​4  was sued    ​5  misleading    ​
6  consumers    ​7  advertising campaigns    ​8  publicity    ​
9  slogan
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Put Sts in small groups of three, A, B, and C. Get them to 
look at the three adverts and discuss the question.
	 Elicit some ideas for each brand, but don’t tell Sts if they 
are correct.
e	 In their groups, tell Sts to go to Communication 
Misleading ads, A on p.110, B on p.112, and C on p.114.
	 Sts A read about the Volkswagen ad, Sts B read 
about Danone, and Sts C about Olay. Go through the 
instructions, making sure Sts understand they must find 
the key information for 1–3 in their advert, to help them 
tell their partners about the ad.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could put Sts A, Sts B, and Sts C 
together to do a first. Then get them to check they have got 
the key elements before putting them in their small groups.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 130@@
130
	 When Sts are ready, focus on the instructions in b and give 
Sts time to tell each other about their ads.
	 You could do c as a whole-class activity.
	 Finally, deal with any new vocabulary, and elicit or model 
the pronunciation.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
f	 Focus on questions 1–6 and quickly go through them to 
make sure Sts understand them. If they ask you what a 
viral advert is (in number 2), you can give the example of 
a video clip advertising a product which is produced by 
a company, but is then spread like a virus from person to 
person via the internet and other social networks. Elicit or 
model the pronunciation of viral /ˈvaɪrəl/.
	 Put Sts in small groups of three and give them time to 
discuss the questions.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Deal with any general vocabulary problems that arose.
	 Get some feedback from various groups. You could find 
out if Sts disagreed whilst discussing any questions, and 
then open the discussion to the class.
2	LISTENING  understanding explanations
a	 e 9.1  Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
messages 1–6.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and complete the gaps. You could pause the audio 
after each marketing technique has been discussed, to 
give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  free Bluetooth speaker    ​2  only a few    ​3  Everybody’s using    ​
4  You too    ​5  independent study    ​6  Trust me
e 9.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.129)
The first point to bear in mind is that nothing, but nothing, is ever 
free. How often have you seen adverts saying things like ’Get a free 
Bluetooth speaker when you subscribe to our magazine for six 
months?’ There’s something about the word ’free’ that immediately 
attracts us – I want it! It makes us feel clever, as if we are going to 
get something for nothing. But, of course, that Bluetooth speaker 
(which, incidentally, will probably break the second time you use it) 
wasn’t free at all. In spite of what the advert said, its price was really 
included in the magazine subscription. So don’t trust any advert 
which offers something for free.
A second trick which advertisers use is when they tell us ’There are 
only a few left! Buy now while stocks last!’ What happens to us when 
we read or hear these words? Even though we don’t really need the 
products, and maybe don’t even like them, we immediately want to 
be among the lucky few who have them. But – let’s be clear about 
this – companies just don’t run out of products. Do you really think 
the manufacturers couldn’t produce a few more if they thought they 
could sell them? Of course they could.
When it comes to new products, we, the consumers, are like sheep 
and we follow each other. So, another way advertisers have of 
getting us to use something is to tell us ’Everybody’s using it’. And 
of course, we think everybody can’t be wrong, so the product must 
be fantastic. So as to make us believe it, they use expressions like 
’It’s a must-have’ or ’It’s the in-thing’, and they combine this with a 
photograph of a large group of people, so that we can’t fail to get 
the message. But don’t be fooled. Even if everybody is using it (and 
they may not be), everybody can be wrong.
Another favourite message is ’You too can look like this’, 
accompanied by a photo of a fabulous-looking man or woman. But 
the problem is: you can’t look like this, because actually the woman 
or man in the photo is a model, and also because he or she doesn’t 
really look like that, either. The photo has been airbrushed in order 
to make the model look even slimmer, with perfect skin, and even 
more attractive than they are in real life.
Finally, what most annoys me is ’Trust me, I’m a doctor’ or ’Trust me, 
I’m a celebrity.’ The idea is that if a celebrity is using the product, 
it must be fantastic, or if a doctor recommends it, it must really 
work. But be careful. Although the actress is holding the product 
in the photo, do you really think she colours her hair with it at 
home? And the doctor in the advert – is he really a doctor, or 
just an actor wearing a white coat? Adverts also often mention 
a particular organization which recommends their product, for 
example, things like ’Our dog biscuits are recommended by the 
International Association of Dog Nutritionists’ – well, that’s probably 
an organization which the company set up themselves. Or ’A recent 
independent study found that our toothpaste cleans your teeth 
better than any other brand’. What study was it? Who commissioned 
the study? It was probably produced for the company itself, and paid 
for by them, too.
b	 Focus on the task and the two questions.
	 In pairs, Sts see if they can remember any of the 
information.
	 Now play the audio again, pausing after each marketing 
technique is mentioned to give Sts time to make notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 The word free makes us want it.
	
Its price is really included in the magazine subscription.
2	 We want to be among the lucky few who have the products.
	
It’s not really true that there are only a few remaining; 
companies can always produce more.
3	 We think everybody can’t be wrong.
	
Not everybody is using it, and even if they are, everybody can 
be wrong.
4	 We want to look fabulous.
	
We can’t look like the person in the photo, because he / she is 
a model and the photo has been airbrushed.
5	 It sounds like an official recommendation.
	
The company probably paid for the study.
6	 It must be fantastic / really work if a doctor or celebrity 
recommends it.
	
It’s probably not true. The ‘doctor’ may be an actor.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.129, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You could get Sts to listen again with 
the script, and notice how the speaker gives extra stress to 
certain words in order to make her point, e.g. The first point to 
bear in mind is that nothing, but nothing, is ever free.
c	 Focus on the task and check Sts understand keep falling  
for (= continue to be tricked into believing sth that isn’t 
true).
	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in 
pairs and then get some feedback.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 131@@
131
•	 Rule 2: Stress that for + gerund is used to describe the 
purpose of a thing (often in answer to the question 
What’s it for?). For can also be used to express the 
purpose of an action if that purpose is expressed with 
a noun, e.g. We went to Venezuela for a holiday, but not 
when it is expressed with a verb phrase, e.g. NOT  
I come to this school for learning English. Another typical 
mistake is using the infinitive after for instead of simply 
to, e.g. NOT I come here for to learn English.
•	 Rule 3: Point out that when there is a new subject in a 
clause of purpose, we must use so that (and not to, in 
order to, or so as to), e.g. We bought a big car so that the 
children would have more space. NOT …in order to the 
children have more space.
•	 Rule 4: The main point to stress here is that the most 
common way of expressing purpose in spoken English 
(to + infinitive) can’t be used to express negative purpose; 
you have to use so as not to… or in order not to…
	 Focus on the example sentences for clauses of contrast 
and play audio e 9.3 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for clauses of purpose e 9.4.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1  despite    ​2  even    ​3  to    ​4  as    ​5  order    ​6  spite    ​7  that    ​
8  although / though    ​9  for    ​10  though
b
1	 …we wouldn’t / didn’t have to spend too much money on 
accommodation.
2	 …she earns a fortune, she drives a very old car.
3	 …the sad ending. / the ending being sad. / the fact that the 
ending was sad.
4	 …the weather conditions were terrible.
5	 …not to offend her.
6	 …to allow the president’s car through safely.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
d	 Sentence race: Put Sts in pairs. Focus on the task and 
make sure Sts know what they have to do. They are 
competing against other pairs to try to be the first to 
complete the eight sentence stems in a way that makes 
sense and is grammatically correct. Set the time limit.
	 Monitor while pairs are writing and point out any 
incorrect sentences you see, but don’t correct them.
	 When the time limit is up, elicit several possible answers 
for each sentence and write them on the board.
3	GRAMMAR  clauses of contrast and purpose
a	 Focus on the task and on phrases A–G, which Sts have to 
match to the extracts. Although this grammar is being 
focused on for the first time, Sts should have seen most of 
the highlighted expressions before, and the context will 
help them to complete the gaps even if they are unsure of 
the exact meaning of some of the highlighted phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare their answers with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do the first one with the class as 
an example (1F).
b	 e 9.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Sts might find it helpful if you write the 
completed phrases on the board, in order to be able to 
focus easily on the examples of contrast and purpose. 
Alternatively, you could refer them to the complete 
sentences in the script.
1  F    ​2  E    ​3  D    ​4  C    ​5  G    ​6  A    ​7  B
e 9.2
1	 In spite of what the advert said, its price was really included in the 
magazine subscription.
2	 Even though we don’t really need the products, and maybe don’t 
even like them, we immediately want to be among the lucky few 
who have them.
3	 So as to make us believe it, they use expressions like ’It’s a must-
have’…
4	 …and they combine this with a photograph of a large group of 
people, so that we can’t fail to get the message.
5	 The photo has been airbrushed in order to make the model look 
even slimmer, with perfect skin, and even more attractive than 
they are in real life.
6	 It was probably produced for the company itself, and paid for by 
them, too.
7	 Although the actress is holding the product in the photo, do you 
really think she colours her hair with it at home?
	 Now focus Sts’ attention on the seven highlighted phrases 
and ask them, in pairs, to decide which express a purpose 
(= the aim or function of sth).
	 Check answers, and elicit that all the others express a 
contrast.
3  So as to    4  so that    5  in order to    6  for
c	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9A on p.148.
Grammar notes
Clauses of contrast
•	 Rule 1: Sts should be familiar with the meaning and 
use of although. Here they are introduced to even 
though and though, and the differences between 
the three in terms of level of formality and sentence 
position.
•	 Rule 2: Sts will have seen in spite of or despite, e.g. in 
reading texts, but in this lesson, they learn how to 
use them.
Clauses of purpose
Sts have previously learned to use to + infinitive to express 
purpose. Here they learn other ways of expressing the 
same idea.
•	 Rule 1: In order to and so as to are more formal than to. 
Make sure Sts don’t use for + infinitive here. NOT I went 
to the bank for to talk to my bank manager. 
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 132@@
132
1	 T (The United Company will make all of life’s necessities as cost-
effectively as possible)
2	 F (The book’s author had a vision that has ended up shaping 
the economy. But…it wasn’t this particular vision. No, it was 
another idea, which he had a year later.)
3	 T (If you’ve ever bought replacement cartridges for an inkjet 
printer, you are likely to have been annoyed…that they cost 
almost as much as you paid for the printer itself…But how 
can it possibly cost almost as much to supply a bit of ink in tiny 
plastic pots? The answer, of course, is that it doesn’t.)
4	 T (It’s also known as the razor-and-blades model…suck people in 
with an attractively priced razor, then repeatedly fleece them for 
extortionately priced replacement blades.)
5	 F (…initially, he made both parts expensive.)
6	 F (Consider the PlayStation 4. Whenever Sony sells one, it loses 
money…But that’s okay, because Sony coins it in whenever a 
PlayStation 4 owner buys a game.)
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   You may want to focus on the example 
from the article Whenever Sony sells one, it loses money.  
Elicit / Explain the meaning of whenever (= every time or at 
any time; it doesn’t matter when). Explain that we can also 
use whatever, whichever, whoever, however, and wherever in 
the same way.
d	 Focus on the questions and make sure Sts know the 
meaning of disposable (= made to be thrown away 
after use).
	 Point out the Glossary, but don’t go through it as a 
class, as Sts should now refer to it only if necessary while 
they read.
	 Tell Sts to read Part 2 of the chapter and not to worry 
about the gaps.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the questions.
	 Check answers.
1	 They are patent-protecting them or changing the technology 
so that other company’s disposable products don’t work with 
them.
2	 Because, especially with digital products, it costs a lot to 
change to another platform, and takes time to learn how to 
use it. People also stay because of brand loyalty.
3	 King Camp Gillette might have thought that the razor-and-
blades model is not at all like his original business vision of 
1894.
e	 Tell Sts to read the second part again and this time to 
complete each gap with a word or phrase from 1–7.
	 Check answers.
1  c    ​2  a    ​3  c    ​4  b    ​5  a    ​6  a    ​7  c
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
f	 Focus on the questions and elicit answers from the class, 
making sure they understand the difference between 
generic (= a product that doesn’t show the name of the 
company that made it) and branded (= made by a well-
known company and having that company’s name on it). 
You could tell the class if you own any products which use 
the two-part pricing system, and if so, why you bought 
them. You could also tell Sts if you generally use generic or 
branded products, and why.
Some possible answers
1	 …children don’t see them.
2	 …the new product didn’t sell very well.
3	 …young people still buy them.
4	 …experience life in a big city.
5	 …not being very good at his job.
6	 …it wasn’t true.
7	 …get a refund.
8	 …a meeting.
4	READING  dealing with an authentic text
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then elicit some ideas, but don’t tell them if they are 
correct or not.
b	 Start by explaining to Sts that when they are reading 
authentic texts, they can use some simple strategies to 
find the correct meaning quickly for words and phrases 
they don’t understand.
	 Firstly, they should check they know what part of speech 
a word is. Sometimes the meaning in the article won’t be 
the most common, e.g. in the article they’re going to read, 
fleece is more common as a noun (= the wool of a sheep), 
but here they need to know its meaning as a verb.
	 Secondly, if they need to look up a phrase, they will need 
to know the key word, as this is where they will find it 
listed in the dictionary or glossary. In a verb phrase, the 
key word is usually the verb, not the noun, e.g. in the 
phrase suck people in, the key word is suck.
	 Now focus on the instructions. Make sure Sts know that 
the chapter is not simplified – it is taken directly from a 
real economics book, so they should find it motivating 
to be able to understand it. You could tell them that the 
book is based on a series of radio programmes of the 
same name (available as podcasts), and is aimed at a 
general audience, not just people who study or work in 
economics.
	 Set Sts a time limit to read the first part of the article to 
find the answer to a, using the techniques they’ve just 
read about to deal with any unknown words and phrases.
	 Check the answer.
!   Don’t pre-teach any vocabulary before Sts read the chapter, 
as the focus of this activity is to work out the meaning of 
unknown words from context or to look them up.
They are all things where the main product, e.g. the machine, 
is quite cheap, but the things you buy to use with them, e.g. 
games, coffee pods, printer ink, blades, are very expensive.
c	 Tell Sts to read Part 1 of the chapter again and then 
mark sentences 1–6 T (true) or F (false). Remind them to 
underline the information in the article that helped them 
find the answer.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 133@@
133
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to try to work out the 
meaning of the bold words and phrases.
	 Check answers.
a new product /ə njuː ˈprɒdʌkt/ = a thing that is grown or 
produced, usually for sale, for the first time
flop /flɒp/ = sth that is not successful
the market leader /ðə mɑːkɪt ˈliːdə/ = the company that sells 
the largest quantity of a particular kind of product
chain /tʃeɪn/ = a group of shops, hotels, etc. owned by the 
same person or company
head office /hed ˈɒfɪs/ = the main office of a company
branches /brɑːntʃɪz/ = offices or shops that are part of a larger 
organization, e.g. a bank
a small business /ə smɔːl ˈbɪznes/ = not doing business on a 
very large scale
a boom /ə buːm/ = a sudden increase in trade and economic 
activity; a period of wealth and success
a recession /ə rɪˈseʃn/ = a difficult time for the economy of a 
country, when there is less trade and industrial activity than 
usual and more people are unemployed
	 Now focus on c and give Sts time to put the words into 
the correct column.
	 e 9.6  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. You might want to tell Sts that you can 
also say do a deal, but make a deal is more frequent.
e 9.6
d
do business, do a job, do market research, do well, do badly
make a deal, make a decision, make a loss, make money, make 
somebody redundant
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Do Activation and get Sts to cover the columns in c, look 
at the words in the list, and remember if they go with do 
or make.
	 Now look at 2 Idioms with business. Focus on the 
business box and go through it with the class.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs. Make sure they can 
remember what an idiom is.
	 e 9.7  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers. 
e 9.7
2 Idioms with business
1	 F	 I think we’ve been through everything on today’s agenda. Now, 
is there any other business?
2	 D	Now that so many people book their holidays and travel online, 
many travel agencies have gone out of business.
3	 C	 Let’s get down to business right away – we’ll have a break after 
an hour or so.
4	 E	 She looks very determined – like a woman who means 
business.
5	 B	 A	 What are you doing?  
B	 I’m sorry, but it’s none of your business.
6	 H	A	 Is he your new boyfriend? 
	
	 B	 Mind your own business!
7	 A	 He arranged to meet his ex-girlfriend because they had some 
unfinished business.
8	 G	Why are you taking your tennis racket on a work trip? It’s never 
a good idea to mix business with pleasure.
EXTRA IDEA   Ask Sts if they think two-part pricing is an 
acceptable business practice, or whether they think it should 
be illegal.
5	VOCABULARY  business
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then check the answer. Tell Sts that manufacture (= make 
things in large quantities, usually in a factory, e.g. cars) and 
produce (= make things either in a factory or by growing 
sth, e.g. wine).
manufacture
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Business on p.162.
Vocabulary notes
Verbs and expressions
Highlight:
•	 the difference between merge (= when two companies 
join together to make one bigger one) and take over 
(= when one company takes control of another company, 
especially by buying shares).
•	 make sb redundant = to take sb’s job away from him / 
her because he / she isn’t needed any more or because, 
for example, the company is losing money and needs 
to cut down on staff. Compare this with sack sb, which 
Sts learned in English File Intermediate, which means 
take someone’s job away from them because they have 
done something wrong.
	 Focus on 1 Verbs and expressions and get Sts to do a 
individually or in pairs.
	 e 9.5  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.5
Business
1 Verbs and expressions, b
1	 Apple products are easy to market because people are 
immediately attracted to the stylish designs.
2	 In nineteen eighty-nine, Pepsi-Cola launched a new product 
called Pepsi A.M., which was aimed at the ‘breakfast cola drinker’. 
It was an immediate flop.
3	 The Spanish airline Iberia merged with British Airways in twenty 
eleven and became one of the world’s biggest airline groups.
4	 Although GAP stands for Genuine American Product, most of its 
clothes are manufactured in Asia.
5	 Prosciutto is a kind of Italian ham. Two of the best-known kinds 
are San Daniele and Parma, which are produced in the Friuli and 
Emilia regions of Italy, and are exported all over the world.
6	 When BMW took over Mini, the smaller company became part of 
the larger organization.
7	 The supermarket chain Tesco became the market leader in 
nineteen ninety-five and is still the UK’s biggest-selling chain.
8	 The first Zara store was opened in La Coruña in Spain in nineteen 
seventy-five, where its head office still is today. The company 
started to expand into new markets in nineteen eighty-eight, and 
it now has branches in ninety-six countries.
9	 Many banks are now offering loans to people who want to set up 
a new small business.
10	 The cost of living in Iceland is so high because so many food 
products have to be imported.
11	 During a boom period, the economy grows quickly and living 
standards improve.
12	 During a recession, many companies close down and living 
standards drop.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 134@@
134
a) verb – the second syllable is stressed
b) noun – the first syllable is stressed
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to practise saying the sentences. They 
could do this individually or in pairs. You could get them to 
listen and repeat after the audio.
b	 Focus on the task and get Sts to practise saying the six 
words both ways, first as a verb, then as a noun, e.g. verb 
decrease, noun: decrease.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Write the rule from a on the board for 
reference. Then say each word, first as a verb and then as a 
noun, getting Sts to listen and repeat after you.
	 Get Sts to practise in pairs.
	 Finally, get individual Sts to say the words.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A say one of 
the words and Sts B have to say whether it is the verb or the 
noun. Sts then swap roles.
c	 Focus on the task. Then put Sts in pairs or small groups 
and get them to discuss each statement, giving as much 
information as possible.
	 Monitor and help Sts with any vocabulary they need.
	 Get some feedback for each statement.
EXTRA IDEA   You could give Sts more statements to discuss, 
e.g.:
•	 There has been a big increase in the price of food during the 
last year.
•	 Big companies rarely refund customers quickly for faulty 
goods or poor service.
•	 People prefer to use their own cars rather than public 
transport.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Do Activation and get Sts to cover 1–8, look at A–H, and 
see if they can remember the idioms.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts A (book open) 
say the highlighted phrases in random order to Sts B. Sts B 
(book open), looking only at definitions A–H, read the letter 
and definition. Then they swap roles.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs and get them to explain, 
in their own words, the difference between the following 
pairs of phrases:
1	 export a product and import a product 
2	 launch a product and market a product 
3	 take over a company and merge two companies 
4	 a boom and a recession 
5	 do business with sb and do a deal with sb 
6	 a consumer and a client 
7	 a manager and an owner
6	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  changing 
stress on nouns and verbs
Pronunciation notes
Some words change their stress depending on whether 
they are verbs or nouns. The nouns are usually stressed on 
the first syllable, e.g. an export, a record, and the verbs on 
the second syllable, e.g. to export, to record. This section 
covers: increase, decrease, import, progress, permit, produce, 
refund, and transport.
Other words which behave in the same way include: 
conduct, conflict, contract, impact, insult, object, permit, 
present, project, rebel, reject, repeat, subject, suspect.
a	 e 9.8  Play the audio for Sts to listen and underline the 
stress in the bold words. You could pause the audio after 
each sentence and elicit the correct stress as you go, or 
check answers after you have played the audio.
	 Check answers.
1  export    ​2  export    ​3  increased    ​4  increase    ​5  progressing ​
6  progress    ​7  produced    ​8  produce
e 9.8
1	 We export to customers all over the world.
2	 Our main export is wine.
3	 Sales have increased by ten per cent this month.
4	 There has been a large increase in profits this year.
5	 The new building is progressing well.
6	 We’re making good progress with the report.
7	 Most toys nowadays are produced in China.
8	 The demand for organic produce has grown enormously.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stress on the 
words in bold before playing the audio.
	 Now ask Sts which syllable is stressed when the word is a 
verb, and then when it is a noun.
9A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 135@@
 
135
9B
 G   uncountable and plural nouns
 V   word building: prefixes and suffixes
 P   word stress with prefixes and suffixes
Lesson plan
The context of this lesson is cities.
In the first half of the lesson, Sts read about author and 
philosopher Alain de Botton’s vision on how to make a 
modern city attractive to live in. Sts then listen to five people 
who talk about the most beautiful city they have ever been 
to. Sts talk about which of the places mentioned they would 
like to visit, and their favourite and least favourite cities. This 
is followed by the grammar focus, where Sts extend their 
knowledge of uncountable nouns (e.g. luggage, furniture, 
etc.) and plural nouns (e.g. news, politics). They round off the 
first half with a speaking game to practise the grammar.
In the second half, Sts read an article about a city in South 
Korea, which was designed as a showpiece of modern urban 
design. This is followed by a speaking activity on modern 
cities and the changes population growth might have on a 
city. There is then a vocabulary focus on word building with 
prefixes and suffixes, followed by a pronunciation focus on 
word stress. Sts then practise the vocabulary by discussing 
different aspects of cities and regions they know. The lesson 
ends with Sts writing a report on the features of a city they 
know well.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  uncountable and plural nouns p.179 
Communicative  Give your opinion p.210  
(instructions p.188) 
Vocabulary  Word building p.229 (instructions p.216)
For students
Workbook  9B
Online Practice  9B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.90 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Desmond Morris is an English 
zoologist and author on human sociobiology.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and if they agree 
with it.
1	READING
a	 Focus on the questions. Elicit the difference between a 
city and a town (a city is larger and more important than a 
town).
	 Then put Sts in pairs and get them to answer the question 
and give their city a score.
	 Get some feedback. If all your Sts live in the same city (or 
near the same city), then do the questions as a whole-
class activity.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could demonstrate the activity by 
talking about the city you come from if it isn’t the same as 
your Sts.
b	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts know the meaning of 
criteria /kraɪˈtɪəriə/ (= standard or principle by which sth 
is judged). Point out that the ‘criteria’ being referred to are 
the six headings in the article. You could tell Sts that Alain 
de Botton is a Swiss-born British philosopher and author 
who has written on travel, architecture, love, and literature. 
His books have been bestsellers in 30 countries.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to read the article.
	 When they have finished, they should explain the six 
criteria in their own words and then discuss the questions 
with their partner.
	 Check answers and elicit opinions on the two questions 
from various pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Order and variety = well-organized, but not all the same
2	 Visible life = seeing people in the streets
3	 Compactness = limited size
4	 Orientation and mystery = easy to find your way around, but 
with areas where you can wander and get a bit lost
5	 Scale = relative size of buildings should be five floors
6	 Local colour = having its own personality and using local 
materials
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
c	 Focus on the task and example.
	 Give Sts time individually to think of some ideas. If Sts 
have problems thinking of more ideas, you could write 
some prompts on the board, e.g. WATER, GREEN SPACES,  
TREES, etc. Monitor and help with vocabulary if necessary.
	 Now put Sts in small groups of four or five. Get them to 
assign a ‘secretary’ to make the group list.
	 When all the groups have finished, elicit their ideas onto 
the board and have a class discussion.
2	LISTENING & SPEAKING  understanding place 
names
a	 e 9.9  Focus on the task and elicit some cities for each 
country in 1–5. Don’t tell Sts if they are correct or not.
	 Play the audio once for Sts to find out what the cities are.
	 Check answers by writing the names on the board.
	9B	 Super cities
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 136@@
136
4	 The Scotsman Steps in Edinburgh. It’s something to see. It’s an 
artwork called 1059. It’s a marble staircase, and each step is a 
different colour.
5	 A ryokan in Kyoto. It’s something to do. It’s a traditional 
Japanese guesthouse. You sleep on tatami matting and have 
rice, eggs, fish, and seaweed for breakfast.
e 9.11
(script in Student’s Book on pp.129–130)
1
I think I’d have to say Venice in Italy. In spite of all the tourists, all 
the clichés, I still think it’s the most beautiful city I know. I always 
remember the first time I went. I arrived by train, and we stepped 
out of the station, and suddenly it was all there – the canals, the 
wonderful old buildings. What makes it beautiful for me is the light, 
the combination of the reflections of the churches and palaces in 
the water, the wonderful winding streets alongside canals, which 
are all different but also all similar – it’s an incredibly easy city to get 
lost in. And of course, the fact that there are no cars, no traffic. I fell 
totally in love with it that first time, and I’ve been back since then 
and loved it just as much. It’s difficult to think of just one thing to 
see. I mean, Piazza San Marco is beautiful, the Rialto Bridge, but I 
wouldn’t say they were the things I remember most. I would actually 
say just wander, without a map or a goal, and get lost. Everything is 
beautiful. The one thing I’d say to do is go on a vaporetto – a water 
bus – down the Grand Canal. I don’t think gondolas are worth it – 
they’re ridiculously expensive – and you can enjoy everything just as 
much on a vaporetto.
2
The most beautiful city I’ve been to recently is probably Curitiba, 
which is in southern Brazil. I think one of the things I liked about it 
most was it’s described as the greenest city on Earth, and they’ve 
really focused on creating a quality public transportation system. 
There’s a huge number of parks in Curitiba – in fact, there’s so 
much grass that the local authority use sheep to cut the grass, 
not lawnmowers. And I just think that what I like about it is their 
commitment to trying to make the city an environmentally-
friendly place to live. One place you need to see there is the Wire 
Opera House, which, it’s built in the middle of an artificial lake, 
in the middle of a park, and it’s built out of steel tubes, it’s really 
extraordinary, and beautiful, I think. And if I had to recommend one 
thing to do, I’d say go for a walk in the Bosque Alemão – it’s one of 
the wonderful parks in Curitiba – and visit the free environmental 
university which is built up in the trees just nearby. Its mission is 
to educate people about the environment, and I just think that’s a 
wonderful goal to have.
3
The most beautiful city I’ve ever been to is Bruges in Belgium – well, 
I’m not absolutely sure if it’s a city or a town, but anyway, it’s my all-
time favourite place. What makes it beautiful for me is the fact that it 
just looks as if it came out of a fairytale – it’s…er…there are very old 
buildings that aren’t too tall, and it’s very traditional, and the whole 
place is like that. There’s nothing super-modern, like skyscrapers, 
that breaks that illusion of being somewhere magical. There are lots 
of things to see – there are two really beautiful churches, but I think 
that the whole of the old city is just amazing to look at. And also 
there are hardly any cars, so you can just cycle or walk round. There 
are lots of canals with swans, I just sat there staring at everything 
and feeding the swans – it was so peaceful and beautiful. Something 
everyone who visits Bruges needs to do is go to the market, which 
is like a square with lots of shops. And most of the shops sell 
chocolate, which is one of the main things they sell in Bruges – and 
it’s absolutely delicious, so I think you need to sit down and have a 
tea or a coffee and a couple of chocolates, just looking out on this 
really beautiful square.
4
I know lots of beautiful cities, and, er, I wouldn’t choose one above 
all the others, but one I always love going back to is Edinburgh 
in Scotland. And something I really love about Edinburgh is that 
!   Don’t ask Sts if they have been to any of these cities, as 
they will be doing this later in the lesson.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could write the jumbled city names on 
the board to help Sts.
1  Venice    ​2  Curitiba    ​3  Bruges    ​4  Edinburgh    ​5  Kyoto
e 9.9
1	 I think I’d have to say Venice in Italy.
2	 The most beautiful city I’ve been to recently is probably Curitiba, 
which is in southern Brazil.
3	 The most beautiful city I’ve ever been to is Bruges in Belgium.
4	 I know lots of beautiful cities and…er…I wouldn’t choose one 
above all the others, but one I always love going back to is 
Edinburgh in Scotland.
5	 The most beautiful city I’ve been to is Kyoto in Japan.
b	 e 9.10  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Tell Sts that they are going to hear a 
list of places and they are going to complete the names –  
they are not going to hear sentences or the speakers 
talking about these places. Tell Sts to write what they hear 
and not to worry too much about the correct spelling.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each place to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again if necessary.
	 Check answers by eliciting the places onto the board, 
and correct any spelling as necessary. Elicit / Explain the 
meaning of wire (= thin metal cable) and that Alemão = 
German in Portuguese.
e 9.10
Piazza San Marco
the Rialto Bridge
the Grand Canal
the Wire Opera House
the Bosque Alemão
the Scotsman Steps
the River Leith
the Kinkaku-ji Temple
c	 e 9.11  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to each 
speaker talking about the city they mentioned in a. They 
must identify the place the speaker mentions in each 
photo (in fact, they all show one of the places named in 
b). Sts then decide if it is something to see or do. They 
should also make a note of any other information they 
hear about it.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each speaker to give Sts time 
to make notes.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1	 A vaporetto on the Grand Canal in Venice. It’s something to 
do. It’s cheaper than going on a gondola.
2	 The Wire Opera House. It’s something to see. It’s in the middle 
of an artificial lake in a park. It’s made from steel tubes.
3	 Having coffee and chocolates in the market square in Bruges. 
It’s something to do. Most of the shops there sell chocolate. 
It’s really beautiful.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 137@@
137
f	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss the questions.
	 Monitor and help while Sts do the task.
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could do the first 
question as a whole-class activity. You could also tell the 
class your answers for questions 2 and 3.
3	GRAMMAR  uncountable and plural nouns
a	 Focus on the task. Encourage Sts to use their instinct if 
they are not sure.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers. Elicit why the other form is wrong and that these 
nouns (i.e. advice, weather, etc.) are uncountable, and so 
can’t be used with a or in the plural in English, although 
this may be different in Sts’ L1.
1  advice    ​2  some bad weather    ​3  accommodation is    ​ 
4  too much luggage    ​5  the outskirts are    ​6  the staff were
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 9B on p.149.
Grammar notes
Uncountable nouns
•	 Rules 1 and 2: Sts will be familiar with the concept of 
countable (C) and uncountable (U) nouns, especially 
in the context of food, e.g. an orange (C), some 
water (U), etc. However, there are many non-food 
nouns which are uncountable in English, though they 
may be countable in Sts’ L1, e.g. information, advice, 
furniture. Other uncountable nouns can be confusing 
because they end in s and so would seem to be plural, 
e.g. politics, news, but are uncountable. Here Sts are 
introduced to the most common nouns of these types 
and shown how to use some of them with a piece of 
to talk about individual items, e.g. Do you want a piece 
of toast? I’ve just heard a very interesting piece of news. 
Some can also be used with these words to mean an 
unspecified amount, e.g. Do you want some toast? I’ve 
had some news from my parents about their new house.
	 As the list of nouns here is not very long, encourage Sts 
to learn them by heart.
•	 Rule 3: Sts probably already know the different uses 
of these words passively. Words like this include many 
materials, and also abstract nouns like light and space, 
which are uncountable but have a different meaning 
when they are countable. Check that Sts know the 
difference in meaning between the two forms, e.g.:
	 business (= general word to describe commercial 
activity), a business (= a company)
	 iron (= a metal), an iron (= a household tool used to 
make clothes smooth)
	 light (= the energy from the sun), a light (= a lamp)
	 paper (= the material), a paper (= a newspaper)
	 space (= where the planets are), a space (= an area that 
is empty)
	 time (= what is measured in minutes, hours, etc.), a time 
(= an occasion).
because it’s quite compact, more or less wherever you are in the 
city, you can see outside the city – so you can see the sea, you can 
see the hills around – so you always have a sense of the city and the 
landscape, and I really like that. And one place, one thing I would 
recommend people to see in Edinburgh is something called the 
Scotsman Steps, which is a staircase that goes from the wall that 
joins the old town to the new town. And it’s actually an artwork – 
it’s called work number one oh five nine, by an artist called Martin 
Creed, and it’s basically a staircase made of marble steps. Each 
one is a different colour marble, so you really have a feel of going 
somewhere – you’re going from one colour to the next – and I love 
that place. And something I would do in Edinburgh would be to 
walk along the river Leith either way – either from the port of Leith 
up into the city, or the other way, because it’s like a secret bit of 
Edinburgh, and you see Edinburgh from a different perspective.
5
The most beautiful city I’ve been to is Kyoto in Japan. It’s a really 
lovely place because it’s a mix of well, like, many Japanese cities: 
very, very modern buildings, and a lot of traditional…er…temple 
areas as well, and you can walk down any Japanese shopping street 
and find a big supermarket or a modern office block next to a little 
temple where you step back in time many centuries. The one place 
that I would recommend you see is the Kinkaku-ji temple, which is a 
very, very famous tourist site. It has a golden pavilion in the middle, 
and it’s the most wonderful place. It gets very, very busy, but I was 
lucky enough to visit it when I lived in Japan, and I was able to stay 
with a friend and go there very early in the morning to avoid the 
crowds. One thing you need to do if you go to Kyoto is to try to 
stay not in a modern hotel, but in a ryokan, which is a traditional 
Japanese guest house where you can sleep on tatami matting 
and have…um…Japanese breakfast, which is rice, eggs, fish, and 
seaweed.
d	 Play the audio again for Sts to listen and write any 
other recommendations the speakers make. You could 
pause the audio after each speaker and elicit the 
recommendations.
	 Check answers.
1	 Piazza San Marco, the Rialto Bridge, just wander without a 
map
2	 Go for a walk in the Bosque Alemão, visit the environmental 
university
3	 Two beautiful churches, just walk or cycle around the city, 
feed the swans in the canal
4	 Walk along the River Leith, from the port to the city, or the 
other direction
5	 Visit the Kinkaku-ji temple, with its golden pavilion
	 Now give Sts time, in pairs or individually, to look back at 
Alain de Botton’s criteria in 1b and decide if any of the 
speakers mentioned them.
	 Check answers.
Speaker 1	
Orientation and mystery   
​Speaker 2	
Scale    ​
Speaker 3	
Compactness​
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on pp.129–130, so they can see exactly 
what they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / 
Explain any new words or phrases.
e	 Finally, give Sts time, in pairs or individually, to look back at 
their own group list in 1c and decide if any of the speakers 
mentioned their criteria.
	 Elicit any criteria from the group lists that were mentioned.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 138@@
138
	 Tell Sts to start, and the timekeeper to start the clock. After 
a minute is up, the next student in the group takes the 
next topic. Stop the activity either when Sts have been 
through all the topics, or each student has spoken at least 
twice. Monitor and help with the scoring.
	 Find out who got the most points.
4	READING & SPEAKING  identifying advantages 
and disadvantages
a	 Focus on the task and then give Sts time to look at the 
photo.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the advantages 
and disadvantages of living in Songdo.
	 Elicit ideas from the class.
b	 Tell Sts that they are now going to read an article about 
Songdo. Before they start, tell them that Songdo is a new, 
smart city 65 kilometres south-west of Seoul. It now has 
approximately 100,000 inhabitants. Conceived in 2001, it 
was planned to be finished in 2015, but the city is still a 
work in progress. It is connected to Incheon International 
Airport by a 12. 3-kilometre road bridge.
	 Put Sts in pairs and tell them to answer the questions with 
their partner when they have finished reading.
	 Check answers. You could also elicit the noun used 
meaning the same as city (megacity), and then tell Sts the 
definition of each word:
•	 city = a large and important town; in the UK, it is also a 
town that has a cathedral
•	 megacity = a very large city, usually one with a population 
of over ten million people
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words or phrases.
1	 Hi-tech services, e.g. the recycling of rubbish; many parks; 
eco-friendly, e.g. state of the art water recycling
2	 It isn’t a vibrant community. It isn’t yet car-free.
3	 Too wide roads, spread out across a wide area, not enough 
public transport, not enough residents to bring the city alive
c	 Tell Sts to read the article again. As they read, they should 
stop and focus on the highlighted words and phrases 
1–8 and use the context to help them choose the best 
meaning, a or b.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  a    ​2  b    ​3  b    ​4  a    ​5  a    ​6  b    ​7  b    ​8  b
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 Focus on the task and put Sts in pairs to discuss the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback for each question from various pairs. 
For question 3, you could have a class vote with a show 
of hands. You could also tell Sts which you would choose 
and why. If all your Sts are from the same city, you could 
do question 4 as a whole-class activity.
Plural and collective nouns
•	 Rule 1: Make sure Sts know the meaning of these 
words, e.g. belongings = things that are yours. Remind 
Sts that words that can be used with a pair of can also 
be used with some. Other words in this group are jeans, 
pyjamas, pants / knickers, tights, (sun)glasse
•	 Rule 2: These nouns, though singular (the crew, the 
family, etc.), are often used with a plural verb, as they 
refer to a group of people. In some contexts, you can 
use either. However, police is an exception and is always 
used with a plural verb. Other similar words are army, 
choir, class, firm, government, orchestra, (political) party, 
public, and school.
	 Focus on the example sentences for uncountable 
nouns and play audio e 9.12 for Sts to listen and repeat. 
Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go through 
the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for plural and collective nouns e 9.13.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1  is    ​2  ✓    ​3  look    ​4  ✓ (depending on whether you’re 
thinking of them as individuals or as a team)    ​5  ✓    ​ 
6  a piece of paper    ​7  some    ​8  some    ​9  progress    ​10  an
b
1	 ✗ We had beautiful weather
2	 ✗ some lovely furniture
3	 ✓
4	 ✗ a pair of scissors
5	 ✓
6	 ✗ some new trousers / a new pair of trousers
7	 ✓
8	 ✗ The homework was
9	 ✓
10	 ✗ The police are sure
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 This is an oral grammar practice activity. You could tell Sts 
that Just a minute is a very popular radio programme on 
BBC Radio 4 and has been running since 1967.
	 Focus on the task and go through the rules with the class. 
Stress that Sts have to try and keep going for one minute 
and not ‘dry up’. If a student hesitates for too long, then 
he or she is ‘out’, the time is paused, and the next student 
must continue speaking on the same topic until the 
minute is up. However, he / she mustn’t just repeat things 
that the previous person said. Tell Sts to appoint one 
person in each group to be the timekeeper.
	 Give Sts a minute to look at all the topics.
	 Now put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them 
to decide which order they will go in.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 139@@
139
10	 K	 I misunderstood the directions that man gave me, and now I’m 
completely lost.
11	 I	 He’s doing a postgraduate degree in aeronautical engineering.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Get Sts to do c individually or in pairs.
	 e 9.15  Now do d. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.15
d
1	 D	There are a lot of homeless people in this city. The situation is 
hopeless.
2	 A	 Be careful how you drive! The instructions were very useful.
3	 C	 The police usually wear bullet-proof vests. My watch is 
waterproof.
4	 B	 Their new laptops are completely unbreakable. I don’t think the 
tap water here is drinkable.
	 Give further practice of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
	 Now do Activation and get Sts to cover sentences 1–11 
in a, look at meanings A–K, and say the prefixes.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to cover meanings A–D in c, look 
at sentences 1–4, and remember the bold suffixes.
	 Now focus on 2 Nouns formed with suffixes and go 
through the Common noun suffixes box with the class.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 9.16  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Elicit the answers onto the board, getting Sts to spell the 
words.
e 9.16
2 Nouns formed with suffixes
accommodation, intention, reduction
employment, entertainment, excitement, government, 
improvement
friendliness, loneliness, ugliness, weakness
absence, distance, ignorance, violence
alcoholism, racism, vandalism
brotherhood, childhood
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the chart, look 
at the nouns in the list, and say them with the correct 
suffix.
	 Now focus on 3 Nouns which are different words and 
go through the Noun formation with spelling or word 
change box with the class.
	 Get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 9.17  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
5	VOCABULARY  word building: prefixes and 
suffixes
a	 Focus on the Prefixes and suffixes box and go through it 
with the class. Note that in the example pre-war, the form 
changes as well as the meaning (i.e. from noun war to 
adjective pre-war).
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Before reading the Prefixes and suffixes 
box, ask the class what prefixes and suffixes are and elicit 
some examples.
	 Give Sts time to answer the questions individually or in 
pairs.
	 Check answers, making sure Sts know the meaning of all 
the words. Elicit or model pronunciation.
1	 a)  mega    b)  eco
2	 abundance  coldness  connection  convenience  
development  expectation  modernism  
neighbourhood  pollution  silence
b	 Tell Sts to go to Vocabulary Bank Word building on 
p.163.
Vocabulary notes
Learning prefixes and suffixes which add meaning, and 
suffixes which change the form of a word, is one of the 
best ways to help Sts to expand their vocabulary.
You could remind Sts that a prefix is something that you 
add to the beginning of a word, usually to change its 
meaning, e.g. pre = before (e.g. pre-war). Note that, in the 
example given, the form changes as well from a noun 
(before the war) to an adjective.
Prefixes and suffixes which add meaning
Sts should already be familiar with some of these, e.g. 
over- and under-, and -less and -ful, but the others will 
probably be new to them, although some may exist in 
Sts’ L1.
Nouns formed with suffixes
Sts will have seen several of these before, but here they 
are brought together and Sts are given clear rules for 
which type of words take which suffixes.
	 Focus on 1 Prefixes and suffixes which add meaning 
and get Sts to do a individually or in pairs.
	 e 9.14  Now do b. Play the audio for Sts to listen and 
check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.14
Word building
1 Prefixes and suffixes which add meaning, b
1	 G	Mumbai is a very overcrowded city.
2	 C	 Tokyo was one of the first megacities.
3	 D	This part of the city is very poor and underdeveloped.
4	 B	 London is a very multicultural city, with many different races 
and religions.
5	 J	 The quickest way to get around New York is on the subway.
6	 H	Many people in Montreal, Canada, are bilingual – they speak 
English and French.
7	 E	 If you want to avoid the traffic jams in Bangkok, get the 
monorail.
8	 F	 The autopilot was switched on after the plane had taken off.
9	 A	 Vandalism, especially breaking public property, is very 
antisocial behaviour.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 140@@
140
7	WRITING  a report
	 Tell Sts to go to Writing A report on p.121.
a	 Focus on the introduction to the report, and either read it 
out loud, or give Sts time to read it.
	 Focus on the question and do it as a whole-class activity.
Information about Milton Keynes, including history, features, 
facilities, and what it’s like to live there
b	 Focus on the main paragraphs in the report and the task. 
Put Sts in pairs to match the headings to paragraphs 1–4.
	 Check answers.
1  History    ​2  Present day    ​3  Activities    ​4  Culture
c	 Focus on the list of information, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. layout, etc.
	 Now tell Sts to tick all the items that are mentioned in the 
main paragraphs (1–4) of the report.
	 Check answers.
Sts should tick:
what the town planners wanted to achieve  
the size of the town  
the layout of the town  
transport connections  
things to do
d	 Tell Sts to read the conclusion of the report and complete 
the gap with the best option.
	 Check the answer.
the new town of Milton Keynes has been a success
e	 Focus on the instructions and then give Sts time, in pairs, 
to plan the content of their report of a city of their choice. 
You could tell Sts that they don’t have to write about the 
same city as their partner – they are brainstorming ideas 
together at the moment.
f	 Focus on the Useful language: Signposting box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Now go through the instructions. Then either get Sts 
to write the report in class (set a time limit of, e.g. 20 
minutes), or get them to write at home for homework.
g	 Sts should check their report for mistakes before giving 
it in.
e 9.17
3 Nouns which are different words
1	 lose, loss
2	 die, death
3	 succeed, success
4	 think, thought
5	 believe, belief
6	 hot, heat
7	 strong, strength
8	 hungry, hunger
9	 high, height
10	 wide, width
	 Now either use the audio to drill the pronunciation of 
the words, or model and drill them yourself. Give further 
practice of any words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
	 Finally, focus on Activation and get Sts to cover the 
column on the right, look at the verbs and adjectives on 
the left, and say the nouns.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 9B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Vocabulary photocopiable 
activity at this point.
6	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  word stress 
with prefixes and suffixes
a	 Focus on the Word stress on words with prefixes and 
suffixes box and go through it with the class.
	 Now give Sts time to underline the main stressed syllable 
in the multi-syllable nouns and adjectives in the list. 
Encourage them to say the words out loud.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to do a in pairs.
b	 e 9.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 9.18
accommodation
antisocial
bilingual
entertainment
government
homeless
loneliness
multicultural
neighbourhood
overcrowded
poverty
underdeveloped
unemployment
vandalism
	 Now give Sts time to practise saying the words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could play the audio again, pausing 
after each word for Sts to listen and repeat.
c	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them to 
discuss the questions, giving as much information as 
possible.
	 Monitor and help if necessary.
	 Get some feedback.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Do some as whole-class questions.
9B
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 141@@
141
Lesson plan
In The Interview, the person interviewed is George 
Tannenbaum, an ad executive, who owns his own ad 
agency and is the director of an international one.
In The Conversation, Sts watch three people discussing 
whether people are influenced by advertising campaigns. 
Sts then discuss this question as well as a couple of other 
questions related to the topic, focusing on correcting 
something someone has said and phrases to make 
something clearer. 
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Colloquial English 8&9 
Quick Test 9 
File 9 Test
For students
Workbook  Colloquial English 8&9 
Can you remember? 8&9
Online Practice  Colloquial English 8&9 
Check your progress
 OPTIONAL LEAD-IN (BOOKS CLOSED)   
Tell Sts that they are going to watch an interview with 
a man who makes adverts. Write the word JINGLE on the 
board and elicit / explain that it is a short song or tune 
which is used in advertising and is easy to remember.
Elicit from the class any jingles which are being used in 
their country now.
 !   Don’t ask Sts if they remember any jingles from the past, 
as they will be doing this later in the lesson.
1	r THE INTERVIEW  Part 1
a	 Books open. Focus on the photo and the biographical 
information about George Tannenbaum. Either read it 
out loud or give Sts time to read it.
	 Focus on the question and do it as a whole-class activity.
b	 Focus on the Glossary and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
questions 1–6.
	 Play the video (Part 1) once the whole way through 
for Sts to watch and answer the questions. Then play it 
again, pausing as necessary to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening scripts and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
1	 His father’s brother / His uncle and his father
2	 In 1984 
3	 Talk when the commercials were on
4	 Because they get into your head and you can’t get them out, 
and you sometimes hear them several times a day.
5	 Animated cartoons advertising cereal for children 
6	 Willie trips over a rock every day, so one day Wilhelmina tells 
him to move it. When he says he can’t, as it is too big, she 
says she will do it. Willie says she isn’t strong enough, but he 
is wrong – Wilhelmina eats H.O. Farina, so she is strong.
I = interviewer, G = George Tannenbaum
Part 1
I	 What first drew you to advertising as a career choice?
G	 What drew me to advertising was, actually, in a weird way, I 
had no choice – I’m a third-generation advertising guy. My 
father’s brother – my uncle – who was fifteen years older than 
he, was in advertising, believe it or not, in the nineteen forties in 
Philadelphia. My father kind of took the baton from him, was in 
advertising, and I grew up with it, so I’ve been making a living in 
the business since nineteen eighty-four. It’s a long time. It’s thirty 
years.
I	 Do you still remember any commercials from your childhood?
G	 So I remember a lot of commercials. You know, growing up in 
an advertising household as we did, TV was more of a social 
event in those days – there wasn’t a TV in every room, like, the 
family would gather to watch television. And, we were told 
not to talk, you know, during the commercials. We could talk 
during the shows, so I grew up kind of watching commercials. I 
remember a lot of commercials. I bet you most people of my…
er…generation would remember a lot of…I feel kind of guilty 
saying this, because they are usually decried as not very creative, 
but you remember a lot of jingles.
I	 What do you think makes jingles memorable?
G	 Among purists in the field, jingles are, you know, laughed at 
– scoffed at – but God, you remember them. You know they – 
what do they call them, ear worms? They get into your head 
and you can’t get them out sometimes, and you add that to, 
you know, almost everyday exposure six times a day – it’s going 
to get in there. I can do…There was a, you know, there was a…
there was a…I could sing one for you; there was a kids’ hot 
cereal, a hot cereal for children called H.O. Farina, and it was an 
animated cartoon. It was very rudimentary. If you saw it today, 
you wouldn’t believe it was a national-broadcast cartoon. And 
it was a little story of Willie and Wilhelmina, and Willie trips on 
a rock and he goes, ‘Every day I trip over that rock, Wilhelmina.’ 
And she says, ‘Move it, Willie.’ And he says, ‘Can’t, too big.’ And I 
bet you I’m getting this word for word if you could find it. And 
she says, ‘I will.’ And he says, ‘Huh, you’re a girl.’ And she picks it 
up and then the jingle comes up and it goes ‘Strong Wilhelmina 
eats her Farina.’ Like I said, I probably heard that five hundred 
times, maybe more, when I was growing up, because it was…it 
was every weekend for about eight years.
c	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
	8&9	Colloquial English  Talking about…
advertising
CE8&9
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 142@@
142
	 r Part 3
a	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read the Glossary 
and sentences 1–5, making sure they understand all the 
lexis.
	 Now play the video (Part 3) once the whole way through 
for Sts to watch and complete the task.
	 Give Sts time to discuss what they understood with a 
partner. Then play the video again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When you play the video the second time, 
pause after each question has been answered and get Sts to 
compare what they have understood.
1	 remain important
2	 only well-made adverts
3	 because they make people feel good about themselves
4	 innovative
5	 honest and clear
Part 3
I	 With all the technology, viral advertising, etc., do you think 
billboards and TV commercials have had their day?
G	 Have billboards and TV commercials had their day? You know 
what, I don’t think so. I mean, I can tell you empirically and I can 
tell you rationally that seventy-five per cent of all media dollars 
is spent on broadcast, and I know it’s, like, current to say, ‘I don’t 
have a TV’ or ‘I never watch TV’, but people do. The fact is, TV 
viewership is at an all-time high. So I don’t think TV is dead and 
I don’t think billboards will be – you know, something as kind of 
passé as a billboard will be dead as long as, like, the highways are 
crowded, because you’ve got a captive audience. And until we 
can kind of pixelize ourselves and beam ourselves to work, I think 
there will be billboards. I mean, they can be effective.
I	 As a consumer, and obviously as an advertiser, does advertising 
influence the decisions you make?
G	 Yeah, you know, I’m very…I’m very susceptible to advertising. 
I think ’cause I tend to notice it. You know, I think I am very 
sensitive…er…to, um, I think I’m very sensitive to, um, stuff 
that isn’t true. But when I see something that’s well-crafted and 
appeals, I think, to both my head and my heart, you know, I 
think…I think I register those things.
I	 Is there an existing advertising campaign you wish you’d come up 
with, and why do you think it is so effective?
G	 Um. Is there an existing advertising campaign? Yeah, that I wish I 
did? There’s a few. Um, I think the stuff that is being done for Nike, 
just in general for thirty years, has been exemplary, you know. 
They tapped into a mindset, and they made everyone feel like 
they were athletic, and they became kind of the gold standard, 
and they rarely hit a false note. Same thing with Apple, though 
people are just stressed in the industry about the latest direction 
Apple has been taking, which seems less sincere.
I	 Why do you think the Apple campaign is so effective?
G	 You know, Apple took…I think Apple is effective because they 
looked at an industry and they said, ‘Here’s what’s wrong with 
the industry, and everything that that industry does, we’re going 
to do differently.’ So that industry, for years and years and years 
and years, was talking about speeds and feeds, and they were 
talking about six hundred and ninety-seven megahertz and four 
megabytes of RAM or gigabytes of RAM, whatever it is, and Apple 
just said, ‘It works.’ And they…what they did was say is that, ‘You 
want to be creative? This machine makes you creative.’ And they 
simplified…they simplified, and they were compelling, um, and 
they never lied, yeah.
b	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity. You could tell 
the class what you think, too.
	 r Part 2
a	 Focus on the Glossary and go through it with the class.
	 Give Sts time to read notes 1–4 and make sure they know 
what an acronym is (= a word formed from the first letters 
of the words that make up the name of something, for 
example, NATO is an acronym for North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization). Remind them to only write one or two 
words in each gap.
	 Now play the video (Part 2) once the whole way through. 
Then play it again, pausing as necessary to give Sts time to 
complete the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   When you play the video the second time, 
pause after each question has been answered and get Sts to 
compare what they have understood.
1	 1  impact    ​2  communication    ​3  persuasion
2	 Attention, Interest, Desire, Action
3	 getting impact, (giant) fan
4	 incredibly important
Part 2
I	 What elements of a commercial are the most important?
G	 To me, a commercial basically is built in three parts. If you think of 
it as a pyramid, the top part of the pyramid I would say is impact. I 
have to intrude upon your life because you are probably working 
on your computer while you’re watching TV or you’re doing 
something, and when I’m talking about a TV commercial, it’s the 
same for a web ad or an app. So, you have to get impact, you have 
to intrude, you have to kind of knock on the door. The second 
thing is communication – what do you want the person to know? 
And…and that needs to be clear and precise. And the third 
thing is the hardest: it’s persuasion, because ultimately, you’re 
running a commercial to get people to do something, so it’s that 
amalgamation. Another way of talking about it – and this is old 
school – but there’s an acronym, that probably comes from Mad 
Men era, that is called AIDA – you know, like the opera: Attention, 
Interest, Desire, Action.
I	 How do you feel about using celebrities to sell things?
G	 Sometimes it’s a short…using a celebrity is a shortcut to…er…
intrusion, because people pay attention to celebrities. Hopefully, 
it’s a celebrity that has some bearing on the brand. I don’t think if 
I was working on a depilatory, I’d want to use Tommy Lee Jones, 
but, um, that would just be gross. But, you know, if you find the 
right person, they can have special, um, special meaning, I think, 
and we do live in a celebrity culture, and people, you know, their 
ears perk up when they see a celebrity. So, if you go back to that 
pyramid I drew, it’s a way of getting impact. I’m not a giant fan of 
it, but sometimes you do things you’re not a giant fan of.
I	 On your website you say I can make people laugh. How important 
is humour in advertising?
G	 I tend not to be funny in TV commercials – I’m just…partly 
because I am a kind of cerebral guy, and I wind up having to 
use that more than humour, but I think humour is incredibly 
important in the business, and a lot of the commercials that really 
resonate with people, I think are funny – a lot of the movies, a lot 
of everything, you know.
b	 Do the questions as a whole-class activity.
CE8&9
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 143@@
143
I = interviewer, Sy = Syinat, J = Joanne, S = Simon
I	 Do you think everybody is influenced by advertising campaigns?
Sy	 I think it is impossible to not be influenced by advertising these 
days because it’s everywhere − it’s on the buses, it’s on the taxis, 
it’s just on buildings…
S	 Yep.
Sy	 …so just by going outside you are seeing these advertisements 
and you’re being influenced, so, for example, we, we, we all know 
certain brands just because they’re everywhere around us. It 
doesn’t mean that we’re going to buy from them…
S	 No.
Sy	 …but you know them and you can recognize them, which is kind 
of the point of advertisements.
J	 It is.
S	 Indeed, yeah.
J	 I mean it’s, it’s, you know, exposure, over and over again, and 
gradually that sinks in. You know, we barely, we really don’t really 
watch TV and we have a TV, we just don’t watch it very much, I 
thought, ‘Well actually that’s some advertising out of the way of 
my children’, but inevitably the radio’s on, you hear jingles…
S	 Mhmm. Yep.
J	 …and that sound gets into your brain and they recognize things. 
And like you say, they see films on buses and they know ‘That’s 
the film I want to go see’ because it’s everywhere.
S	 And sometimes I find that you, you go to a supermarket and you 
buy a product and you think, ‘I haven’t bought that before, where, 
why am I suddenly buying this product?’…
J	 Yeah.
S	 …and it’s because you’ve either seen it somewhere, someone’s 
talked about it, it’s been in a magazine and it’s just in your head, 
and that’s super subtle advertising. I mean, um, I never thought 
I was being influenced, but I think I am. I’m, I’m normally quite 
specific about what I buy − but suddenly, suddenly buying, I 
don’t know,  a different brand of blueberries or something for no 
reason, well, it’s like, well, why did I do that? You know, so, there’s 
definitely, you’re definitely being influenced.
J	 It is, it’s that recognition, isn’t it? And subliminally, I think, if we 
recognize something, particularly if you’re in a rush, you think, ‘Oh 
yeah, I know that one’, and you might buy that one. 
S	 Yeah.
J	 I actually try to − because I have young children − I try to actually 
teach them a little bit so that they become more aware of what 
the advertisers are trying to do, um, because…
Sy	 Wow.
J	 Which is hard actually, you know, but you see pictures in 
magazines and they’re starting to be − my eleven-year-old, is 
starting to become a little bit more cynical about what he sees, so 
he’ll look at things and say, ‘Mummy, that’s not very good, they’re 
just trying to get me to spend my money, and I don’t like the way 
they’re doing that’…
S	 And I know…
J	 …and I think, ‘Yes, well done!’
S	 …apparently in Sweden they’re not allowed to advertise to 
children under eleven at Christmas, so they’re not allowed to 
target children after a certain time of day, which is a great idea 
because remember in the UK they just target you all the time with 
the latest toy and so forth, so that sort of advertising is blatant.
Sy	 Yeah, especially for children, I mean I, I have, I have younger 
siblings and it’s kind of like ‘Ooh, all of my friends have this toy, so 
I must have it as well’, …
J	 Yes.
Sy	 …and actually I think if, if we were to remove that in England, 
that would be very good to kind of to teach them that actually 
self-worth comes from something else rather than from material 
possessions.
J	 That’s right, it’s part of this whole consumerist society that, that 
we live in, really.
S	 Yeah. So, I think, um, I think definitely I think that the answer to 
the question is yes, we are all influenced in different ways by 
advertising, I suppose. Yeah. What do you think?
J	 I agree. Whether we want to be or not.
S	 Yeah, sure.
J	 Sadly.
2	r LOOKING AT LANGUAGE
a	 This exercise focuses on a feature of spoken English which 
the interviewer illustrates – in this case using idiomatic 
language. Focus on the Metaphors and idiomatic 
expressions box and go through it with the class.
	 Now focus on the task and give Sts time to read 
extracts 1–7.
	 Play the video, pausing after each extract to give Sts time 
to write.
	 Check answers. You could tell Sts that the expression perk 
up your ears is American English, and in British English it is 
prick up your ears.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they can remember any of the 
missing words before they listen to the extracts.
1  ear    ​2  head    ​3  word    ​4  perk    ​5  day    ​6  audience    ​
7  false
1	 You know they, what do they call them, ear worms?
2	 They get into your head and you can’t get them out sometimes…
3	 And I bet you I’m getting this word for word if you could find it.
4	 …we do live in a celebrity culture, and people, you know, their 
ears perk up when they see a celebrity.
5	 Have billboards and TV commercials had their day?
6	 …because you’ve got a captive audience.
7	 …they became kind of the gold standard, and they rarely hit a 
false note.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss the 
meaning of each bold expression.
	 Elicit the meaning of each expression.
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose, and get 
feedback from Sts on what parts they found hard to 
understand and why, e.g. speed of speech, etc.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
3	r THE CONVERSATION
a	 Focus on the photo and tell Sts they are going to watch 
the three people answer a question, which they will 
see on the screen. Focus on the task and make sure Sts 
understand what they have to do.
	 Play the video and pause after the question. Remind Sts of 
the meaning of advertising campaigns.
	 Then play the video once the whole way through for Sts 
to watch and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before playing the video, go through the 
listening script and decide if you need to pre-teach / check 
any lexis to help Sts when they listen.
They conclude that everybody is influenced by advertising 
campaigns whether they want to be or not.
CE8&9
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 144@@
144
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 1–6. 
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Put Sts in pairs to see if they can 
remember any of the information in 1–6.
	 Play the video again for Sts to mark the sentences T (true) 
or F (false).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary.
	 Check answers.
1  T    ​2  F    ​3  T    ​4  F    ​5  T    ​6  F
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to watch 
again with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they 
understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new 
words or phrases.
c	 Either do the questions as a whole-class activity, or put Sts 
in pairs and then get some feedback.
d	 Highlight that the focus here is on understanding and 
helping them unpick the kind of language they are likely 
to hear in unplanned conversations, rather than teaching 
them useful phrases. 
	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read 1–5. 
	 Play the video for Sts to watch and focus on the 
highlighted phrases. Pause after each one to give them 
time to complete the phrase.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play again if 
necessary. 
	 Check answers.
1  we all know    ​2  really don't really    ​3  starting to become    
​4  I have, I have    ​5  I think    ​
a) give themselves time to think  4, 5
b) make something clearer   1, 2, 3   
1	 …and you’re being influenced, so, for example, we, we all know 
certain brands just because they’re everywhere around us.
2	 You know, we barely, we really don’t really watch TV and we have 
a TV, we just don’t watch very much…
3	 …but you see pictures in magazines and they’re starting to be − 
my eleven-year-old, is starting to become a little bit more cynical 
about what he sees…
4	 Yeah, especially for children, I mean I, I, I have, I have younger 
siblings and it’s kind of like ‘Ooh, all of my friends have this toy, so 
I must have it as well’
5	 So, I think, um, I think definitely I think that the answer to the 
question is yes…
	 Highlight that in 1–3 the speaker stops and then starts 
again in a slightly different way, because she wants to 
be clearer or more exact. In 4 and 5 the speaker simply 
repeats something while he / she is organizing his / her 
ideas.
e	 Put Sts in small groups of three if possible. Focus on the 
questions, and check Sts understand what they mean. 
Then set a time limit for Sts to discuss them. 
	 Monitor and help, and remind them them to simply start 
a phrase again if they think they could express themselves 
better, or to repeat a word or phrase if they need to give 
themselves time to think.
	 Get feedback from various groups. You could also tell the 
class what you think.
CE8&9
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 145@@
145
10A
	10A	 Science fact, science-fiction
 G   quantifiers: all, every, both, etc.
 V   science
 P   stress in word families
Lesson plan
The topic of this lesson is science.
In the first half, Sts begin by revising science-related 
vocabulary through doing a quiz of questions commonly 
asked by children that parents struggle to answer, and 
then listening to an expert answering each question. The 
vocabulary focus is on more words related to science, and 
Pronunciation deals with changing stress in word families 
(e.g. science, scientist, scientific). The first half ends with Sts 
interviewing each other about science-related issues.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts read about the 
plausibility of some of the ideas in science-fiction, and 
whether they might actually become reality. Then the 
grammar – revision and extension of the use of a variety of 
quantifiers – is presented through sentences from the article, 
and finally practised in another science quiz.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  quantifiers: all, every, both, etc. p.180 
Communicative  Science quiz p.211 (instructions p.188)
For students
Workbook  10A
Online Practice  10A
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.96 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could elicit from Sts any other information they know 
about Marie Curie (1867–1934), e.g. she was both a physicist 
and a chemist. In 1903, Pierre Curie (Marie’s husband), Marie 
Curie, and Henri Becquerel were awarded the Nobel Prize 
in physics. Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel 
Prize, and the only woman to have won two Nobel Prizes, as 
in 1911, she won the Nobel Prize in chemistry.
Ask Sts what they think the quote means and if they agree 
with it.
1	SPEAKING & LISTENING  understanding 
scientific explanations
a	 Focus on the cartoon and give Sts time to read it. If 
they are having trouble with the handwriting font, you 
could read it to them: Well, rain is liquid water in the form 
of droplets that have condensed from atmospheric water 
vapour and then become heavy enough to fall under gravity. 
The major cause of rain production is moisture moving along 
three-dimensional zones of temperature…
	 Now elicit opinions from the class.
	 Elicit that the answer is probably too detailed and boring 
for the child to understand. Ask Sts if they know parents or 
children like this, or have had a similar experience.
b	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to read the article. Then with 
their partner, they should try to explain the meaning of 
the highlighted words, which are all related to science. 
Remind them to use the context to help them guess. Tell 
them not to answer the questions yet.
	 Check answers. Elicit or model pronunciation.
reflect /rɪˈflekt/ = throw back light (or heat, sound, etc.) from a 
surface
scatter /ˈskætə/ = throw or drop things in different directions so 
that they cover an area of ground
dissolve /dɪˈzɒlv/ = mix with a liquid and become part of it
rotate /rəʊˈteɪt/ = move or turn around a central fixed point
moist /mɔɪst/ = slightly wet
gas /ɡæs/ = any substance like air that is neither a solid nor a 
liquid, for example hydrogen and oxygen
particle /ˈpɑːtɪkl/ = a very small piece of sth
water vapour /ˈwɔːtə ˈveɪpə/ = a mass of very small drops of 
water in the air
gravity /ˈɡrævəti/ = the force that attracts objects in space 
towards each other, and that on the Earth pulls them towards 
the centre of the planet, so that things fall to the ground when 
they are dropped
c	 Now give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to answer 
questions 1–8.
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
d	 e 10.1  Tell Sts they are now going to listen to a scientist 
answer each question.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each fact has been 
mentioned, and elicit the answer.
	 Finally, find out with a show of hands if any Sts got all 
the answers correct. Ask how many questions Sts already 
knew the answer to, and which information was new 
to them.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
1  B    ​2  B    ​3  A    ​4  B    ​5  A    ​6  A    ​7  B    ​8  A
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 146@@
146 10A
e 10.1
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
C = child, S = scientist
1
C	 Why is the sky blue?
S	 To understand why the sky is blue, we first need to understand 
a little about light. Although light from the Sun looks white, it’s 
really made up of many different colours, as we see when they 
are spread out in a rainbow. Light is like a wave of energy, and 
each colour has a different wavelength. Red is the longest, and 
blue and violet are the shortest. When the Sun’s light reaches 
the Earth’s atmosphere, it’s scattered by tiny molecules of gas in 
the air. Shorter wavelengths – violet and blue – are scattered the 
most widely, and our eyes are much more sensitive to blue than 
violet, so we see more of the blue light than the other colours. So 
that’s why we see the sky as blue.
2
C	 Why is the sea salty?
S	 Most of our planet’s surface is covered in salt water. But where 
does the salt come from? Well, some of it comes from rocks on 
the bottom of the sea, but most of it actually comes from the 
land around us. Every time it rains, tiny amounts of mineral salts 
dissolve into rivers, and these eventually get to the sea. Rivers 
aren’t very salty, because they flow continually, but the Sun’s heat 
causes the seawater to evaporate, so the salt in the sea becomes 
more concentrated.
3
C	 Why can we sometimes see the moon during the day?
S	 We all know that the Sun produces a lot of strong light. So, when 
it’s in the sky, we can’t see the stars or the other planets. The 
moon doesn’t produce light – it reflects the light of the Sun. The 
moon is visible for about twelve out of every twenty-four hours 
because of the way it rotates around the Earth. This means it’s 
visible for some time during daylight nearly every day. 
4
C	 Why do we have a leap year?
S	 The one about leap years. A year is the amount of time it takes the 
Earth to go around the Sun, and we’ve divided our calendar year 
into three hundred and sixty-five days. However, it actually takes 
the Earth three hundred and sixty-five days, five hours, forty-
eight minutes and forty-five seconds to go round the Sun. To deal 
with this difference, we add one day (twenty-four hours) to our 
calendar every four years. This adjustment is not exactly correct, 
because it effectively adds six hours per year rather than the exact 
amount of the difference.
5
C	 Why do we blink?
S	 A ‘blink of an eye’ lasts only a tenth of a second. Every time you 
blink, your eyelids spread fluid across the surface of your eyes, to 
keep them moist, and also to stop them getting dirty. Blinking 
also keeps eyes safe from things that might damage them, such 
as bright light and, sometimes, bigger objects coming into our 
eyes, like a small stone. Blinking stops the activity in your brain 
that detects changes, so you never notice that you actually stop 
seeing for a very short time when you blink.
6
C	 Why does cutting onions make us cry?
S	 For a vegetable, onions have very complicated chemistry. 
When you cut them, a chemical reaction changes molecules 
in the onion into a gas. When this gas reaches the cornea – the 
transparent layer that covers and protects the outer part of your 
eye – the cornea senses it as an irritant. It acts to protect your eyes 
by making you cry, and the tears clean your eyes.
7
C	 What is a cloud?
S	 We all enjoy looking at clouds and seeing their different shapes, 
but what’s the science behind them? Well, the sky is full of drops 
of water. But most of the time, you can’t see them, because they 
are too small; the drops have turned into water vapour. As the 
water vapour goes higher in the sky, the air gets cooler. The cooler 
air causes the drops to start to stick to things, like bits of dust, ice, 
or sea salt, which make them visible. So that’s what we see when 
we see clouds.
8
C	 What is a black hole?
S	 This is another physics question. A black hole is caused by gravity. 
There are places in space where gravity pulls so hard that even 
light cannot get out. The reason that gravity is so strong in a 
black hole is that a lot of matter – that’s physical ‘stuff’ – has been 
compressed into a tiny space. A lot of matter has a high mass, and 
this creates a strong gravitational pull. Inside a black hole, space is 
falling faster than light, which is why light can’t escape.
e	 Focus on the task and then get Sts, in pairs, to discuss 
what extra information they can remember about each 
statement.
	 Then play the audio again, pausing after each statement 
to give Sts time to write.
	 Get Sts to compare with their partner, and then play again 
if necessary.
	 Check answers.
1	 Our eyes are more sensitive to blue than to violet.
2	 It causes it to evaporate.
3	 12
4	 The adjustment adds six hours rather than the exact 
difference.
5	 It stops the activity that detects changes.
6	 It protects the outer part of your eye.
7	 It makes the drops of water start to stick to things like dust.
8	 It creates a strong gravitational pull.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.130, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
f	 Do this as a whole-class activity. You could elicit a simple 
explanation for each question in b from different Sts.
2	VOCABULARY & PRONUNCIATION  
science; stress in word families
Pronunciation notes
In some ‘word families’, i.e. groups of words from the same 
root, the stress is always on the same syllable, e.g. in all the 
words related to physics (physical, physicist), the stress is on 
the first syllable. In others, however, the stress shifts, e.g. 
scientist, scientific, and these groups are often problematic.
a	 Focus on the task and the first column of the chart. 
Explain that the answers to questions 1–8 are the names 
of the subjects Sts need to complete in the chart. Point 
out that the first one (science) has been done for them.
	 Give Sts time to do the task individually or in pairs. Make 
sure they only complete the first column.
b	 e 10.2  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
e 10.2
1	 science
2	 physics
3	 chemistry
4	 biology
5	 astronomy
6	 genetics
7	 botany
8	 zoology
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 147@@
147
10A
	 Check answers, by eliciting the phrases onto the board. 
Explain / Elicit the meaning of each phrase.
genetically modified = having had its genetic structure 
changed artificially, so that it will produce more fruit or not be 
affected by disease
botanical gardens = a park where plants, trees, and flowers are 
grown for scientific study
chemical reaction = a chemical change produced by two or 
more substances acting on each other
human biology = the scientific study of man
physical energy = the ability to put effort and enthusiasm into 
an activity, work, etc.
astronomically expensive = extremely expensive
e 10.4
1	 genetically modified
2	 botanical gardens
3	 chemical reaction
4	 human biology
5	 physical energy
6	 astronomically expensive
f	 Focus on the task and go through the words in the 
list. Elicit / Explain guinea pigs /ˈɡɪni pɪɡz/, laboratory 
/ləˈbɒrətri/, and theory /ˈθɪəri/.
	 Give Sts time to complete the sentences. Point out that 
the first one (experiments) has been done for them.
	 Get them to compare with a partner.
g	 e 10.5  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. As Sts have previously seen the word trial 
in relation to crime, you might want to explain / elicit the 
meaning of the phrase clinical trial in 6 (= the process 
of testing the ability, quality or performance of sb / sth, 
especially before you make a final decision about them).
1  laboratory    ​2  discovery    ​3  theory    ​4  drugs, tests    ​
5  research, side effects    ​6  guinea pigs    ​7  clone
e 10.5
1	 Scientists carry out experiments in a laboratory.
2	 Archimedes made an important discovery in his bath.
3	 Isaac Newton’s experiments proved his theory that gravity 
existed.
4	 Before a pharmaceutical company can sell new drugs, they have 
to do tests to make sure they are safe.
5	 Scientists have to do a lot of research into the possible side effects 
of new drugs.
6	 People can volunteer to be guinea pigs in clinical trials.
7	 In nineteen ninety-six, scientists were able for the first time to 
clone a sheep, which they named Dolly.
	 Now get Sts to underline the stress on the bold  
multi-syllable words in 1–6.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each sentence.
	 Check answers.
1  carry    ​4  pharmaceutical company    ​6  volunteer, clinical 
trials
	 Give Sts time to practise saying the sentences.
	 Now focus on the other two columns in the chart and 
the examples. Give Sts time, individually or in pairs, to 
complete the rest of the chart.
c	 e 10.3  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
!   Some Sts may come up with the word physician. If they 
do, explain that this is also related to physics, but does not 
mean a scientist who studies physics. It is another (old-
fashioned) word for a doctor.
See words in script 10.3
	 Now focus on the Stress in word families box and go 
through it with the class.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after each word or group of 
words for Sts to underline the stressed syllables.
	 Check answers by writing the words on the board and 
underlining the stressed syllables.
physics, physicist, physical
chemistry, chemist, chemical
biology, biologist, biological
astronomy, astronomer, astronomical
genetics, geneticist, genetic
botany, botanist, botanical
zoology, zoologist, zoological
e 10.3
1	 science, scientist, scientific
2	 physics, physicist, physical
3	 chemistry, chemist, chemical
4	 biology, biologist, biological
5	 astronomy, astronomer, astronomical
6	 genetics, geneticist, genetic
7	 botany, botanist, botanical
8	 zoology, zoologist, zoological
	 Now elicit in which groups the stress changes on the 
adjective.
The adjectives from science, biology, astronomy, botany, and 
zoology have the stress on a different syllable from the base 
word.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to underline the stressed 
syllables in the words before they listen to the audio for the 
second time. Get feedback, and then play the audio for Sts 
to listen and check.
d	 Give Sts time to practise saying the word groups. They 
could do this individually or in pairs.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Drill the pronunciation with the whole class 
first, and then get them to practise in pairs. You could use 
the audio to do this.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts if they can think of any more 
scientific word families, e.g. oceanography, geology, 
anthropology, psychology, sociology, etc.
e	 e 10.4  Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand 
that they are only going to hear phrases, not sentences.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each phrase to give Sts time 
to write.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 148@@
148 10A
	 Check answers.
a) quite likely
b) not very likely, 
but possible
c) extremely 
unlikely
plausible
could in theory
a long way from
a real possibility
might be possible
faces extreme 
obstacles
quite a way off
only speculative
might be 
achievable
far-fetched
not totally 
implausible
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could do up to half of the phrases as a 
whole-class activity, and then get Sts to complete the rest in 
pairs.
d	 Focus on the task and go through the Talking about 
future possibilities box with the class.
	 Put Sts in small groups or pairs to discuss which ideas 
in the article they think might happen in the next 50 
years, which they would like to happen, and which will 
never happen. Encourage them to give reasons for their 
answers.
	 Get some feedback from various groups or pairs.
e	 Focus on the phrases in the list and make sure Sts know 
what they mean.
	 Now put Sts in small groups of three or four and get them 
to discuss how likely each one is to happen and whether 
it would be a good thing or not.
	 Get some feedback from various groups for each item. 
Find out if there were any disagreements in any groups.
5	GRAMMAR  quantifiers: all, every, both, etc.
a	 Focus on the instructions. Point out to Sts that they are 
going to be looking at quantifiers – all of which they 
probably will have seen before. However, the rules of use 
will probably be new, although they may instinctively 
know what sounds correct.
	 Give Sts time to circle the correct form, and then check 
answers. If Sts ask why, say that they are now going to the 
Grammar Bank to find out.
1  all    ​2  All the    ​3  everything    ​4  No    ​5  Both    ​6  Neither
b	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10A on p.150.
3	SPEAKING
	 The vocabulary from 2 is now put into practice in this 
speaking activity.
	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do.
	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give them time to read the 
questions. Check Sts understand the word cosmetics (= a 
substance that you put on your face or body to make it 
more attractive).
	 Then get Sts A to ask Sts B the questions in the green 
circles. Encourage Sts B to answer each question in 
as much detail as possible and Sts A to ask follow-up 
questions to extend the conversation. Sts B then ask Sts A 
the questions in the blue circles. Alternatively, you could 
do this activity as a small-group discussion.
	 Monitor and help, correcting any mispronunciation of the 
new lexis.
	 Get feedback from the whole class on some of the 
questions.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Sts could return the questions they 
answer by saying What about you?, or if they finish quickly, 
ask each other the questions which they previously 
answered.
EXTRA IDEA   Get Sts to choose two or three questions to ask 
you after they have done the activity.
4	READING  understanding the language of 
speculation
a	 Focus on the task. Go through the questions, making sure 
Sts understand all the lexis, e.g. teleport, invisible, etc. Try to 
exploit the information that Sts already know.
	 Put Sts in pairs and give them time to discuss the 
questions.
	 Get some feedback.
b	 Focus on the instructions and make sure Sts understand 
what they have to do. Make sure Sts know who Harry 
Potter is (a boy wizard who has an invisibility cloak, in the 
books by J.K. Rowling). Sts don’t need to know exactly what 
quantum information is; if they ask, then you could tell 
them that it’s a tiny amount of electromagnetic energy. 
Quantum theory is a complex concept in physics, but it 
essentially refers to information about the physical world 
at an atomic and subatomic level, where the traditional 
laws of physics no longer apply.
	 Give Sts time to read the article individually and score 
each concept in a from 1 (= very unlikely) to 5 (= very 
likely).
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then elicit 
opinions.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the article the first time, 
check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary, but 
not the highlighted words and phrases.
c	 Focus on the task and make sure Sts understand what 
they have to do. Put Sts in pairs, and tell them to look at 
the context and check what the highlighted words and 
phrases refer to in the text. You could do the first one 
(plausible) with the class, and then get Sts to continue in 
pairs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 149@@
149
10A
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10A.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
c	 This is an oral grammar practice activity. Focus on the 
quiz and give Sts time to do it in pairs. You might want to 
check Sts know the meaning of some of the words, e.g.  
a current, intense, and a circuit. Tell Sts to write the number 
and correct option a, b, or c on a separate piece of paper.
	 Elicit some ideas from Sts, but don’t tell them if they are 
correct or not.
d	 e 10.9  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers. Find out which pair got the most correct 
answers.
1  a    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  a    ​5  b    ​6  c    ​7  b    ​8  c    ​9  c    ​10  a
e 10.9
1	 In direct current, the electrons move in only one direction.
2	 Helium gas can be found in both liquid and solid form.
3	 Adult giraffes remain standing all day.
4	 Of all the water on our planet, hardly any of it is found 
underground.
5	 Snakes eat either other animals or eggs.
6	 A diamond can be destroyed only by intense heat.
7	 The human brain can continue to live without oxygen for nearly 
six minutes.
8	 In our solar system, Pluto is no longer considered to be a planet.
9	 When we breathe out, some of that air is oxygen.
 10	 An individual blood cell makes a whole circuit of the body in 
nearly sixty seconds.
Grammar notes
Sts will have frequently seen and heard all the quantifiers 
they learn here and should know what they mean.
The rules here have been simplified (i.e. there are some 
other uses or positions which we haven’t referred to). If Sts 
find the rules a little overwhelming, focus particularly on 
the examples and encourage them to use their instinct 
when they do the exercises and are not sure which form 
to choose. For example, a phrase like every animals should 
sound wrong, even if they can’t remember why.
all, every, most
You might want to point out that all can sometimes be 
used without a noun when it is followed by a relative 
clause, e.g. I’ve forgotten all (that) I learned at school / 
everything (that) I learned at school.
•	 Rule 4: You could also point out that the verb agrees 
with the object pronoun, e.g. all of them are, most of it 
is, etc.
no, none, any
Sts should know the difference between no and none, but 
the use of none of + pronoun / noun, and any meaning it 
doesn’t matter what / who, etc., may be new. They may 
still be making mistakes with double negatives (NOT we 
haven’t got no time), or using any on its own to mean none. 
In rule 1, remind Sts that any can also be used without a 
noun, e.g. Would you like some tea? No thanks, I don’t feel like 
any right now.
both, neither, either
You may also want to point out that you can use not + 
either instead of neither…nor, e.g. Neither Tim nor Andrew 
can come. Tim can’t come and Andrew can’t (come), either. 
This is also more informal than neither…nor, which can 
sound quite formal in spoken English.
	 Focus on the example sentences for all, every, most and 
play audio e 10.6 for Sts to listen and repeat. Encourage 
them to copy the rhythm. Then go through the rules with 
the class.
	 Go through the every and all + time expressions box 
with the class.
	 Repeat for no, none, any e 10.7 and both, neither, 
either e 10.8.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
a
1  Most of    ​2  Everything    ​3  Most    ​4  every    ​5  any    ​6  None ​
7  Anybody    ​8  neither    9  no
b
1	 ✗ Both the kitchen and the bathroom need cleaning.
2	 ✗ The food wasn’t cheap or tasty. / The food was neither 
cheap nor tasty.
3	 ✓
4	 ✗ My sister and I were both late for school.
5	 ✗ It’s either Jane’s or Karen’s birthday today.
6	 ✓
7	 ✗ Neither of my best friends called to see how I was.
8	 ✗ We can either walk or take the bus.
9	 ✓
10	 ✓
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 150@@
150 10B
 G   articles
 V   collocation: word pairs
 P   pausing and sentence stress
Lesson plan
The topic of this final lesson is public speaking.
In the first half, Sts begin by listening to a programme about 
the controversy surrounding Neil Armstrong’s famous words 
when he stepped on the moon (Did he make a mistake by 
omitting an indefinite article?). This leads into the Grammar, 
where Sts revise and extend their knowledge of use and 
non-use of the definite and indefinite articles. Sts then read 
a short text about what makes a good speech according to 
Cicero, before focusing on eight sound bites from famous 
speeches. Then they read about the circumstances in which 
four of the speeches were written. Sts discuss which speech 
they would most like to have heard, great speakers they 
know of, and past or present politicians who are either good 
or bad speakers.
In the second half of the lesson, Sts listen to a radio 
programme in which an expert gives tips for giving a 
good presentation and a young woman talks about an 
international public speaking competition she took part in. 
The vocabulary focus is on word pairs joined with and and 
or, e.g. sick and tired, all or nothing. Then in Pronunciation, 
Sts learn how pausing in the correct places and stressing 
sentences correctly will make them much easier to 
understand if they are giving a presentation in English. They 
then have the opportunity to give a short presentation to 
the class. The lesson ends with a documentary on speaking 
in public.
More materials
For teachers
Photocopiables 
Grammar  articles p.181 
                       Revision Grammar Auction p.182 
Communicative  General knowledge quiz p.212 
(instructions p.189) 
                              Revision p.213 (instructions p.189) 
Vocabulary  Revision p.230 (instructions p.217)
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Giving presentations: a voice coach
For students
Workbook  10B
Online Practice  10B
OPTIONAL LEAD-IN – THE QUOTE   
Write the quote at the top of p.100 on the board and the 
name of the person who said it, or get Sts to open their 
books and read it.
You could tell Sts that Dale Carnegie (1888–1955) was an 
American writer and lecturer, and the developer of famous 
courses in self-improvement, salesmanship, corporate 
training, public speaking, and interpersonal skills. He wrote 
How to Win Friends and Influence People in 1936, which is still 
a bestseller today.
Ask Sts if they agree with him.
1	GRAMMAR  articles
a	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
Neil Armstrong was the first man to walk on the moon in 1969 
(on 20 July).
b	 e 10.10  Tell Sts that they are going to hear the original 
recording of Neil Armstrong speaking from the moon. 
Warn them that, understandably, the recording is quite 
crackly.
	 Play the audio for Sts just to listen.
	 Now play it again and get Sts to complete the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check answers.
small, man, mankind
e 10.10
(Neil Armstrong original recording)
That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.
	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to answer questions 1 and 2.
	 Check answers.
1	 a step = the act of lifting your foot and putting it down in 
order to walk or move somewhere
	
a leap = a long or high jump; a sudden large change or 
increase in sth
2	 mankind = all humans, thought about as one large group; the 
human race
c	 e 10.11  Tell Sts they are going to listen to an interview 
about the moon landing. Focus on the three questions 
they need to answer and make sure they know the 
meaning of controversy.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then if necessary, 
play the audio again.
	 Check answers.
The controversy is whether he said ‘one small step for man’ or 
‘one small step for a man’. The version without a doesn’t really 
make sense.
‘One small step for a man’ means one small step for an individual 
human being.
‘One small step for man’ means one small step for all men, i.e. the 
human race (which is the same as mankind).
New technology proved him right.
e 10.11
(script in Student’s Book on p.130)
P = presenter, J = James
P	 When Neil Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon 
on July the twentieth nineteen sixty-nine, a global audience of 
five hundred million people were watching and listening. As he 
climbed down the steps from the spacecraft and stepped onto 
	10B	 Free speech
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 151@@
151
10B
1	 the USA ✓
2	 a shy boy ✓, the books and the music
3	 at the university
4	 the first man ✓, on the moon
5	 by people all over the world ✓
6	 an astronaut, the US navy ✓
7	 the autographs
8	 the Armstrong’s hair
f	 Tell Sts to go to Grammar Bank 10B on p.151.
Grammar notes
Sts should be familiar with the basic rules for using 
articles, but this is an area that can be very difficult for 
some nationalities who don’t have articles in their L1. The 
basic rules are revised here, as well as introducing Sts to 
new areas, such as the use of articles with institutions, e.g. 
hospital, and with geographical and other place names, 
e.g. streets, hotels, etc.
Basic rules: a / an / the, no article
•	 Rule 2: (non-use of the definite article when generalizing) 
is an area where Sts often make mistakes, e.g. Men are 
better at parking… NOT The men are better at parking…
Institutions
The use and non-use of the with church, hospital, and 
school is a tricky little point, but with a clear rule. It will 
help to give Sts other examples, e.g.:
I’m studying at university. (= I am a student there) NOT …at 
the university.
The university is in the centre of town. (= we are talking 
about the buildings of a particular university).
Other words which are used like this are college and 
mosque / synagogue (and other places of worship).
More rules: geographical names
The number of rules here, most of which are new for Sts, 
may seem overwhelming. Emphasize, however, that Sts 
should already have a good instinct for whether they 
need to use the or not, and also that the easiest way to 
internalize the rules is by learning and remembering 
a clear example, e.g. Fifth Avenue, the River Nile, the 
Mediterranean Sea, (Mount) Everest, the Andes, etc.
If their L1 has articles, Sts should also focus especially on 
any rules that are different.
	 Focus on the example sentences for basic rules: a / an / 
the, no article and play audio e 10.12 for Sts to listen 
and repeat. Encourage them to copy the rhythm. Then go 
through the rules with the class.
	 Repeat for institutions e 10.13 and more rules: 
geographical names e 10.14.
	 Focus on the exercises and get Sts to do them individually 
or in pairs.
	 If they do them individually, get them to compare with 
a partner. Check answers, getting Sts to read the full 
sentences.
the moon, they heard him say, ‘That’s one small step for man, one 
giant leap for mankind.’ It seemed like the perfect quote for such 
a momentous occasion. But from the moment he said it, people 
have argued about whether Armstrong got his lines wrong and 
made a mistake. James, tell us about it.
J	 Well, Armstrong always said that he wrote those words himself, 
which became some of the most famous and memorable words 
in history, during the time between landing on the moon and 
actually stepping out of the capsule onto the moon. That was 
nearly seven hours.
P	 And so what is the controversy about what Armstrong said when 
he stepped down the ladder, onto the moon?
J	 The question is: did he say, ‘one small step for man’ or ‘one small 
step for a man’? That’s to say: did he use the indefinite article or 
not? It’s just a little word, but there’s a big difference in meaning.
	
Armstrong always insisted that he wrote one small step for a man, 
one giant leap for mankind. Of course, this would have been a 
meaningful sentence. If you say a man, then it clearly means that 
this was one small step for an individual man, i.e. himself, but one 
giant leap for mankind – that’s to say men and women in general. 
But what everybody actually heard was, ‘one small step for man, 
one giant leap for mankind’, with no indefinite article, and that 
sentence means, ‘one small step for people in general, one giant 
leap for people in general.’ And that doesn’t really make sense.
P	 So did he just get the line wrong when he said it?
J	 Well, Armstrong himself was never sure if he actually said what 
he wrote. In his biography, First Man, he told the author James 
Hansen, ‘I must admit that it doesn’t sound like the word a is 
there. On the other hand, certainly the a was intended, because 
that’s the only way it makes sense.’ He always regretted that there 
had been so much confusion about it.
	
But almost four decades later, Armstrong was proved to be right. 
Peter Shann Ford, an Australian computer expert, used very hi-
tech sound techniques to analyse his sentence, and he discovered 
that the a was said by Armstrong. It’s just that he said it so quickly 
that you couldn’t hear it on the recording, which was broadcast to 
the world on the twentieth of July nineteen sixty-nine.
P	 Was Armstrong relieved to hear this?
J	 Yes, he was. I think it meant a lot to him to know that he didn’t 
make a mistake.
d	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the interview again and 
this time they need to answer questions 1–6. Give Sts time 
to read the questions.
	 Play the audio again once the whole way through for Sts 
to listen and answer the questions.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then, if necessary, 
play the audio again.
	 Check answers.
1	 During the time (nearly seven hours) between landing on 
the moon and actually stepping out of the capsule onto the 
moon
2	 He says he wrote That’s one small step for a man…
3	 Because that sentence means ‘one small step for people in 
general, one giant leap for people in general’.
4	 He thought he said, ‘one small step for a man…’.
5	 He is an Australian computer expert who used very hi-tech 
sound techniques to analyse Armstrong’s sentence.
	
He discovered that, in fact, Armstrong did say a man, but he 
said it so quickly that you can only hear it with special sound 
equipment.
6	 He felt relieved.
e	 Focus on the facts about Neil Armstrong and make it clear 
to Sts that the mistakes are all to do with using or not 
using the indefinite article a / an or the definite article the.
	 Give Sts time to do the task.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 152@@
152 10B
3	 a person who makes formal speeches in public or is good at 
public speaking
4	 the ability to say or write things that are both clever and 
amusing
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Ask Sts what they think are the elements 
of a good speech.
	 Deal with any vocabulary problems that arose.
b	 Tell Sts to focus on the eight images, and find out if they 
know any information about the people. Don’t worry if 
they don’t.
	 Now give Sts time to match the sound bites to the images 
of the people. They could do this individually or in pairs. 
Tell them to guess if they don’t know.
	 If Sts worked individually, get them to compare with a 
partner.
	 The speeches can be found online, in original and acted 
versions.
c	 e 10.15  You might want to tell Sts that the recording 
they are going to listen to is a mix of actors and authentic 
clips. Play the audio for Sts to listen and check.
	 Check answers.
A  Elizabeth I    ​B  Abraham Lincoln    ​C  Emmeline Pankhurst    ​
D  Winston Churchill    ​E  John F Kennedy    ​F  Martin Luther King ​
G  Nelson Mandela    H  ​Barack Obama
e 10.15
(script in Student’s Book on pp.130–131)
(actor) – Elizabeth the First A
I know I have the body of a weak and feeble woman, but I have the 
heart and stomach of a king, and a king of England, too.
(actor) – Abraham Lincoln B
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining 
before us – that from these honored dead we take increased 
devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of 
devotion – that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not 
have died in vain – that this nation, under God, shall have a new 
birth of freedom – and that government of the people, by the 
people, for the people, shall not perish from the Earth.
(actor) – Emmeline Pankhurst C
The title of my speech today is The laws that men have made.
Men politicians are in the habit of talking to women as if there 
were no laws that affect women. ‘The fact is,’ they say, ‘the home is 
the place for women. Their interests are the rearing and training 
of children. These are the things that interest women. Politics have 
nothing to do with these things, and therefore politics do not 
concern women.’
(original recording) – Winston Churchill D
We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, 
we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the 
hills; we shall never surrender.
(original recording) – John F Kennedy E
And so, my fellow Americans, ask not what your country can do for 
you; ask what you can do for your country. My fellow citizens of the 
world, ask not what America will do for you, but what together we 
can do for the freedom of man.
(original recording) – Martin Luther King F
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a 
nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but 
by the content of their character. I have a dream today!
(original recording) – Nelson Mandela G
I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which 
all persons live together in harmony, and with equal opportunities. It 
is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve. But, if needs be, it 
is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.
a
1  (–)    ​2  The    ​3  (–)    ​4  (–)    ​5  The    ​6  (–)    ​7  the    ​8  (–)    ​
9  a    ​10  the
b
1	 (–) Sicily is the largest island in the Mediterranean.
2	 Cairo is on the River Nile.
3	 We didn’t have time to visit the Louvre when we were in Paris.
4	 (–) South-west England is famous for its beautiful countryside 
and beaches.
5	 (–) Mount Everest is in the Himalayas.
6	 The largest inland lake is the Caspian Sea.
7	 We stayed at the Palace Hotel while we were in Madrid.
8	 Romeo and Juliet is on at the Globe Theatre.
9	 Pico d’Aneto is the highest mountain in the Pyrenees.
 10	 I’ve always wanted to visit (–) India.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
EXTRA SUPPORT   If you think Sts need more practice, you 
may want to give them the Grammar photocopiable 
activity at this point.
g	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, preferably face-to-face. Tell them 
to go to Communication True or false, A on p.110, B on 
p.114.
	 Go through the instructions and make sure Sts know what 
they have to do.
	 When Sts have completed their sentences in a, check 
answers using the key below. Don’t read out the 
sentences: just elicit where articles are necessary, and 
which ones.
Sts A
Sts B
1	 The, the, the
1	 The, the, –
2	 –, the
2	 The, the, the
3	 The, the, –
3	 The, the, the
4	 –, the
4	 The, the, –
5	 The, the, –
5	 The, –
6	 –, –
6	 The, the, –, –
7	 –, –
7	 –, the, the
8	 –, –, –
8	 –, –
	 Now give Sts time to take turns to read their sentences to 
each other and to guess whether they are true or false.
	 When the activity has finished, you could ask who got the 
most correct answers in each pair.
	 Tell Sts to go back to the main lesson 10B.
2	READING  understanding context
a	 Tell Sts they are going to read about some famous 
speeches through the ages. Focus on the task and give 
Sts time to read the introduction and try to work out the 
meaning of the highlighted words and phrases.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1	 a short phrase or sentence taken from a longer speech, 
especially a speech made by a politician, that is considered to 
be particularly effective or appropriate
2	 the ability to speak easily and to persuade other people with 
your words
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 153@@
153
10B
1  yourself    ​2  type out your talk    ​3  eye contact    ​4  Rehearse, 
rehearse, rehearse    ​5  sound bites    ​6  other speakers
e 10.16
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
P = presenter, L = Lynne Parker, A = Anya Edwards
P	 Welcome to today’s programme. Our topic today is public 
speaking. Public speaking is right up there at the top of what 
most people say they’re most afraid of. There is even a name for 
it – glossophobia. But hopefully after this programme, you will feel 
a lot more confident if you do have to make a speech or give a 
presentation.
	
First, we have Lynne Parker, an expert in the art of public 
speaking, who’s going to tell us some of her dos and don’ts. Then 
after that, we’re going to talk to Anya Edwards from Chile. Anya 
was a finalist in last year’s English Speaking Union International 
public speaking competition. Lynne, I believe you have six key 
tips for us, is that right?
L	 Yes, that’s right. My first tip, and maybe the most important one, 
is be yourself. This applies both to how you speak, and to what 
you actually do on the stage, whether that’s standing up, sitting 
down, or moving about. Do what you feel comfortable with. 
The only don’t as regards how you are onstage, I’d say, is try not 
to continually walk up and down, because this tends to distract 
people from what you’re saying.
P	 Yes, I do find that distracting.
L	 Secondly, if you’re using PowerPoint, don’t just type out your 
talk. You want people to listen to what you’re saying, not to read 
ahead. Slides are best for illustrating your talk or for drawing 
attention to a point. Pictures are often better than words, but if 
you use words, do keep it short. And do remember the ten-
twenty-thirty rule. Do you know what that is?
P	 Er…no, do tell us.
L	 The ten-twenty-thirty rule is that the ideal presentation should 
have ten slides, last twenty minutes, and never have a font size on 
the slides that’s less than thirty points.
P	 Ah, great, that’s an easy one to remember. And tip number three?
L	 Maintain eye contact with your audience, whether it’s to five 
hundred people in a room, or twenty people in a classroom or 
round a table. Don’t spend the whole talk looking at your notes or 
slides.
P	 How can you maintain eye contact with five hundred people?
L	 Well, you can’t with all of them, of course, but a good technique 
is to scan the audience occasionally from side to side and front to 
back, to give the impression you’re talking to everyone.
P	 Number four?
L	 Rehearse, rehearse, rehearse. In front of a mirror, or even better, 
video yourself. It will make you aware of how you use your hands 
and body, and even what clothes look right.
P	 Number five?
L	 Include a couple of good sound bites. Whenever you hear 
something good, write it down, as you might be able to use it 
later.
P	 So, sound bites rather than stories or examples?
L	 Well, no, not instead of – a good story or example can also help to 
illustrate a situation, or help people to remember the point you 
were making. Just don’t make it too long, and if you’re telling a 
little story, remember – good stories have a beginning, a middle, 
and an end.
P	 And your last point?
L	 Listen to other speakers. There are lots of good resources online, 
such as TED talks and The Moth, which is a great storytelling 
website. Also, listen to people talking when you’re out and about, 
for example traveling on public transport or queuing up in the 
supermarket. You never know what witty remarks or good stories 
you might pick up along the way.
P	 Thank you very much, Lynne.
d	 Focus on the chart and tell Sts that they are going to listen 
to Lynne again and this time, for each tip, they must write 
any more information that she mentions. Point out to Sts 
that tips 2, 4, and 6 don’t have any more information for 
Don'ts.
(original recording) – Barack Obama H
For when we have faced down impossible odds, when we’ve been 
told we’re not ready, or that we shouldn’t try, or that we can’t, 
generations of Americans have responded with a simple creed that 
sums up the spirit of a people. Yes, we can! Yes, we can! Yes, we can!
d	 Tell Sts they are now going to read a little more 
information about four of the speeches in b. They must 
complete each one with the name of the person who 
made it, and the correct sound bite from b.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Before Sts read the four speeches the first 
time, check whether you need to pre-teach any vocabulary.
1	 Elizabeth I, A	
3	 Emmeline Pankhurst, C
2	 Abraham Lincoln, B	
4	 Nelson Mandela, G
	 Deal with any other new vocabulary. Elicit or model the 
pronunciation of any tricky words.
	 Now ask Sts if they know in what context the other four 
people made their speeches.
H	 Barack Obama during his presidential campaign in 2008
D	 Winston Churchill after the D-Day landings in 1941
E	 John F Kennedy at his inaugural address in 1961
F	 Martin Luther King at the end of a march against racial 
discrimination in 1963
e	 Focus on the task and questions 1–8, making sure Sts 
understand all the lexis, e.g. convey, applauded, etc.
	 Give Sts time to answer each question with the speaker’s 
initials. Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
1  AL    ​2  NM    ​3  QE    ​4  AL    ​5  QE    ​6  EP    ​7  NM    ​8  EP
f	 Put Sts in pairs and get them to discuss the three 
questions.
	 Get some feedback from various pairs. If your Sts come 
from the same country, you could do question 3 as a 
whole-class activity.
3	LISTENING & SPEAKING  identifying dos and 
don’ts
a	 Either get Sts to answer the questions in pairs and get 
feedback, or do them as a whole-class activity and elicit 
Sts’ experiences. If you have a story of your own, tell it to 
the class.
b	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
That you shouldn’t use too many slides when doing a 
PowerPoint presentation.
c	 e 10.16  Focus on the task. Tell Sts that Lynne Parker 
is the founder of an organization which helps women 
perform, write, and do business. In particular, she provides 
coaching for women who want to improve their public 
speaking skills.
	 Give Sts time to read tips 1–6. Play the audio once 
the whole way through for Sts to listen and complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 154@@
154 10B
A	 I was nervous – very nervous. But then I’ve never not been 
nervous before speaking in front of an audience. I’ve done a 
lot of drama, of acting, and that’s taught me that nerves are 
good because you can learn to channel them into a better 
performance.
P	 How is public speaking different from acting?
A	 Well, in many ways they’re similar, because you need many of 
the same qualities: to be able to stand in front of an audience 
confidently and speak clearly, to be convincing. But I’d say that 
public speaking is harder because you can’t rely on anyone else. 
If you miss a line, there won’t be someone next to you to give you 
your cue, and you’re the main focus of attention one hundred per 
cent of the time.
P	 And what did you learn from the experience?
A	 I think it was one of the most useful skills I’ve ever learnt, and that 
any person can have because if you’ve learnt to do it well, and 
practised, it means that you’ll never, ever have to worry about 
standing up and speaking in front of other people.
P	 What tips would you give to someone about writing a speech?
A	 Well, for writing a speech, I’d say to start by talking about the 
topic out loud and record whatever comes into your head on your 
phone. Then listen back to it, and start by ordering your ideas on 
paper. And if you think the subject you have to talk about is a bit 
dry, try to come up with some anecdotes to illustrate it. Also, use 
plain, simple language. Vocabulary that’s too complicated puts 
people off.
P	 And to deliver it?
A	 I agree entirely with Lynne about being authentic, about being 
yourself. If you want your speech to be effective, people need to 
believe what you say, and in order to convince them, you need to 
be convinced yourself.
f	 Tell Sts they are going to listen to the audio again and this 
time they need to answer multiple-choice questions 1–6.
	 Give Sts time to read the questions and options.
	 Play the audio again, pausing after Anya has answered a 
question, to give Sts time to choose the best option.
	 Check answers.
1  b    ​2  a    ​3  b    ​4  c    ​5  b    ​6  a
EXTRA SUPPORT   If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
g	 Do this as a whole-class activity, or put Sts in pairs and 
then get some feedback.
4	VOCABULARY  collocation: word pairs
a	 Focus on the Word pairs box and go through it with the 
class.
	 Focus on the questions and elicit the equivalent 
expressions in the Sts’ L1, and ask them which order the 
words come in.
b	 Focus on the instructions. Do one with the class. Ask 
Sts which word (from box B) often goes with backwards 
(in box A), and elicit forwards. Then ask Sts if we say 
backwards and forwards or forwards and backwards, and 
elicit that it is the former. Elicit / Explain that in these word 
pairs and is usually pronounced /ən/.
	 Sts then continue matching the pairs. Don’t check 
answers yet.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to do b and then c in pairs.
c	 Focus on the task and get Sts to do it individually or 
in pairs. Sts should know most of these or be able to 
guess them.
	 Play the audio, pausing after each tip to give Sts time to 
write.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then check 
answers.
Dos
Don’ts
Tip 1
Do what you feel 
comfortable with.
Don’t continually 
walk up and down.
Tip 2
Do keep it short. Do 
remember the 10–20–30 
rule.
–
Tip 3
Do occasionally scan from 
side to side and front to 
back.
Don’t spend the 
whole time looking 
at your slides or 
notes.
Tip 4
Do use a mirror or video 
yourself.
–
Tip 5
Do write down anything 
you hear. Do make sure 
a story has a beginning, 
middle, and end.
Don’t make it too 
long.
Tip 6
Do use online resources. 
Do listen to people when 
you’re out and about.
–
EXTRA SUPPORT  If there’s time, you could get Sts to listen 
again with the script on p.131, so they can see exactly what 
they understood / didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any 
new words or phrases.
e	 e 10.17  Tell Sts that they are now going to listen to 
Part 2 of the interview. Remind Sts that the presenter 
introduced Anya at the beginning of Part 1.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen and answer the question.
	 Check the answer.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts listen.
She agrees with Lynne’s Tip 1, ‘Be yourself’.
e 10.17
(script in Student’s Book on p.131)
P	 And now we have Anya on the line, from Chile.
A	 Hello.
P	 Anya, you took part in the competition last year, is that right?
A	 Yes.
P	 Can you tell us a bit about it?
A	 Well, it’s open to people from any country between the ages of 
sixteen and eighteen. First, you compete at home – so for me, in 
Chile – and then the international finals take place in London.
P	 What exactly did you have to do there?
A	 So you have to give two speeches. The first one is a prepared 
speech, which is a maximum of five minutes on a subject that 
they give you – that year for me it was on the role of education. 
And then after your speech, you have to answer questions for 
three to four minutes. And then the second speech, and this was 
definitely the scariest, was the impromptu speech. You are given 
three subjects to choose from which you’ve never seen before, 
and then fifteen minutes to choose one and prepare a speech of 
three minutes.
P	 What did you choose?
A	 I chose the title To be grown up is a state of mind.
P	 Were you nervous?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 155@@
155
10B
Good afternoon everyone / and thank you for coming. / I’m 
going to talk to you today about one of my hobbies, / baking. / 
I’ve loved baking since I was a child. / My grandmother taught 
me to make simple biscuits and cakes / and later, / when I was 
a teenager, / I watched a lot of TV programmes and online 
videos / to learn how to make more complicated ones. / What I 
like about baking / is that it’s very creative / and it makes other 
people happy.
e 10.19
See text in Student’s Book on p.103
b	 Get Sts in pairs to practise reading the speech in a, making 
the correct pauses and trying to get a good rhythm. You 
might want to explain that the content of this example 
talk is relatively easy, and on a familiar topic, because the 
focus of this activity is less about what you say and more 
about improving the way you deliver a talk.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Play the audio again and get Sts to listen 
and repeat at the same time. Then put them in pairs to 
practise again.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   After doing the activity, elicit what else 
this speaker might go on to say in her speech.
c	 Focus on the instructions. You could elicit / suggest some 
other topics, e.g. a famous person you admire, the good or 
bad side of your job / course, a sport you play, etc.  
Set a time limit for Sts to prepare their presentation, 
and monitor and help with vocabulary. Encourage Sts 
to make a plan and write notes, rather than writing the 
presentation out in full. Remind them to think about some 
of the tips they listened to earlier in the lesson.
!   If you know that some of your Sts will be nervous about 
giving a presentation, tell them now that they won’t be 
doing it in front of the whole class, but in small groups.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Less confident / proficient Sts might want 
to write up their presentation at home and practise it before 
doing the presentation in the following class.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Get Sts to look back through Files 1–9 
and choose a topic for their presentation which relates to 
one of the topics they have covered in the course.
d	 Now put Sts in small groups of three or four to give 
the presentations to each other. Remind them of the 
question-and-answer session after each presentation; 
while they are listening, they should write down at least 
one question to ask the speaker after the presentation 
is over.
	 Try to listen to as many Sts as possible and to give positive 
feedback to the whole class, as this may be one of the 
most challenging speaking activities that they have done.
EXTRA IDEA   If you have a video camera, you could film 
some or all of the presentations to show later, provided Sts 
feel comfortable with this.
6	r VIDEO LISTENING
a	 Tell Sts they are going to watch a short film about public 
speaking. Give Sts time to read the three questions.
	 Play the video once the whole way through for Sts to 
listen.
d	 e 10.18  Play the audio for Sts to listen and check their 
answers to b and c. Check answers.
e 10.18
b
backwards and forwards, cause and effect, forgive and forget,  
health and safety, live and learn, thunder and lightning, pros and 
cons, peace and quiet, supply and demand, short and sweet
c
right or wrong, now or never, more or less, sooner or later,  
all or nothing, once or twice, dead or alive, rain or shine
EXTRA SUPPORT   Get Sts to practise saying the phrases. You 
could use the audio to do this.
EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs and get them to test each other 
by saying the first word from each pair for their partner to 
complete the expression, e.g.:
A	 (book open) Backwards… 
B	 (book closed) …and forwards.
Make sure they swap roles.
e	 Tell Sts that they are now going to look at some more 
word pairs which are idioms. Focus on the task and give 
Sts time to match the idioms to their meanings.
	 Check answers and make sure Sts are clear about the 
meaning of these idioms.
1  C    ​2  G    ​3  E    ​4  H    ​5  A    ​6  B    ​7  D    ​8  F
f	 This exercise recycles some of the expressions Sts have 
just learned. Focus on the sentences and give Sts time to 
complete them.
	 Check answers. You might want to point out that now and 
then and on and off are close synonyms for now and again 
(item 2). 
1  bits and pieces    ​2  now and again    ​3  wait and see    ​ 
4  safe and sound    ​5  by and large    ​6  law and order    ​ 
7  sick and tired    ​8  touch and go
EXTRA IDEA   This activity could be done in pairs or small 
groups as a timed race.
EXTRA CHALLENGE   Tell Sts to cover sentences 1–8 in e, and 
call out in random order the phrases in A–H, to prompt the 
highlighted idiom. Alternatively, Sts could do this in pairs.
5	PRONUNCIATION & SPEAKING  pausing and 
sentence stress
a	 e 10.19  Focus on the instructions and elicit / explain 
that a chunk is a reasonable amount of something, e.g. a 
chunk of cheese. In this case, it refers to a section / a few 
sentences of a speech. Highlight that there will always be 
a pause after full stops and commas, but that there are 
sometimes more pauses, which help the listener to follow 
what is being said. Point out the first pause, which has 
already been marked.
	 Play the audio once the whole way through for Sts just to 
listen. Then play it again and get Sts to mark the pauses.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
audio again. Check answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 156@@
156 10B
L	 Right.
S	 Probably the most significant thing that I noticed that you could 
do differently is to slow down.
	
…see yourself and feel yourself confident and sure…
P	 If you can get your body language right, it will help your breathing, 
and controlling your breath is central to good public speaking.
	
You learn to relax and find the power behind the voice through 
warm-up and breathing exercises.
S	 … trust, Lou, that you are aware of that amazing range you in fact 
have. Yes?
L	 Yeah.
S	 So, you’re breathing in, sighing in, pushing out. Pushing all the air 
right out. Waiting…
P	 Once you have mastered the thought and the breath, you can finally 
speak. But this isn’t as easy as it sounds.
L	 Good afternoon.
S	 Brilliant, you’ve done that really, really well. You’ve got the hang of 
that. So now we’re going to get a bit of oomph into our voice by 
doing it like an opera singer. Good afternoon.
L	 Good afternoon.
P	 It isn’t always easy to speak naturally, but finally – after a lot of 
practice – the words start to flow. Now I can try a full paragraph.
L	 I’ll share some very embarrassing stories and I’ll explain the 
impact that our work has on very lonely people.
P	 You have to make an impact from the beginning, and Sandie gives 
you the A, B, C, D of the perfect opening. And it’s just as important to 
end on a positive note.
S	 …and language and anticipate finishing by four p.m.
P	 Speaking and communicating are two very different things, and 
communicating effectively takes skill, perseverance, and lots of hard 
work. Unfortunately, it isn’t as easy as just reading the right words; 
you need to tell the story, too. But if you can do this, you will draw in 
your audience, and as they relax, you’ll relax, too.
S	 Yeah, I thought your pace was excellent: it was really measured, it 
was clear. I would have understood exactly what you were about 
to do, who you were, and why you were doing that. So, as far as 
I’m concerned, that was really effective communication.
L	 Thank you.
S	 Pleasure.
P	 I still feel nervous about speaking in front of people, but at RADA I 
enjoyed public speaking for the first time, and the more I enjoyed it, 
the better I became. And that’s what the RADA technique is all about. 
It gives you the skills to grow in confidence so…so like an actor, you 
can face your audience with assurance rather than fear.
b	 Focus on the task and give Sts time to read sentences 
1–10. Point out that the acronym RADA is explained in the 
film. 
	 Play the video again for Sts to watch and complete 
the gaps.
	 Get Sts to compare with a partner, and then play the 
video again if necessary.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to compare their answers 
with a partner before the second playing of the video.
1  public speaking    ​2  clearly, confidently    ​3  London, 1904    ​ 
4  same skills    ​5  think, breathe, speak    ​6  interesting feedback  ​
7  body language    ​8  make, impact    ​9  positive note    ​
10  grow, confidence
EXTRA SUPPORT   You could get Sts to watch the video again 
with subtitles, so they can see exactly what they understood / 
didn’t understand. Translate / Explain any new words or phrases.
c	 Do this as a whole-class activity.
EXTRA IDEA   After doing the Revise and Check lesson, you 
could give Sts one or all of the final three photocopiable 
activities (Grammar, Communicative, and Vocabulary), 
which include questions to revise all the grammar points 
and lexis they studied in this level.
	 Check answers.
EXTRA SUPPORT   Read through the script and decide if you 
need to pre-teach any new lexis before Sts watch the video.
Sandie criticised Louise for playing with her feet and crossing her 
legs.
Sandie said Louise should slow down, be confident, relax, and 
use her voice.
Sandie said Louise had slowed down, was clear, and an effective 
communicator.
Giving presentations: a voice coach
P = presenter, S = Sandie, L = Louise
P	 Hi, I’m Louise, and I work for a local newspaper here in London. I love 
writing and I enjoy interviewing, but there’s one part of my job I really 
hate – and that’s public speaking.
	
The problem is that no matter what work you do, speaking in 
public is almost impossible to avoid. These days, most roles require 
communication skills. From small presentations to big conference 
speeches, you need to be able to deliver a message clearly and 
confidently. But for people like me, this isn’t easy. I find speaking 
in public terrifying. I become tense and nervous and find it very 
difficult to relax. That’s why I’ve come here – to the Royal Academy of 
Dramatic Art.
	
RADA first opened in the Haymarket in London in nineteen oh four. 
It offers training for theatre specialists, including actors, stage 
managers, directors, and designers. It has become one of the most 
famous acting schools in the world, and some of the entertainment 
industry’s biggest names have studied here.
	
But what am I doing here? Well, it’s about time I overcame my fear of 
public speaking, and to do this, I need to become a good actor.
	
After all, actors and public speakers use a lot of the same skills. Both 
should tell a story, and both should engage an audience. Because of 
this, RADA run several public speaking courses.
S	 …into a series of individuals and of course, individuals are never 
as scary as the mass. Does that make sense?
P	 I’ve come here to develop an actor’s approach to speaking effectively, 
and Sandie – an actor for over thirty years – is going to show me the 
way.
S	 but nothing weird or spooky, but…
P	 The RADA approach to public speaking can be summarized in three 
words – think, breathe, speak.
S	 Tell me if anything doesn’t make sense.
L	 No, it does, and I’ve always wanted a really grown-up…
P	 First, we’re going to focus on the ‘think’ part.
S	 First of all, I hope you don’t mind me asking, but why are you 
here?
L	 Um, well, I tend to do a lot of one-to-one work with people when 
I’m interviewing them…
P	 At this stage, you talk through your concerns and set an objective for 
the session.
L	 … there’s a big group of people and they’re not behind a 
microphone or TV camera. I get so nervous – even when I’m 
meeting new people at parties or dinner parties, so it would just 
be good to learn a few techniques to feel more confident.
S	 OK, so…
P	 Then you give a presentation in your usual style, and get some 
interesting feedback from Sandie.
L	 … So, that’s about it.
S	 Very, very well done. Thank you very much indeed. Really well 
done, Lou. How was that for you? So, I think you’re absolutely 
charming, Lou. You come across with a really positive energy. 
You’ve got a lovely open face. You very clearly are naturally 
engaging, which means I, as your audience, am naturally 
engaged. You’re friendly, you’re affable, and you’ve got a great 
smile, which is wonderful. Things – small things – that I think you 
might be able to do differently: so, you were playing with your 
feet. You were playing with your feet like a five-year-old. So, if I say 
that you were doing that on your heels…
L	 Right. Oh, yeah.
S	 Do you know what I mean?
L	 Yeah, yeah, yeah.
S	 And then you crossed your legs.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 157@@
157
Revise and Check
For instructions on how to use these pages, see p.41.
More materials
For teachers
Teacher’s Resource Centre 
Video  Can you understand these people? 9&10 
Quick Test 10 
File 10 Test 
Progress Test Files 6–10 
End-of-course Test
For students
Online Practice  Check your progress
GRAMMAR
1  b    ​2  c    ​3  a    ​4  c    ​5  b    ​6  a    ​7  c    ​8  a    ​9  c    ​10  c    ​
11  b    ​12  b    ​13  a    ​14  b    ​15  a
VOCABULARY
a	 1  genetic    ​2  scientific    ​3  neighbourhood    ​4  loneliness    ​
5  death
b	 1  overpopulated    ​2  mispronounced    ​3  multinational    ​
4  autobiography    ​5  underpaid
c	 1  loss    ​2  set up    ​3  leader    ​4  launch    ​5  branches    ​
6  business    ​7  rise    ​8  side    ​9  carry    ​10  guinea
d	 1  quiet    ​2  sound    ​3  later    ​4  order    ​5  never
PRONUNCIATION
a	
1  branch /ɑː/    ​2  government /ʌ/    ​3  research /ɜː/    ​ 
4  decision /ʒ/    ​5  though /ð/
b
1  biological    ​2  physicist    ​3  multicultural    ​4  increase    ​
5  manufacture
CAN YOU  understand this text?
a	 Because he considered it the best he’d ever heard and 
because it became iconic and recognizably his own.
b	 1  a    ​2  c    ​3  b    ​4  c
r CAN YOU  understand these people?
1  c    ​2  b    ​3  c    ​4  b
e 10.20
1
I = interviewer, T = Thomas
I	
Are there any brands which you think have a really good logo or 
slogan?
T	
I think, you know, one, the one that sticks out to me the most is 
the Nike swoosh. Er, you know the, I’ve sort of been fascinated 
by that and the whole progression of the company over the 
years. I, I find them to be one of the strongest brands. I think 
American, er, icons like Coca-Cola – that’s a great brand name. 
Disney, that’s a great brand.
I	
Does it make you want to buy the products?
T	
You know, I will say I am loyal to those products. I think each 
one brings a little different thing to it. When I think of, you 
know, Disney, I think about customer service. When I think 
about Coca-Cola, I think about the quality of their product. Nike, 
Nike, I think about their, sort of, um, cutting edge marketing 
campaigns, and they’ve got a product that is, sort of, backs it 
up, too.
I	
Are there any advertisements that make you not want to buy 
the product?
T	
I tend to dislike, er, car ads that are on the radio. I don’t mind 
them on television, but on ads, I, er, I tend to want to turn 
them off. I don’t think I’m not going to buy a car, but I don’t like 
listening to the ads, that’s for sure.
2
I = interviewer, D = Devika
I	
What’s your favourite city?
D	
My favourite city would have to be Rome. I love Italy and I’ve 
spent a lot of time there. And Rome doesn’t bore me, even if I 
go there several times.
I	
Why do you like it?
D	
I love the food in Rome, I love the sights. The people are so 
friendly and no matter what time of year, in winter or summer, 
there’s lots going on.
I	
Do you think cities will be different in the future?
D	
Ooh, that’s a difficult question. I think some cities which are 
already quite wealthy and have a lot of modern aspects to 
them, such as New York or London, might become more 
efficient. I hope they do. But I can imagine lots of cities around 
the world that aren’t so wealthy, or have, um, more kind of 
commercial centres to not be too different. Even in maybe 
twenty years’ time.
3
I = interviewer, N = Noel
I	
Do you think it’s more important to study science than arts at 
school or university?
N	
Er, well, from, for the economy’s point of view I think studying 
science is important. But from a, a kind of creativity, learning 
and educational point of view, possibly art because it, it’s about 
imagination, and, you know, we don’t know what skills we’re 
going to need in twenty or thirty years’ time. So, something to 
do with creativity. I’m sure scientists can be creative, but arts 
tend to promote that a bit more.
I	
Which scientific subjects do you think have taught you 
something useful?
N	
Oh, I’ve never been very good at sciences, I, to be quite honest 
with you. So, um, I quite like maths. Um, I, I was a bit late 
coming to maths, but I quite like the kind of logic to it, and the, 
kind of, the thinking process that goes alongside it.
I	
What would you most like scientists to discover in the future?
N	
Oh, er, definitely how to, um, respond to global warming. Um, 
and, er, anything that gets us away from carbon-based heating 
or fuel. Um, I mean, obviously there’s the medical sciences 
which are quite important. Um, I, I suppose anything to do with 
the neurosciences and how we cope with, um, er, learning or 
mental health problems, that type of thing
4
I = interviewer, S = Sophie
I	
Have you ever had to make a speech, or give a talk or 
presentation, in front of a lot of people?
S	
Yes, it was at my university. It was part of an exam, we had to 
give a PowerPoint presentation to a group of people and some 
examiners.
I	
How did you feel?
S	
Not great. It was not enjoyable.
I	
Was it a success?
S	
I passed. Success in some way, yeah.
	9&10	Revise and Check
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 158@@
158
themselves. Alternatively, you could set the main activity 
for homework and then get Sts to do the Activation at 
the start of the next class.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their worksheets and that they 
review any difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go 
back to activities and cover and test themselves.
Tips for using Communicative activities
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 We have suggested the ideal number of copies for each 
activity. However, you can often manage with fewer, e.g. 
one worksheet per pair instead of one per student.
•	 When Sts are working in pairs, if possible get them to sit 
face-to-face. This will encourage them to really talk to 
each other and also means they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 If your class doesn’t divide into pairs or groups, take part 
yourself, get two Sts to share one role, or get one student 
to monitor, help, and correct.
•	 If some Sts finish early, they can swap roles and do the 
activity again, or you could get them to write some of the 
sentences from the activity.
Tips for using Vocabulary activities
•	 These worksheets are intended to recycle and consolidate 
Sts’ understanding of the vocabulary in the Student’s Book 
Vocabulary Banks. As such, we suggest not using them 
directly after doing these exercises. Instead, get Sts to do 
them in a subsequent lesson.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Vocabulary Bank page.
•	 You could ask Sts to check their answers by referring to 
the relevant Student’s Book Vocabulary Bank.
•	 All the activities are suitable for use in class. However, you 
may wish to set some of the tasks for homework.
•	 Most of the Vocabulary worksheets have an Activation 
task and this can be treated in a similar way to the 
Grammar ones.
•	 Make sure that Sts keep their and that they review any 
difficult areas regularly. Encourage them to go back to 
activities and cover and test themselves.
Customisable worksheets
There are customisable versions of some of the Grammar, 
Communicative, and Vocabulary activities on the Teacher’s 
Resource Centre. These allow you to adapt the material 
to make it more applicable and/or relevant to your Sts. For 
instance, you could:
•	 change some of the names to the names of Sts in 
your class.
•	 change place names to ones that are more relevant 
and/or familiar to your Sts.
•	 change items of grammar or vocabulary to focus on 
the needs and interests of your Sts and/or adapt the level 
of challenge.
•	 reduce the number of items if you are short of time.
Overview
•	 There is a Grammar activity for each main (A and B) 
lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Communicative activity for each main (A and 
B) lesson of the Student’s Book.
•	 There is a Vocabulary activity for each section of the 
Vocabulary Bank in the Student’s Book.
The photocopiable material is also available on the 
Teacher’s Resource Centre (TRC) and the Classroom 
Presentation Tool (CPT), allowing you to display the 
worksheets on an interactive whiteboard or projector. This 
will make it easier to set up and demonstrate the activities, 
and show answers.
Using extra activities in mixed 
ability classes
Some teachers have classes with a very wide range of 
levels, and where some Sts finish Student’s Book activities 
much more quickly than others. You could give these fast 
finishers a photocopiable activity (Grammar, Vocabulary, or 
Communicative) while you help the slower Sts. Alternatively, 
some teachers might want to give faster Sts extra oral 
practice with a communicative activity while slower Sts 
consolidate their knowledge with an extra grammar activity.
Tips for using Grammar activities
•	 Use the Grammar Introduction worksheet as diagnostic 
tests for your class.
•	 The grammar activities are designed to give Sts extra 
practice in the main grammar points from each lesson. 
How you use these activities depends on the needs of 
your Sts and the time available. They can be used in the 
lesson if you think all of your class would benefit from the 
extra practice or you could set them as homework for 
some or all of your Sts.
•	 Before using the worksheets in class, check for any 
vocabulary that may be either new or difficult for your Sts.
•	 All of the activities start with a writing stage. If you use the 
activities in class, get Sts to work individually or in pairs. 
Allow Sts to compare before checking answers.
•	 If Sts are having trouble with any of the activities, make 
sure they refer to the relevant Grammar Bank in the 
Student’s Book.
•	 All of the activities have an Activation section. Some of 
them have a task that gets Sts to cover the sentences and 
test their memory. If you are using the activities in class, 
Sts can work in pairs and test their partner. If you set them 
for homework, encourage Sts to use this stage to test 
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
162
  
Complete the questions.
 a
  
Change the direct questions to indirect questions.
1 ‘What’s the wi-fi password?’ 
‘Do you remember what the wi-fi password is?’
2 ‘Is it going to rain this afternoon?’ 
‘Do you think 
?’
3 ‘Has Thomas arrived yet?’ 
‘Do you know 
?’
4 ‘How much will it cost to repair the roof?’ 
‘Can you tell me 
?’
5 ‘Do I have to pay to park here?’ 
‘Could you tell me 
?’
6 ‘Why did you leave your last job?’ 
‘Would you mind telling me 
?’
7 ‘What time does the library close?’ 
‘Do you know 
?’
8 ‘Did Susan’s flight take off on time?’ 
‘Do you have any idea 
?’
 b
1A GRAMMAR question formation
1 A I don’t like her dress.
 
B What don’t you like about it?
 
A The style. I think it’s awful.
 
B It must have cost a fortune though.
 
A Yes. Who 
 
 it?
 
B Her grandparents paid for it. It was a 
wedding present.
2 A Do you know 
 
 
 
 over there?
 
B That woman there? I think she’s Claire’s 
cousin.
 
A Her hairstyle is very old-fashioned!
3 A Where 
 
 
 on 
their honeymoon?
 
B On an African safari, I think.
 
A How 
 
 
 going 
?
 
B Three weeks!
4 A Who 
 Tony come with?
 
B Nobody. He came on his own. His girlfriend 
left him last month.
 
A Why 
 
 
 him?
 
B I think she met someone else.
5 A 
 
 
 the wedding 
cake yet?
 
B Yes, I have. It looks fantastic! Do you know 
 
 it?
 
A Matt’s aunt. Apparently, that’s the second 
cake she made.
 
B Oh, really? 
 
 to the first 
one?
 
A She dropped it!
 
B Oh, no! What a shame!
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Write two direct and two indirect questions to find out something you don’t know 
about your partner. Ask for more information.
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
The part of the signature (first name or 
surname) that is bigger is the most important 
part of your personality. So, if it’s the first 
name, for example, you care more about 
your private self. If both are big, you are very 
confident. Capital letters suggest that you 
are arrogant or big-headed. If you have very 
small writing, you may be insecure or have 
low self-esteem.
2
Size
1B COMMUNICATIVE What’s in a signature?
  
On a piece of paper, write Yours sincerely and your signature underneath.
 
Look at the signatures of some famous people. Match the names to the signatures. Do you know 
anything about these people’s personalities?
Leo Tolstoy 
 Barack Obama 
 Paris Hilton 
 Usain Bolt 
 Charles Schultz 
  
Charles Dickens 
 Elijah Wood 
 Damien Hirst 
 Paul McCartney 
 Sean Connery 
 a
 b
3
  
Read the information about interpreting someone’s personality from their signature. With your 
partner, look at the signatures above again and interpret them.
 c
 
Now look at your partner’s signature and try to interpret it. Do you both agree with the 
interpretation of your signatures?
 d
Your first name represents your private self, 
and your surname represents your public 
self. If you use only initials for your first 
name or surname, it means you are more 
secretive and protective about that part of 
your personality. Is there a space between 
the first name and surname? The bigger the 
space, the more you want to keep those 
two parts of your personality separate.
If the signature goes up, it means you 
work hard to overcome problems. You are 
determined, optimistic, and ambitious. If the 
signature goes down, it means that you get 
depressed when you have problems, and 
you aren’t very self-confident. A horizontal 
signature, one which goes straight, means 
that you are well-balanced, emotionally 
stable, and generally satisfied with life.
1
4
How you write your name
Angle
What your signature says about you
1
2
5
8
3
6
9
4
7
10
If the signature is easy to read, you have 
clear ideas and objectives, but if it’s difficult 
to read, it may mean you’re disorganized or 
indecisive and maybe also quite secretive. 
The more illegible the signature is, the less 
assertive you are.
3
Legibility
218
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
  
Work with a partner. Complete the words as quickly as you can.
1 Three parts of the body that we use with ‘ache’. 
earache, stomach ache, toothache
2 Something that can be high, often because of stress or bad diet. 
bl
 pr
3 Something you could get on the beach if you’re not careful. 
s
4 What you should take if you have a headache, e.g. aspirin or paracetamol. 
p
s
5 A phrasal verb that means to recover from an illness. 
g
 o
 an illness
6 When you have a cold you 
sn
 and c
 .
7 A condition when something you eat can make you feel ill. You should  
take antihistamine tablets. an a
 r
8 You should do this when you feel unwell or tired. 
l
 d
 (on a sofa)
9 A verb and a phrasal verb that mean to become unconscious, and  
a phrasal verb that means to become conscious again. 
f
 , p
 o
 , c
 r
 
10 An infectious illness like a very bad cold that causes fever, pain, and 
weakness. fl
 
11 If you cut your finger with a sharp object, 
it will bl
 .
 
12 An injury to your leg which means you can’t walk. 
a spr
 ankle
 
13 This can happen if you drop very hot liquid on yourself. 
b
 yourself
 
14 Something you should put on a small cut. 
a pl
 
15 You might get this if you eat food which is past its sell-by date. 
f
 p
 
16 This can happen to you if a piece of food gets stuck in your throat. 
You might ch
 
17 Adjective to describe a part of your body that has got bigger  
because of an injury. (a) sw
 (finger)
 
18 Two verbs that mean to be sick. 
v
 , thr
 u
 
2A VOCABULARY Illnesses and injuries
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Have you had any of the following illnesses or injuries recently? How long were you 
unwell for? Did you have any treatment?
• a temperature
• a rash
• sunburn
• a sore throat
• a blister on your foot
• an allergic reaction
Photocopiable activities
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 159@@
159
Grammar activity answers
	
8  were extremely lucky
	
9  Personally, I thought both teams played badly; England were 
a bit better, especially in the second half
 10  in Munich next, so let’s see how they do there
b	 2  slowly    3  quickly    4  earlier that day    5  obviously    
6  actually    7  angrily    8  a little    9  badly    10  incredibly    
11  here    12  always    13  well    14  naturally    
15  in (a) quarter of an hour
4A  future perfect and future continuous
a	 1  won’t be thinking
	
2  ’ll (still) be working; ’ll have been promoted
	
3  will have left
	
4  won’t be using
	
5  won’t have gone; ’ll (still) be watching
	
6  ’ll have graduated; ’ll be looking for
	
7  won’t have had
	
8  Will (you) be coming
	
9  Will (you) be picking me up
 10  will (they) have visited
 11  ’ll have finished; ’ll be celebrating
 12  won’t have saved
4B  zero and first conditionals, future time 
clauses
	
2  a and b    3  a    4  b    5  b and c    6  c    7  a and c    8  a and b  
9  a    10  c    11  b    12  a and c    13  b and c    14  a and b    15  c
5A  unreal conditionals
a	 2  ’d put; would have tasted / would taste
	
3  found; be
	
4  wouldn’t have got; ’d taken
	
5  were; wouldn’t swim
	
6  wouldn’t have left; hadn’t fallen
	
7  hadn’t used; wouldn’t have found
	
8  ’d buy; could
	
9  would have gone; hadn’t been
 10  didn’t spend; could
 11  would have bought; ’d known
 12  wouldn’t be; practised
5B  wish for present / future, wish for past 
regrets
a	 2  was / were    3  could    4  didn’t have to    5  wouldn’t sing    
6  would stop    7  wouldn’t make    8  would call
b	 2  They wish they’d put on    3  He wishes he hadn’t broken up    
4  We wish we’d bought    5  I wish I hadn’t eaten    
6  She wishes she hadn’t dyed    7  We wish we hadn’t thrown away  
8  I wish I hadn’t had
6A  used to, be used to, get used to
a	 2  get used to    3  usually    4  was used to being able    
5  used to be    6  usually go
b	 2  ’m used to    3  get used to    4  used to    5  usually    
6  get used to    7  ’m used to    8  get used to    9  get used to    
10  used to
c	 2  being    3  seeing    4  get up    5  eating
Introduction What do you remember?
	
2  decided to move    3  is five / five years old    4  who are    
5  the oldest / eldest child    6  He used to be    7  in charge of    
8  to meet / in order to meet    9  I’ve been learning    10  went to  
11  as a waitress    12  very hard work / a very hard job    
13  had improved    14  to be able to speak    15  good at reading   
16  is good enough    17  have very little    18  I’d learn
1A  question formation
a	 1  paid for    2  who that woman is    3  are they going, long are 
they (going) for    4  did, did she leave    5  Have you seen, who 
made, What happened
b	 2  it’s going to rain this afternoon    3  if / whether Thomas has 
arrived yet    4  how much it’ll cost to repair the roof    
5  if / whether I have to pay to park here    6  why you left your 
last job    7  what time the library closes    8  if / whether Susan’s 
flight took off on time
1B  auxiliary verbs
a	 2  do    3  isn’t    4  Have    5  aren’t    6  do    7  Is    8  will
b	 2  am    3  are    4  do / did    5  Did    6  did    7  Couldn’t    
8  do    9  can’t
2A  present perfect simple and continuous
a	 2  ’ve been    3  haven’t I seen     4  ’ve come    
5  Have you forgotten    6  ’ve been drinking    
7  haven’t been talking    8  has your throat been hurting    
9  ’s been    10  haven’t been able    11  ’ve had    
12  ’ve been taking    13  haven’t made    14  ’ve just bought
b	 2  Have you ever been injured    3  have you been coming    
4  have you missed    5  have you been living / have you lived    
6  Have you ever studied
2B  adjectives as nouns, adjective order
a	 2  The French    3  homeless people    4  Japanese girl    5  ✓    
6  The Spanish    7  the poor    8  ✓    9  The Chinese    
10  The young
b	 2  blue denim    3  awful loud    4  big dark    5  long black silk    
6  beautiful old wooden    7  small black leather    
8  delicious Thai    9  short curly brown    10  new striped
3A  narrative tenses: past simple, past 
continuous, past perfect, past perfect continuous
a	 2  hadn’t noticed, had stopped    2  had been (carefully) saving, 
had been concentrating, had been watching, had (only) been 
looking    3  was leaving, was happening, were looking
b	 2  asked    3  mentioned    4  had been looking    
5  had accused / accused    6  had searched / searched    7  made  
8  had said    9  jumped up    10  made    11  had never seen    
12  drove    13  parked    14  had taken place    15  came    
16  started    17  had never stolen    18  made    19  found    
20  had stopped    21  were watching
3B  the position of adverbs and adverbial 
phrases
a	 2  do you really mean that; were absolutely awful
	
3  England played well
	
4  Unfortunately, England never play well
	
5  were incredibly lucky
	
6  do you ever have
	
7  To be honest, they were quite lucky
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 160@@
160
10A  quantifiers: all, every, both, etc.
a	 1  every
	
2  all of the research; all of it
	
3  everything
	
4  all day; any
	
5  They all passed.
	
6  Most of
	
7  either of them; both
	
8  nor; Both; neither of them
b	 2  Neither    3  Every    4  All    5  Most of    6  no    7  anyone    
8  Most    9  all    10  both    11  every    12  None of
10B  articles
	
2  the    3  –    4  an    5  –    6  The    7  the    8   –    9  The    10  –   
11  –    12  an    13  The    14  the    15  the    16  a    17  The    
18  –    19  the    20  –    21  –    22  the    23  the    24  –    25  the    
26  the    27  –    28  a    29  –    30  the    31  the    32  the    33  –    
34   the    35  –    36  the    37  the
Revision Grammar auction
   Instructions
Sts revise the main grammar points of the book by playing 
a game where, in pairs, they have to bid to try to ‘buy’ 
correct sentences. Copy one sheet per pair.
•		Put Sts in pairs. Give each pair the list of 20 sentences. 
Elicit what an auction is = a public sale where things are 
sold to the person who offers the most money. Explain 
that Sts have 1,000 euros (or dollars, depending on 
which currency they are most familiar with). They have 
a list of sentences, some of which are correct and some 
incorrect. They bid to ‘buy’ as many correct sentences as 
they can. Bids start at 50, the next bid is 100, then 150, 
etc. Sts must record on their sheet how much they have 
spent on a sentence, in order to calculate how much 
money they have left. The pair which buys the most 
correct sentences is the winner.
•		Start with the first sentence and invite bids. Make 
the activity more fun by using typical language of an 
auctioneer, e.g. How much am I offered for this fantastic 
sentence: 50 euros, 100? Do I hear 150? Going, going, gone 
to Marc and Andrea for 150 euros.
•		When you have ‘sold’ all the sentences, go through each 
one eliciting whether it is correct or not, and what the 
mistake is. Then find out who bought the most correct 
sentences.
	
1  ✓
	
2  ✗ Her name’s Hannah, isn’t it?
	
3  ✓
	
4  ✗ She has beautiful long dark hair.
	
5  ✓
	
6  ✗ I like classical music very much.
	
7  ✓
	
8  ✓
	
9  ✗ I would have enjoyed the film more if it hadn’t had subtitles.
 10  ✗ I wish I had more free time! / I wish I could have more  
free time!
 11  ✓
 12  ✓
 13  ✗ He can’t have seen you or he would have said hello.
 14  ✗ It looks like / as if it’s going to rain.
 15  ✗ The missing man is thought to be from Manchester.
 16  ✓
 17  ✗ Lily is going to hospital this afternoon to visit her husband.
 18  ✗ I need to buy some new furniture for my living room.
 19  ✓
 20  ✗ The man was sent to prison for ten years.
6B  gerunds and infinitives
	
2  seeing    3  go out    4  to have    5  not stay    6  working    
7  to wear    8  live    9  laughing    10  to finish    11  going    
12  not to tell    13  work    14  to study    15  to help    16  waiting   
17  to park    18  speaking    19  getting up / to get up    
20  not come    21  spending    22  to give    24  not to be    
25  changing    26  meeting    27  arriving    28  to revise    
29  to tell    30  turning
7A  past modals
a	 2  might have broken    3  must have left    4  must have put    
5  can’t have drunk    6  might not have seen    7  must have 
worked    8  can’t have finished    9  might not have been able  
to get / might not have got    10  must have switched off
b	 2  shouldn’t have used    3  shouldn’t have broken up    
4  should have come    5  should have waited    6  should have 
kept    7  should have told    8  shouldn’t have bought
7B  verbs of the senses
a	 2  smells    3  smells as if (like)    4  smells like    5  feels    
6  feels like    7  feels as if (like)    8  feels    9  tastes    
10  tastes like    11  tastes as if (like)    12  tastes    13  look as if (like)  
14  look    15  look as if (like)    16  look    17  look like    18  look    
19  sounds    20  sounds    21  sounds as if (like)    22  sound like
8A  the passive (all forms); have something done; 
it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc.
a	 2  is thought that    3  is said to    4  are understood to    
5  is expected that    6  are thought to
b	 2  to have my wallet stolen    3  ’m having / ’m going to have a  
tooth filled    4  had your heart broken    5  have your eyes tested  
6  do you have your car serviced    7  are having a swimming 
pool built    8  haven’t had my hair cut    9  having my photo taken  
10  had our house burgled    11  has his shopping delivered    
12  ’ve had our car broken into
8B  reporting verbs
a	 1  to give    2  to come    3  having / having had    
4  not going / not having gone    5  to tell; breaking    
6  going    7  not to leave    8  making
b	 2  promised to tidy    3  apologized (for) forgetting    4  advised 
(me) to keep    5  suggested trying    6  admitted eating    
7  invited (me) to come    8  blamed (me for) losing
9A  clauses of contrast and purpose
a	 2  j    3  h    4  i    5  f    6  e    7  a    8  c    9  d    10  b
b	 2  A lot of companies have reduced staff numbers in order to 
save money.
	
3  Despite the long flight / Despite the fact the flight was long, 
she felt great when she arrived in New York.
	
4  Nick didn’t tell Louisa the truth so as not to hurt her feelings.
	
5  I bought the shoes even though they were ridiculously 
expensive.
	
6  The company has a big market share in spite of doing very  
	
	 little advertising / in spite of the fact that they do very little  
	
	 advertising.
	
7  They had to leave the hotel early so that they wouldn’t miss 
their train.
	
8  She didn’t get the job, though she was a strong candidate. / 
She didn’t get the job. She was a strong candidate, though.
9B  uncountable and plural nouns
	
2  look    3  is    4  shorts    5  a piece of    6  is    
7  some belongings    8  isn’t    9  behaviour    10  staff    
11  some    12  advice    13  some    14  some    15  the    
16  those    17  homework    18  rubbish
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 161@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
161
 	
Read about Beata. Then correct the bold phrases 1–18.
  INTRODUCTION    GRAMMAR  What do you remember?
ACTIVATION
Write a similar text about yourself, in five paragraphs. Include the following information:
•	 where you live
•	 your family
•	 what you do
•	 how long you’ve been learning English and why
•	 what you do in your free time
1	 I lived there
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
 
10	
 
11	
 
12	
 
13	
 
14	
 
15	
 
16	
 
17	
 
18	
M
y name’s Beata and I’m from Poznan in Poland. 
I was born there and 1 I have lived there until 
I was 14. Then my family 2 decided move to Warsaw, 
and that’s where I live now.
I’m divorced and I have a son called Filip, who 3 is five 
years. He spends weekdays with me and weekends 
with his father. I have two brothers, 4 which are both 
studying at university. I am 5 the older child in the 
family. My mother works in a bank and my father is 
retired. 6 He use to be a business consultant. 
I work for a big clothing company. I am 7 on charge 
of foreign suppliers, which means that I have to 
use English when I talk to them on the phone, and 
sometimes I travel to other countries such as Morocco 
and Turkey 8 for to meet suppliers.
9 I am learning English for about nine years. I studied it at school, and then after I left school, I spent eight weeks in 
Ireland. During the day I 10 was going to English classes, and in the evening I worked 11 like a waitress in a restaurant. 
It was 12 a very hard work. When I came home, my English 13 has improved a lot, but that was a few years ago and 
I’ve forgotten a lot since then. My main aim this year is 14 to be able speak more fluently and to improve my writing.  
I think I’m quite 15 good at read in English. As soon as my level of English 16 will be good enough, I’ll take the  
IELTS exam.
I 17 have very few free time, but when I can, I go horse riding. If I had more time, 18 I’ll learn another language, 
maybe French or German.
´
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 162@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
162
 	
Complete the questions.
 a
 	
Change the direct questions to indirect questions.
1	 ‘What’s the wi-fi password?’	
‘Do you remember what the wi-fi password is?’
2	 ‘Is it going to rain this afternoon?’	
‘Do you think 
?’
3	 ‘Has Thomas arrived yet?’	
‘Do you know 
?’
4	 ‘How much will it cost to repair the roof?’	
‘Can you tell me 
?’
5	 ‘Do I have to pay to park here?’	
‘Could you tell me 
?’
6	 ‘Why did you leave your last job?’	
‘Would you mind telling me 
?’
7	 ‘What time does the library close?’	
‘Do you know 
?’
8	 ‘Did Susan’s flight take off on time?’	
‘Do you have any idea 
?’
 b
1A  GRAMMAR  question formation
1	 A	 I don’t like her dress.
	
B	 What don’t you like about it?
	
A	 The style. I think it’s awful.
	
B	 It must have cost a fortune though.
	
A	 Yes. Who 
 
 it?
	
B	 Her grandparents paid for it. It was a 
wedding present.
2	 A	 Do you know 
 
 
 
 over there?
	
B	 That woman there? I think she’s Claire’s 
cousin.
	
A	 Her hairstyle is very old-fashioned!
3	 A	 Where 
 
 
 on 
their honeymoon?
	
B	 On an African safari, I think.
	
A	 How 
 
 
 going 
?
	
B	 Three weeks!
4	 A	 Who 
 Tony come with?
	
B	 Nobody. He came on his own. His girlfriend 
left him last month.
	
A	 Why 
 
 
 him?
	
B	 I think she met someone else.
5	 A	
 
 
 the wedding 
cake yet?
	
B	 Yes, I have. It looks fantastic! Do you know 
 
 it?
	
A	 Matt’s aunt. Apparently, that’s the second 
cake she made.
	
B	 Oh, really? 
 
 to the first 
one?
	
A	 She dropped it!
	
B	 Oh, no! What a shame!
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Write two direct and two indirect questions to find out something you don’t know 
about your partner. Ask for more information.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 163@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
163
1B  GRAMMAR  auxiliary verbs
 	
Circle the correct answer.
Andreas	 Hello.
Beatriz	
Good morning. Are you here for an interview, too?
Andreas	 Yes. They say it’s a good company to work for, 1 don’t / doesn’t / do they?
Beatriz	
Yes, they 2 do / are / don’t say that.
Andreas	 By the way, I’m Andreas Kourkoulos.
Beatriz	
That’s a Greek name, 3 is / does / isn’t it?
Andreas	 Yes. I’m from Athens, but I’ve been living in New York for the past two years.
Beatriz	
4 Do / Are / Have you? I’ve got a friend who lives there. Anyway, I’m Beatriz Flores, from Buenos 
Aires, in Argentina.
Andreas	 Nice to meet you.
Beatriz	
You’re a bit nervous, 5 are / don’t / aren’t you?
Andreas	 A little. Don’t you get nervous before 
interviews?
Beatriz	
Not really. I 6 am / will / do get nervous before 
exams, but not before interviews. What’s the  
time now?
Andreas	 2.15. My interview’s at 3.00.
Beatriz	
7 Is / Has / Does it? Mine’s at 2.30. We won’t 
have to wait much longer, 8 have / will / do we?
 	
Complete the next part of the conversation with 
auxiliary verbs.
Andreas	 So, do you live here in Boston?
Beatriz	
No, I actually live in Dallas. I flew here  
yesterday afternoon.
Andreas	
1 Did you? I arrived yesterday, too.
Beatriz	
Oh, right. Where are you staying?
Andreas	 At the Hotel Europe.
Beatriz	
Ah, so 2 
 I. The rooms aren’t very nice, 3 
 they?
Andreas	 No, they aren’t. But I 4
 like the restaurant. I had a good meal there last night.
Beatriz	
5 
 you? Are you working at the moment?
Andreas	 No, I resigned last week.
Beatriz	
Why? Didn’t you like your job?
Andreas	 Well, I 6
 like the job, but to be honest, I couldn’t stand my boss!
Beatriz	
7
 you? I get on with my boss, but I think I need a new challenge.
Andreas	 So 8
 I. Ah, it’s your turn now. Good luck, Beatriz.
Beatriz	
Thanks. Shall we meet at the coffee bar later?
Andreas	 OK. And we can compare notes, 9 
 we?
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations in a and b with a partner. Try to use the correct rhythm and intonation.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 164@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
164
2A  GRAMMAR  present perfect simple and continuous
 	
Complete the conversation with the verbs in brackets in the present perfect simple or continuous.
 a
Doctor	 Mrs Jones! Would you like to come through now, please?
Patient	 Oh, thank goodness! I 1 ’ve been waiting (wait) for ages.
Doctor	 Yes, sorry about that. We 2 
 (be) extremely busy all morning. Now then, 
3 
 (I / not see) you this week already, Mrs Jones?
Patient	 Yes, doctor. Actually, this is the third time I 4 
 (come) to see you this  
week. I was last here on Wednesday. 5 
 (you / forget)? I had a terrible 
sore throat. Anyway, I took your advice and I 6 
 (drink) plenty of water 
and I 7 
 (not talk) too much.
Doctor	 Right, and 8 
 (your throat / hurt) less since then?
Patient	 Oh, yes. It feels much better now.
Doctor	 Ah, that’s great news. So, …
Patient	 Well, yes, it is, but now I’ve got a more serious problem with my foot. It 9 
 
(be) swollen since yesterday and I 10 
 (not be able) to walk on it properly.
Doctor	 OK. If you could just lie down here on the…
Patient	 I think maybe I 11 
 (have) an allergic reaction to something.  
I 12 
 (take) antihistamine tablets every four hours, but they  
13 
 (not make) any difference.
Doctor	 Right, Mrs Jones. If you would please lie down here on the couch, I’ll take a look…hmm. Well, 
there really is absolutely nothing to worry about. It’s just a blister.
Patient	 Really? Hmm. Well, I 14 
 (just / buy) these new shoes, so maybe they 
caused the problem.
Doctor	 Yes, I’d say that’s very likely. Now, I’ll put a plaster on it and I’m sure it’ll be fine in a few days.
Patient	 Alright then. Thank you, doctor.
 	
Complete the questions with the verbs in brackets in the present perfect simple or continuous.
1	 How long have you had your phone? (have)
2	
 you ever 
 in an accident? (be injured)
3	 How long 
 you 
 to this school? (come)
4	 How many classes 
 you 
 this year? (miss)
5	 How long 
 you 
 in your current home? (live)
6	
 you ever 
 abroad? (study)
 b
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions in b. Ask your partner for more information.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 165@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
165
2B  GRAMMAR  adjectives as nouns, adjective order
 	
Circle the correct form. Tick (✓) if both forms are correct.
1	 The unemployed / Unemployed people can apply to do these training courses free of charge. ✓
2	 The French / Frenchs are very proud of their language and culture.
3	 There are a lot of homeless people / homeless sleeping on the streets at night.
4	 I met a very nice Japanese girl / Japanese in Manchester. She was really friendly.
5	 Rich people / The rich always live in the best part of a city.
6	 The Spanish / Spanish love being outside on warm, summer evenings.
7	 Prime Minister, a lot of people say that your government just doesn’t care about poor / the poor.
8	 Don’t talk like that – you should show more respect for elderly people / the elderly.
9	 The Chinese / The Chineses invented paper.
 
10	 The young / Young are finding it very difficult to buy their first flat or house.
 	
Complete the sentences with the adjectives in brackets in the correct order. Use your instinct if you 
are not sure.
1	 A	 Can I help you?
	
B	 Yes, I’m looking for some smart, high-heeled sandals. (high-heeled / smart)
2	 A	 Did you see either of the robbers?
	
B	 It all happened so fast. I saw a young man wearing a 
 jacket running out of 
the restaurant. (denim / blue)
3	 A	 Your granddaughter’s boyfriend is a rock musician, isn’t he, Mrs Smith?
	
B	 Yes, he is, but I can’t stand the 
 music he plays! (loud / awful)
4	 A	 Your son looks really like you – he has your 
 eyes. (dark / big)
	
B	 Do you think so? I think he looks more like my husband.
5	 A	 Are you looking for something?
	
B	 Yes. I’ve lost a 
 scarf. Have you seen it? (silk / long / black)
6	 A	 We used to live in a 
 house near the river. (wooden / beautiful / old)
	
B	 How lovely. It must have been really peaceful.
7	 A	 I’ve just arrived on the flight from Athens, but my suitcase hasn’t arrived.
	
B	 Can you describe it?
	
A	 It’s a 
 case. (black / leather / small)
8	 A	 Ever since Simon came back from Bangkok, he’s been cooking me 
 curries. 
(delicious / Thai)
	
B	 Lucky you! I love curries.
8	 A	 What does Adam’s wife look like?
	
B	 She’s quite slim and she has 
 hair. (brown / curly / short)
 
10	 A	 I’m going to wear my 
 shirt to the party. (new / striped)
	
B	 Good idea. It really suits you.
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Describe three items that you own, e.g. clothes, a car, a guitar, etc., using two or three adjectives in the 
correct order. Use the chart to help you.
item
adjectives
description
bag
leather, brown, lovely
I have a lovely, brown leather bag that I bought in Italy last summer.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 166@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
166
3A  GRAMMAR  narrative tenses: past simple, past continuous, 
past perfect, past perfect continuous
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner.
Student A: Cover the text. Try to remember what happened to Richard in Part 1.
Student B: Cover the text. Try to remember what happened to Richard in Part 2.
 	
Read Part 1 of Richard’s story and find examples of each tense below.
1	 the past perfect	
had finished	
	
2	 the past perfect continuous	
	
	
	
3	 the past continuous	
	
	
	
 a
 	
Complete Part 2 of the story with the correct form of the verbs in brackets: past simple, past 
continuous, past perfect, or past perfect continuous.
 b
Part 1
When I was about nine years old, I 
used to go to the cinema every Saturday 
morning – in those days it was very 
popular. After the film had finished, 
I would go to a toy shop and look at 
model planes and trains, and sometimes 
I bought them with the pocket money 
that I had been carefully saving. One 
day after the film, I went to a big 
department store to have a look at 
the model planes they had. I didn’t 
buy anything, but as I was leaving, a 
very large man grabbed my arm quite 
violently and accused me of shoplifting. 
The man said that he was a store 
detective. As I had been concentrating 
on the toys, I hadn’t noticed that he had 
been watching me. He made me empty 
my pockets and he went through my 
coat, searching for stolen goods, even 
though I told him very clearly that I had 
only been looking. Of course, he didn’t 
find anything, but by this time several 
people had stopped to see what was 
happening. I felt very embarrassed and 
humiliated that so many people were 
looking at me, and I was very glad to 
leave the shop when it was all over.
Part 2
An hour or so later, when I 1 was having (have) lunch 
with my family at home, my father 2 
 
(ask) me about the film. I then 3 
 
(mention) that I 4 
 (look) at toys in a  
department store when a store detective  
5 
 (accuse) me of shoplifting and  
6 
 (search) me in the middle of the  
shop. My father 7 
 (make) me repeat 
what I 8 
 (say), and then immediately  
9 
 (jump up) from the table.  
Without either of us having finished our lunch, he  
10 
 (make) me get into the car.  
I 11 
 (never see) my father look so angry! 
He 12 
 (drive) quickly to the store,  
13 
 (park) outside, and took me to where 
the incident 14 
 (take place). He then 
demanded to see the manager and the store detective. 
When the manager 15 
 (come), my father  
16 
 (start) shouting at him and he told 
him that I 17 
 (never steal) anything in 
my life. He 18 
 (make) the manager and 
store detective apologize to me for having accused me of 
shoplifting and for embarrassing me. But the thing is,  
I 19 
 (find) this scene even more 
embarrassing than the first one, especially as I could see 
that a lot of customers 20 
 (stop) and  
21 
 (watch) us!
The most embarrassing moment of my life (Richard, Sussex)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 167@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
167
3B  GRAMMAR  the position of adverbs and adverbial phrases
 	
Put the adverbs in brackets in the best place in the conversation.
Gary	
So, what did you think of the match?
Craig	
1 Even though they lost, I think Scotland played again. 
(brilliantly / tonight)
John	
2 Craig, do you mean that? (really) I thought they were awful. 
(absolutely)
Craig	
3 I suppose you think England played. (well)
John	
4 No, I don’t. England play these days. (unfortunately / never / well) But they deserved to win.
Craig	
5 But you must admit that they were lucky. (incredibly)
Gary	
6 Craig, do you have anything good to say about England? (ever)
John	
7 They were lucky with their second goal. (to be honest / quite)
Craig	
8 Come on, John, England were lucky with both the first and second goals! (extremely)
Gary	
9 I thought both teams played (personally / badly), but at the end of the day, Craig, I’d say England 
were better in the second half. (a bit / especially)
John	
10 Well, they are playing Germany in Munich, so let’s see how they do. (next / there)
 	
Complete the conversation with the correct adverbs from the list.
absolutely  actually  always  angrily  a little  badly  earlier that day  here   
in quarter of an hour  incredibly  naturally  obviously  quickly  slowly  well
Director	 Jason, that was 1 absolutely marvellous, but you’ve got to get 
to  the centre of the stage.
Jason	
But I have to wait for Tanya to finish her line and she’s doing it 
too 2 
 .
Tanya	
Well, I could try saying it more 3 
 if you want me to.
Director	 Yes, could you? Now, Jason, remember, when Tanya tells you she’s going to marry Henry, 
you know about it, because you heard them talking in the garden 4 
 , so you 
aren’t at all surprised.
Jason	
Well, 5 
 I know about it, but I thought maybe I should pretend at first that I  
didn’t know.
Director	 No, we want to see your emotion! You reacted very calmly, but 6 
 you’re not a  
calm person at all. I want you to react 7 
 , OK? Now the next scene. Sally, you  
were great. But, when you’ve finished reading Tanya’s letter, when you’re on the last couple of  
lines, pause 8 
 and look up at the audience. Let them feel how 9 
 
you’ve been treated by her.
Sally	
Do you want me to cry? I am 10 
 good at crying.
Director	 Not 11 
 , not in this scene. Look out at the audience.
Tanya	
Can I just ask why you 12 
 ask me to play horrible characters?
Director	 Because you do it so 13 
 , darling. It just comes 14 
 to you.  
Right everyone, take a break and come back 15 
 .
 a
brilliantly tonight
 b
ACTIVATION
Write five sentences using the adverbs. Then compare your ideas with a partner.
brilliantly  fortunately  gradually  incredibly  sadly
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 168@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
168
4A  GRAMMAR  future perfect and future continuous
ACTIVATION
Write one thing that you’ll…
1	 be doing at midday tomorrow.
2	 have done by the end of next week.
3	 have done a year from now.
Work with a partner. Compare your sentences. Ask for more information.
 	
Complete the conversations with the verbs in brackets in the future perfect or future continuous.
1	 A	 I’m really looking forward to our trip to Paris on Friday.
	
B	 Me, too! This time tomorrow we’ll be getting on (get on) the plane, and we 
 
(not think) about work!
2	 A	 Do you think you 
 still 
 (work) here in ten years’ time?
	
B	 Probably. But I hope I 
 (be promoted) to Head of Department by then.
3	 A	 Why are you walking so fast?
	
B	 If we don’t hurry, by the time we get to the station, the train 
 (leave).
4	 A	 Oh no! My car won’t start and I need to pick up a friend at the airport.
	
B	 You can borrow mine. I 
 (not use) it today.
5	 A	 Do you think it’s too late to phone Hilary?
	
B	 No, it’s only eleven o’clock. Knowing her, she 
 (not go) to bed yet. She 
 still 
 (watch) TV.
6	 A	 Is this your son’s final year at university?
	
B	 Yes, by this time next year, he 
 (graduate), and he 
 
(look for) for a job.
7	 A	 Shall I make some soup or something for your parents when they arrive?
	
B	 Good idea! They’ll be starving, as they 
 (not have) time for lunch.
8	 A	
 you 
 (come) with us to see the new Marvel film tonight?
	
B	 Sorry, I won’t – I still have lots of work to do.
9	 A	 What time does your plane land?
	
B	 At seven in the morning. 
 you 
 (pick me up) from the airport?
	
A	 Of course. I always do!
 
10	 A	 Mark and Paul are travelling around Asia. They’ve already been to China and Thailand.
	
B	 Wow! How many countries 
 they 
 (visit) by the time they get 
back home?
 
11	 A	 I’m fed up with all these exams.
	
B	 Yes, but just think – we 
 (finish) them all by Friday, and we 
 (celebrate)!
 
12	 A	 Tim’s going to South Africa next month, isn’t he?
	
B	 No, he’s decided to wait. He 
 (not save) enough money until at least July.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 169@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
169
4B  GRAMMAR  zero and first conditionals, future time clauses
 	
Circle the correct answer. Sometimes two answers are possible.
 
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with your own ideas. Then compare your ideas with a partner.
1	 As soon as I get home, I 
 .
2	 If I don’t have time for breakfast, 
 .
3	 When I retire, 
 .
4	 You won’t get a good job unless 
 .
5	 Don’t forget to take 
 in case 
 .
6	 I’m not going to 
 until 
 .
	11–15	 Excellent. You can use conditionals and future time clauses very well.
	 8–10	 Good. But check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.139) for any questions 
that you got wrong.
	 0–7	 This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank again (Student’s Book p.139). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
1	 I’ll have my mobile phone with me 
 .
	
a	 in case you need to call me
	
b	 in case you’ll need to call me
	
c	 in case you’ve needed to call me
2	 Phone him as soon as 
 that report.
	
a	 you finish
	
b	 you’ve finished
	
c	 you’ll finish
3	 I’ll play football with you when 
 .
	
a	 I’ve had my dinner
	
b	 I’ll have my dinner
	
c	 I have my dinner
4	 I’m not going to go to the party unless 
 .
	
a	 you’ll go too
	
b	 you go too
	
c	 you’ve gone too
5	 Could you get me some milk if 
 ?
	
a	 you’ll go to the shop
	
b	 you go to the shop
	
c	 you’re going to the shop
6	 If the weather 
 , we’ll go for a walk.
	
a	 will have improved
	
b	 will improve
	
c	 improves
7	 I won’t tell my boss I’m leaving 
 .
	
a	 until I find a new job
	
b	 until I’m finding a new job
	
c	 until I’ve found a new job
8	 If I don’t have breakfast, 
 .
	
a	 I’ll be hungry all morning
	
b	 I’m hungry all morning
	
c	 I’ll be being hungry all morning
9	 Please come in quietly because 
 .
	
a	 the children will be sleeping when you arrive
	
b	 the children will sleep when you arrive
	
c	 the children are sleeping when you arrive
 
10	 Take a jacket in case 
 later.
	
a	 it’ll have got cold
	
b	 it’s getting cold
	
c	 it gets cold
 
11	 Their flight was delayed, so they 
 back until 
after midnight.
	
a	 ’ll be
	
b	 won’t be
	
c	 ’ll have been
 
12	 We’re going to have a picnic at the beach 
tomorrow unless 
 .
	
a	 it rains
	
b	 it will be raining
	
c	 it’s raining
 
13	 I 
 book our flights until we’ve found  
a hotel.
	
a	 don’t
	
b	 ’m not going to
	
c	 won’t
 
14	 If you want to improve your English, 
 .
	
a	 you’ll have to practise
	
b	 you have to practise
	
c	 you’ve had to practise
 
15	 Come and say goodbye tomorrow 
 .
	
a	 before you’ll leave
	
b	 before you’ve left
	
c	 before you leave
15
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 170@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
170
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verbs in brackets, using second or  
third conditionals.
1	 They met in Paris at a conference.
	
If they hadn’t gone to the conference in Paris, they 
wouldn’t have met. (not go / not meet)
2	 The curry doesn’t taste great. I should have put more spices 
in it.
	
If I 
 more spices in it, it 
 better. 
(put / taste)
3	 I’m not very happy in my present job. Maybe I should quit 
and look for another.
	
If I 
 another job, I might 
 happier. 
(find / be)
4	 We got wet because you wouldn’t take the bus. You wanted 
to walk.
	
We 
 wet if we 
 the bus. (not get /  
take)
5	 Don’t swim in that river; there might be crocodiles.
	
If I 
 you, I 
 in that river, there might 
be crocodiles. (be / not swim)
6	 Laura fell in love with Tom. She left Liam.
	
Laura 
 Liam if she 
 in love with 
Tom. (not leave / not fall)
7	 He used the stolen credit card at a hotel, so the police 
found him.
	
If he 
 the stolen credit card at a hotel, the 
police 
 him. (not use / not find)
8	 They don’t have enough money to buy a new car.
	
They 
 a new car if they 
 afford one. 
(buy / can)
9	 We didn’t go on the London Eye because the queue was 
too long.
	
We 
 on the London Eye, if the queue 
 so long. (go / not be)
 
10	 They spend all their money on designer clothes. They can’t 
afford to go on holiday.
	
If they 
 all their money on designer clothes, 
they 
 afford to go on holiday. (not spend / can)
 
11	 I didn’t know you wanted to go to the concert. I didn’t buy 
you a ticket.
	
I 
 you a ticket if I 
 that you wanted 
to go to the concert. (buy / know)
 
12	 Nicola isn’t very good at the piano because she doesn’t 
practise.
	
Nicola 
 so bad at the piano if she 
 . 
(not be / practise)
 
5A  GRAMMAR  unreal conditionals
ACTIVATION
Cover the sentences. Look at the pictures and try to remember the sentences.
1
3
5
7
9
11
2
4
6
8
10
12
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 171@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
171
 	
Complete the sentences with a verb from the list. For sentences 1–4, use the past simple.  
For sentences 5–8, use would / wouldn’t + infinitive.
be  call  can  live  not have to  not make  not sing  stop
 a
 	
Complete the sentences using wish + past perfect
1	 I didn’t apply for the job and now I regret it.
	
I wish I’d applied for the job.
2	 They didn’t put on sunscreen and now they’re burnt.
	
 sunscreen.
3	 He broke up with his girlfriend and now he misses her. 
	
 with his girlfriend.
4	 We didn’t buy concert tickets yesterday and now they’re sold out. 
	
 concert tickets yesterday.
5	 I ate too much chocolate and now I feel sick.
	
 so much chocolate.
6	 She dyed her hair and now she hates the colour.
	
 her hair.
7	 We threw away some old books and now they’re worth a lot of money.
	
 the old books.
8	 I had an argument with Sophie and now she isn’t talking to me.
	
 an argument with Sophie.
 b
1	 I wish we lived in a bigger house.
2	 I wish my husband 
 better at 
cooking.
3	 I wish we 
 afford to buy a 
new car.
4	 I wish I 
 wear a suit to work.
5	 I wish my mum 
 all the time. 
Her voice is awful!
6	 I wish the dog 
 chasing the cat.
7	 I wish my parents 
 me practise 
the piano every day.
8	 I wish my boyfriend 
 me more 
often.
5B  GRAMMAR  wish for present / future, wish for past regrets
ACTIVATION
Write three sentences beginning I wish: one with the past simple, one with person + would, and one 
with the past perfect. Then compare your ideas with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 172@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
172
6A  GRAMMAR  used to, be used to, get used to
 	
Circle the correct form.
 a
 	
Complete the blog with a verb from the list in the correct form.
 c
 	
Complete the blog with used to, be used to, get used to, or usually.
 b
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with information about your life. Compare your answers with a partner.
1	 I usually 
 .
2	 I used to 
 .
3	 I’m used to 
 .
4	 I’m not used to 
 .
5	 It’s difficult to get used to 
 .
6	 I didn’t use to 
 .
7	 When I was younger, I would 
 .
I come from Germany. I 1 used to live / would live in the north, in Hamburg, but then 
I moved to Madrid about five years ago. I love the weather in Spain – there are more 
sunny days and it’s a lot warmer. But I had to 2 be used to / get used to having lunch 
quite late, at about 2.00 p.m., and dinner as late as 9.00 or 10.00 p.m. In Germany, 
things 3 usually / use to happen exactly on time, but here things are much more 
relaxed. I like that, too. The only thing I really miss is the bread! I 4 was used to 
being able / was used to be able to choose from between 20 or 30 different kinds 
of bread, but here it’s more like two or three. And sometimes I have problems with 
noisy neighbours, especially at night. That never 5 used to be / was used to being a 
problem in Hamburg. People there 6 usually go / are used to going to bed earlier.
Inge
Madrid, Spain
Neil and Shirley
Queensland, Australia
Lennart
Parma, Italy
be  eat  get up  live  see
We used to 1 live in England, but we’ve been living in Queensland, Australia, since 
2010. We’re used to 2 
 here now, but at first it was quite hard. We live 
in the country, and when we first moved into the house, I just couldn’t get used to  
3 
 snakes in the garden, but now it’s not a problem. We just leave them 
alone. Although we speak the same language, there are still some things here that 
are strange. People here usually 4 
 really early, at about 5.00 a.m., 
which we still haven’t got used to. Christmas doesn’t feel right either – I haven’t 
got used to 5 
 roast turkey when the temperature is 40°C!
I 1 used to live in Sweden, but I married an Italian woman and now I live in 
Parma, Italy. I’ve been here for six years now, so I 2 
 the lifestyle. 
Life is more hectic here than in Sweden. Italian people socialize more than 
Swedish people, and I really enjoy that. I had to 3 
 eating lots of 
pasta, particularly tortellini, which is Parma’s local speciality. In Sweden I  
4 
 eat pasta once or twice a month, and now I 5 
 have 
it once or twice a week! I also had to 6 
 the different mentality. For 
example, people here are very family-orientated. This was new to me and hard to 
understand at first. But now I 7 
 having lunch every Sunday with my 
in-laws! It was also quite hard for me to 8 
 the dialect they speak in 
Parma. I still sometimes have to ask people to repeat things. The only thing I can’t 
9 
 is the coffee. I know espresso is supposed to be the best coffee in 
the world, but it’s just too strong for me. In Sweden I 10 
 drink a lot 
of coffee, but it was much weaker. Still, I do love the smell of espresso!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 173@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
173
6B  GRAMMAR  gerunds and infinitives
 	
Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets in the infinitive (with or without to) or the 
gerund (-ing).
1	 I learnt to speak French when I was at school. (speak)
2	 Do you fancy 
 a film tonight? (see)
3	 Laura’s mother lets her 
 when she wants. (go out)
4	 I can’t afford 
 a holiday this year. (have)
5	 It’s getting late. We’d better 
 much longer. (not stay)
6	 I’m going to carry on 
 until 8.00 p.m. tonight. (work)
7	 What are you planning 
 to the party? (wear)
8	 Would you rather 
 in the country or in a town? (live)
9	 I couldn’t help 
 when my brother fell off his bicycle. (laugh)
 
10	 Did you manage 
 the report before the meeting? (finish)
 
11	 The satnav died and we ended up 
 completely the wrong way. (go)
 
12	 If I tell you a secret, do you promise 
 anybody? (not tell)
 
13	 My boss made me 
 late last night. (work)
 
14	 At school, I was made 
 really hard. (study)
 
15	 Would you like me 
 you with the dinner? (help)
 
16	 I don’t mind 
 . I’m not in a hurry. (wait)
 
17	 Sorry, you aren’t allowed 
 here. (park)
 
18	 We need to practise 
 before the oral exam. (speak)
 
19	 I like 
 early in the morning in the summer. (get up)
 
20	 Monica might 
 tomorrow. She’s ill. (not come)
 
21	 I love 
 time with my grandparents. (spend)
 
22	 Will you be able 
 me a lift to work tomorrow? (give)
 	
Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets in the gerund or the infinitive with to.
 
23	 You forgot to buy the milk. (buy)
 
24	 Could you try 
 late tomorrow? (not be)
 
25	 The sheets on this bed are dirty. They need 
 . (change)
 
26	 Don’t you remember 
 his wife at the Christmas party? (meet)
 
27	 I’ll never forget 
 in New York for the first time. (arrive)
 
28	 I think you need 
 the irregular verbs. (revise)
 
29	 Did you remember 
 James about the meeting tomorrow? (tell)
 
30	 If the computer doesn’t work, try 
 it off and on again. (turn)
 
 
ACTIVATION
Write sentences that are true for you, using the prompts. Compare your ideas with a partner. Ask him / 
her for more details.
•	 something you learnt to do when you were 
a child
•	 something your parents didn’t let you do 
when you were younger
•	 a place you remember visiting
•	 a person you enjoy spending time with
•	 something you often forget to do
•	 something that you try not to do
	25–30	 Excellent. You can use gerunds and infinitives very well.
	16–24	 Quite good. But check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.143) 
for any questions that you got wrong.
	 0–15	 This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank again (Student’s Book p.143). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 174@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
174
7A  GRAMMAR  past modals
 	
Read the conversations and the sentences in brackets. Then complete the conversations with might 
(not) have, must have, or can’t have + past participle.
1	 A	 Why is there so much traffic today?
	
B	 I don’t know. There might have been an accident. (maybe 
there was)
2	 A	 Can you move your leg?
	
B	 No, it hurts too much. I think I 
 it. (perhaps I 
have broken it)
3	 A	 Look! The gate’s open and the dog has gone.
	
B	 Oh no! We 
 it open when we went out. (I’m 
sure we left it open)
4	 A	 Oh no, the cake’s burning!
	
B	 You 
 the oven on too high. (you definitely put 
the oven on)
5	 A	 I can’t find the milk. We 
 it all. (I’m sure we 
didn’t drink it)
	
B	 Yes, you’re right. It must be in there somewhere.
6	 A	 Where’s Jeremy? He should be here.
	
B	 He 
 the email about the meeting. (perhaps he 
didn’t see)
7	 A	 Ellen passed all her exams with top marks!
	
B	 Wow! She 
 really hard. (I’m sure she worked)
8	 A	 I’ve done my homework, Mum. I’m going out.
	
B	 What? You 
 all of it. Let me see it. (it’s 
impossible you’ve finished)
9	 A	 We didn’t see Dan and Sarah at the concert.
	
B	 They 
 tickets. I think the concert was sold out. 
(perhaps they weren’t able to get)
 
10	 A	 I called you earlier, but I got your voicemail.
	
B	 Sorry. I 
 my phone by mistake. (I’m sure I 
switched off)
 	
Complete the sentences with should / shouldn’t have and the past participle of a verb from the list.
break up  buy  come  keep  take  tell  use  wait
1	 We’re lost. I knew we should have taken the second exit at the roundabout!
2	 This tastes too spicy. You 
 so much chilli.
3	 You 
 with James. He was perfect for you.
4	 The concert was amazing. You 
 with us.
5	 Jim’s already gone? I don’t believe it – he 
 for us.
6	 I’m afraid we can’t exchange the jacket now. You 
 the receipt.
7	 You 
 us that you were in hospital. We would have visited you.
8	 I 
 these jeans. They really don’t suit me.
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Write four conversations of two lines using must have, might have, can’t have, and should(n’t) have.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 175@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
175
7B  GRAMMAR  verbs of the senses
 	
Complete the conversations with the phrases in each list. Sometimes two forms are possible.
 
ACTIVATION
Practise the conversations with a partner. Then cover the conversations and try to act one of them out 
from memory.
1
smells  smells like  smells as if
Customer	 I’m looking for a perfume for my wife that 1 smells nice and fresh.
Assistant	 What about this one? It 2 
 very flowery.
Customer	 No, I don’t like it. It 3 
 it’s for an older woman.
Assistant	 Try this one then – it’s called ‘Paris’.
Customer	 That’s very nice. It 4 
 roses.
2
feels  feels like  feels as if
Assistant	 It’s very good quality and it 5 
 very smooth. 
Touch it and see.
Tourist	
Hmm, yes. It 6 
 silk. Is it silk?
Assistant	 No, it’s cotton, but it 7 
 it’s made of silk.
Tourist	
The material 8 
 very soft. I like it.
3
tastes  tastes like  tastes as if
Woman 1	 Try a piece of this. It 9 
 delicious.
Woman 2	 Mmm. This one 10 
 the cakes my grandma used to make.
Woman 1	 It’s very nice. It 11 
 there’s a little bit of orange in there.
Woman 2	 That’s right! And it 12 
 much better than the ones you 
get in the shops.
4
look  look like  look as if
Woman	 You shouldn’t have said you wanted to come if you didn’t.
Man	
Why do you say that?
Woman	 You 13 
 you are totally bored.
Man	
I did want to come. It’s just that they all 14 
 fine to me.
Woman	 Even the ones that make me 15 
 I’m 60 years old?
Man	
OK, those ones do 16 
 a bit old-fashioned.
Woman	 And these ones that 17 
 something a 13-year-old 
would wear?
Man	
They 18 
 OK to me.
Woman	 Oh, you’re so helpful.
5
sound(s)  sound(s) like  sound(s) as if
Engineer	
Wait! You’re coming in too soon. It 19 
 wrong.
Guitarist	
It 20 
 fine to me.
Engineer	
No, it 21 
 you’re rushing in.
Guitarist	
Well, how should it sound?
Engineer	
It should 22 
 an early 80s rock band, remember?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 176@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
176
8A  GRAMMAR  the passive (all forms); have something done;  
it is said that…, he is thought to…, etc.
 	
Complete the newspaper report with the verbs in brackets in the passive. Add any other necessary 
words, e.g. to or that.
 a
 	
Complete the sentences with the correct form of have, the past participle, and the words in brackets.
1	 She had her wedding dress made by a famous designer. It cost a fortune! (wedding dress / make)
2	 I thought this was a safe city. I didn’t expect 
 . (my wallet / steal)
3	 I 
 at the dentist tomorrow. I’m terrified! (a tooth / fill)
4	 Have you ever 
 ? (your heart / break)
5	 You should 
 if you can’t see the board clearly. (your eyes / test)
6	 How often 
 ? (your car / service)
7	 Our neighbours 
 at the moment. (a swimming pool / build)
8	 I really need to go to the hairdresser’s. I 
 for ages. (my hair / cut)
9	 I don’t mind 
 , but I hate being videoed. (my photo / take)
 
10	 Unfortunately, we 
 last night. (our house / burgle)
 
11	 My grandfather 
 every Friday. (his shopping / deliver)
 
12	 It’s the second time this year that we 
 . (our car / break into)
 b
Police have begun an enquiry after a fight broke out 
between several people in Lindhurst Road, Poole.
The fight 1 is believed to (believe) have started in the 
early hours of Friday morning at an address near the corner 
of Lindhurst Road. It 2 
 (think) the fight 
started after a car was damaged by one of the men.
At least one of the men involved 3 
 (say) 
have been armed. Three men remain in hospital and are  
being treated for injuries, which 4 
 
(understand) be the result of the fight. It 5 
 
(expect) one man will be released from hospital later 
today. Five men, who 6 
 (think) be 
from the Brighton area, and are aged between 21 and 32, 
have been arrested. The police are asking anyone who 
witnessed the incident to contact them urgently.  
All information will be treated confidentially.
Investigation after seaside incident
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Ask and answer the questions. If your partner says yes, ask for more information.
Have you ever had your…?
•	 portrait painted
•	 hair cut by a friend
•	 fortune told
•	 photo taken by a professional photographer
•	 house or car broken into
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 177@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
177
8B  GRAMMAR  reporting verbs
 	
Complete each sentence with the correct form of the verb in brackets.
1	 A	 Remind me to book a taxi to the airport. (book)
	
B	 We don’t need one; Andy’s offered 
 us a lift. (give)
2	 A	 Hi, Tom. I’m surprised to see you here. I didn’t think you liked opera.
	
B	 I don’t, but Delia persuaded me 
 tonight. (come)
3	 A	 Have the police found the men that robbed the supermarket?
	
B	 Apparently, they’ve arrested one man, but he denies 
 anything to do with it. (have)
4	 A	 I’ve always regretted 
 to university. (not go)
	
B	 Well it’s never too late. Why don’t you apply?
5	 A	 Have the kids been fighting again? Oliver’s really upset, but he refuses 
 me why. (tell)
	
B	 Oh, Harry accused Oliver of 
 one of his toys, and now they aren’t speaking to each other. 
(break)
6	 A	 Where are you going on holiday this year?
	
B	 We haven’t decided yet. Molly suggested 
 camping in Scotland, but I’m not very keen. 
I’d rather go somewhere warmer. (go)
7	 A	 Someone broke into the car and stole my laptop while I was in the supermarket.
	
B	 I warned you 
 it in the car. Have you reported it to the police? (not leave)
8	 A	 There’s a funny smell in the kitchen.
	
B	 That’s because your dad insisted on 
 curry for dinner and he burnt it. (make)
 	
Complete the sentences using the reporting verb in brackets and a verb from the list.
come  cook  eat  forget  keep  lose  tidy  try
1	 Adam offered to cook dinner for everyone. (offer)
2	 Pablo 
 his room at the weekend. (promise)
3	 Roger 
 for 
 my birthday. (apologize)
4	 Bill 
 me 
 all my money in the bank. (advise)
5	 Sofia 
 the new pizza place. (suggest)
6	 Ruby 
 all the chocolates. (admit)
7	 Mike 
 me 
 to the theatre with him. (invite)
8	 Jamie 
 me for 
 the tickets, but I think he had them. (blame)
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Think of a time when you…
•	 received some good advice.
•	 apologized to someone for something.
•	 offered to help someone.
•	 advised somebody to do (or not to do) something.
•	 were blamed for something you didn’t do.
•	 regretted something you did / didn’t do.
Make sentences using reported speech. Then compare your sentences with your partner.
My sister advised me to do a course to improve my computer skills. 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 178@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
178
9A  GRAMMAR  clauses of contrast and purpose
 	
Match 1–10 with a–j to make complete sentences.
1	 They went to London for…	
	
a	 be late.
2	 She flew to São Paulo to…	
	
b	 the rough sea.
3	 Although Josh played really well, …	
	
c	 the fact that it was raining.
4	 We downloaded a travel app so that…	
	
d	 avoid the traffic.
5	 Despite losing the first set, …	
	
e	 I still went to work.
6	 Even though I wasn’t feeling very well, …	
	
f	 she won the match.
7	 I took a taxi so as not to…	
	
g	 a weekend break.
8	 He went for a walk in spite of…	
	
h	 he lost in the end.
9	 We left early in order to…	
	
i	 we would know the best things to see.
 
10	 The men went out fishing in spite of…	
	
j	 visit her brother.
 	
Rewrite the sentences using the words in brackets so that both sentences mean the same.
1	 In spite of the cold weather, the barbecue was a success. (although)
	
Although the weather was cold, the barbecue was a success.
2	 A lot of companies have reduced staff numbers so that they can save money. (in order to)
	
 .
3	 Even though the flight was long, she felt great when she arrived in New York. (despite)
	
 .
4	 Nick didn’t tell Louisa the truth because he didn’t want to hurt her feelings. (so as)
	
 .
5	 I bought the shoes in spite of the fact that they were ridiculously expensive. (even though)
	
 .
6	 The company has a big market share even though they do very little advertising. (in spite of)
	
 .
7	 They had to leave the hotel early. If they hadn’t, they would have missed their train. (so that)
	
 .
8	 She didn’t get the job in spite of being a strong candidate. (though)
	
 .
 a
g
 b
ACTIVATION
Complete the sentences with your own ideas. Then compare with a partner.
1	 Sara is learning English in order to 
 .
2	 My husband isn’t making very good progress in English, even though 
 .
3	 Nicola watches films in English to 
 .
4	 Jan passed his English exam despite 
 .
5	 Our English teacher took us to London for the weekend so that 
 .
Write two true sentences about yourself and learning English. Use expressions of contrast and purpose. 
Then compare your ideas with a partner.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 179@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
179
9B  GRAMMAR  uncountable and plural nouns
 	
Circle the correct option.
 
ACTIVATION
Choose four nouns from the list and write a sentence using each one. Compare your sentences with  
a partner.
accommodation  equipment  manners  news  police  politics  research  team
Hurry up, kids! You don’t have 1 a time / time 
to watch videos! Daniel, your trousers 2 look / 
looks dirty. Go and put on a clean pair. Bertha, 
don’t forget athletics 3 is / are after school today. 
Have you remembered your 4 short / shorts and 
a T-shirt? OK, good. And have you both had 
breakfast? No, Bertha? Well, you’ll have to have 
5 a / a piece of toast because there isn’t any 
cereal. And hurry up!
Now then, Brian. I’ve talked 
to you before about your 
9 behaviour / behaviours 
with customers. I know they 
can sometimes be rude, but 
we expect our 10 staff / staffs 
to be polite at all times. Do 
you understand? Good. Then 
I hope to see 11 a / some 
progress from you very soon.
I know what you’re going to 
say, doctor. You’re going to 
give me some 12 advices / 
advice about reducing stress, 
and give me 13 a / some 
medicine to help me sleep at 
night. But I read 14 an / some 
information on a website 
which said that sleeping 
tablets aren’t good for you.
Be careful you don't scratch 
15 a / the furniture with  
16 that / those scissors, 
Bertha! And have you 
finished your 17 homework /  
homeworks? Good, then 
come and help me take out 
the 18 rubbish / rubbishes.
I’m sorry, but your hand luggage 6 is / are too 
heavy, Madam. You’ll need to put 7 a belonging / 
some belongings into your suitcase. Oh, right. 
There 8 isn’t / aren’t any space in your suitcase? 
Well then, I’m afraid we’ll have to charge you 
extra.
1
3
4
5
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 180@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
180
10A  GRAMMAR  quantifiers: all, every, both, etc.
 	
Circle the correct form.
1	 A	 We don’t do any / no experiments in our chemistry class.
	
B	 Don’t you? We do something practical in every / all class.
2	 A	 Did you do all research / all of the research yourself?
	
B	 Yes, I did all / all of it myself.
3	 A	 How often do you use the library?
	
B	 Hardly ever. I can find everything / all on the internet.
4	 A	 When can I see you to discuss my science project?
	
B	 I’ll be in my office all day / every day today. Come any / all time.
5	 A	 How did your students do in the biology exam?
	
B	 Not too badly. They passed all. / They all passed.
6	 A	 How did the trip to the science museum go?
	
B	 It was fine. Most / Most of the students enjoyed it.
7	 A	 What subject do you like best – physics or chemistry?
	
B	 I don’t like either of them / both of them. They’re either / both boring!
8	 A	 Neither my mother or / nor father went to university.
	
B	 Really? Both / Either my parents studied law, but either of them / neither of them work as lawyers.
 	
Complete the column on the right with  
quantifiers from the list.
all  all  all  anyone  both  every  every  
most  most of  neither  no  none of
	
	
quantifiers
1	 Not 
 birds can fly.	
all
2	
 kiwis nor penguins can fly.	
3	
 country in South America, except Bolivia and Paraguay, has a coastline.	
4	
 cars nowadays are fitted with seatbelts at the front and the back.	
5	
 the students in my class, about 80%, live very near the school.	
6	 There are 
 wild tigers in Africa. However, some can still be found in parts of Asia.	
7	 In Ireland, 
 who is aged 18 or over can vote in an election.	
8	
 Canadians speak English as their first language (77%), but some speak French.	
9	 Nocturnal animals are animals that sleep 
 day and hunt for food at night.	
 
10	 Alexander Graham Bell and Elisha Gray 
 invented the telephone at the same time.	
 
11	 Trains in France run 
 day of the year, including Christmas Day.	
 
12	
 the people who survived the sinking of the Titanic are still alive today. The last  
survivor, Millvina Dean, died in 2009.	
 a
 b
ACTIVATION
Cover the quantifiers column in b. Work with a partner and take turns to say the sentences using the 
correct quantifier.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 181@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
181
10B  GRAMMAR  articles
 	
Complete the sentences with a, an, the, or – (no article).
A	 1 The Kremlin is probably 2 
 most famous building in 3 
 
Moscow.
B	 James had 4 
 accident while he was skiing in Austria and now 
he’s in 5 
 hospital.
C	 6 
 first state in 7 
 USA where 8 
 women could vote 
was Wyoming.
D	 9 
 population of 10 
 South Africa is approximately 52 
million.
E	 I took a year off before I went to 11 
 university. First, I worked 
as 12 
 au-pair in Italy for six months.
F	
13 
 River Ebro in Spain flows into 14 
 Mediterranean Sea.
G	 We couldn’t visit 15 
 village church yesterday because there 
was 16 
 wedding taking place.
H	 17 
 quickest way to get from London to Oxford by 18 
 car 
is to take 19 
 M40 motorway.
I	
20 
 Lake Superior, in 21 
 Canada, is 22 
 biggest lake 
in 23 
 world.
J	 I’m not usually frightened of 24 
 spiders, but 25 
 spiders 
in 26 
 zoo were enormous!
K	 The man was sent to 27 
 prison for eight years for robbing  
28 
 bank in Zürich.
L	 I love eating at 29 
 Mario’s. I think it’s the best pizza restaurant 
in the city.
M	 Whenever I’m in London, I take 30 
 bus to 31 
 Science 
Museum and spend the morning looking around.
N	 We spent our honeymoon in Morocco and camped in 32 
 
Sahara desert for two nights.
O	 My sister doesn’t normally like 33 
 heights, but she managed 
to get to the top of 34 
 Eiffel Tower.
P	
35 
 Mont Blanc is 36 
 highest mountain in 37 
 Alps.
 
ACTIVATION
Write two paragraphs about your country and city or town. Include the following information:
Your country:
•	 Where is it?
•	 What are the most important geographical 
features, e.g. mountains, lakes, rivers, etc.?
Your city or town:
•	 Where is it?
•	 What are the most important buildings, tourist 
sites, shops, etc.?
	28–37	 Excellent. You can use articles very well.
	10–27	 Good. But check the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.151) 
for any questions that you got wrong.
	
0–9	 This is difficult for you. Read the rules in the Grammar Bank (Student’s Book p.151). 
Then ask your teacher for another photocopy and do the exercise again at home.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 182@@
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
182
Revision  GRAMMAR  Auction
Sentences	
Price
1	 Can you tell me what the time is?	
2	 Her name’s Hannah, isn’t she?	
3	 How long have you been having driving lessons?	
4	 She has long beautiful dark hair.	
5	 The accident happened because the driver had been drinking.	
6	 I like very much classical music.	
7	 This time tomorrow we’ll have finished all our exams.	
8	 I can’t wait to tell my dad the news when he comes home.	
9	 I would have enjoyed the film more if it wouldn’t have had subtitles.	
 
10	 I wish I have more free time!	
 
11	 It’s getting late. We’d better go now.	
 
12	 I’m not used to getting up so early.	
 
13	 He mustn’t have seen you or he would have said hello.	
 
14	 It looks like if it’s going to rain.	
 
15	 The missing man is thought that he is from Manchester.	
 
16	 Nick insisted on paying for the meal.	
 
17	 Lily is going to hospital this afternoon for to visit her husband.	
 
18	 I need to buy some new furnitures for my living room.	
 
19	 You can have either the chocolate or the vanilla ice cream. Not both.	
 
20	 The man was sent to the prison for ten years.	
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 183@@
183
Childhood and school
1  were you    2  did / do you, to    3  was / is your    
4  Have you, Did you    5  did you, to
A male or female relative
1  What’s his / her    2  is he / she    3  What does he / she    
4  What does he / she, like    5  What’s / is he / she
•	 Now focus on b and put Sts in pairs. Tell them to choose  
a topic and ask and answer the questions. 
•	 When you feel the activity has gone on for long enough, 
get feedback from a few pairs.
•	 If a pair finishes early, get them to try another topic.
1B	What’s in a signature?
An interpretation and free-speaking 
activity
Sts use information to interpret famous people’s signatures 
and also their own. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
present simple (narrative), the…the + comparatives, 
personality vocabulary
This person uses their full name and the initial of their 
surname. That means their private life is more important.
The more illegible the signature is, the less assertive that 
person is.
•	 Give out the worksheets. Focus on a and get Sts to 
write Yours sincerely on a piece of paper, and then their 
signature underneath. Then get them to exchange their 
pieces of paper with a partner. Tell them to put their 
partner’s piece of paper somewhere safe as they will be 
using it later on in the lesson.
•	 Focus on the signatures in b. In their pairs, get Sts to 
match the names to the signatures, and say what they 
know about the people’s personalities.
•	 Check answers and elicit what Sts know about the 
people’s personalities.
1	 Charles Schultz (1922–2000) was an American cartoonist. 
He created Charlie Brown and Snoopy.
2	 Paul McCartney (1942– ) is an English musician, singer and 
songwriter. He was a member of The Beatles.
3	 Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910) was a Russian writer. He wrote 
War and Peace and Anna Karenina.
4	 Charles Dickens (1812–1870) was an English writer. He 
wrote Oliver Twist, A Christmas Carol, and David Copperfield.
5	 Barack Obama (1961– ) was elected the 44th president of 
the USA on 4 November 2008. 
6	 Paris Hilton (1981– ) is an American heiress and socialite.
7	 Sean Connery (1930– ) is a Scottish actor. He is best 
known for his roles as James Bond and Dr Henry Jones 
(father of Indiana Jones).
8	 Elijah Wood (1981– ) is an American actor. He is most 
famous for his role as Frodo in The Lord of the Rings and  
The Hobbit sagas.
Tell me about it
A pairwork activity
Sts write information about themselves in a chart. They then 
swap charts with a partner and ask each other to explain the 
information. This is a two-page activity. Copy one page  
(A and B) per student.
LANGUAGE
general revision of Intermediate grammar and vocabulary
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
•	 Focus on the instructions for a and give Sts five minutes 
to write their answers in the correct spaces. Point out that 
they each have different instructions for what to write. 
When Sts have finished, tell them to fold the worksheet in 
half (or tear off the instructions).
•	 Now get Sts to swap worksheets with their partner. 
Demonstrate the activity by taking a worksheet from a 
student, looking at the answers in the chart, and asking 
him / her Why did you write…? Ask follow-up questions to 
continue the conversation.
•	 Sts now do the activity in their pairs. Tell them they had 
different instructions in a, and encourage them ask about 
the information in any order. Monitor and help where 
necessary. Stop the activity when most Sts have asked 
about all their partner’s information.
1A	 Ask me a question
A semi-controlled speaking activity
Sts practise question formation. Copy one worksheet  
per student.
LANGUAGE
question formation
•	 Give out the worksheets and focus on a. Tell Sts they have 
five minutes, in pairs, to decide what the missing words 
are for each question. They must not write anything.
•	 Check answers.
Your home
1  do you    2  have you    3  do you, with    4  do you    
5  there, don’t
Getting around
1  do you, to    2  does it    3  Do you, What, do you drive / 
have    4  How, do, use    5  What’s, to, around
Free time
1  do you    2  What kind / type, do you, to    
3  often do you    4  What, do you    5  How much
Lifestyle
1  much, do you, a    2  How many, do you    3  do you, to    
4  you, to    5  was, to
Travel
1  the most, ’ve / have ever    2  are, to go    3  Do you, to, or    
4  Do you, in    5  you ever, to
Family
1  How many, are    2  Who, do you, to    
3  Who do you, with, or    4  do you, about    5  was the, your
Communicative activity  
instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 184@@
184
2B	You’re only as old as you feel
A groupwork speaking activity
Sts compare their opinions on age and fashion. Copy one 
sheet per student.
LANGUAGE
managing discussions, agreeing and disagreeing, 
clothes and fashion
•	 Give out the worksheets and give Sts enough time to read 
through the statements. Explain that they have to put a 
cross on the line below each statement, showing to what 
extent they agree or disagree with each one. 
•	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four. Tell them to 
compare their answers and explain the reasons for their 
choices. Encourage Sts to use the language for managing 
discussions and politely disagreeing in the Student’s Book 
on p.23. You might like to write the target language on 
the board for easy reference. Monitor and help where 
necessary.
•	 Get feedback from the groups.
3A	Talk about it
A groupwork activity
Sts are dealt cards with prompts for anecdotes. They plan 
what they are going to say. Copy and cut up one set of cards 
per group of three.
LANGUAGE
narrative tenses: past simple, past continuous, past 
perfect simple and past perfect continuous
•	 Put Sts in groups of three and give each group a set of 
cards. Tell them to each choose two that they can talk 
about. Set a time limit, e.g. two minutes, for Sts to think 
about what they are going to say. Help with vocabulary if 
necessary.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Sts may want to make notes to help them 
tell their anecdotes.
•	 You could suggest that each student starts with I’m going 
to tell you about a time when…. Then Sts take turns to tell 
their first anecdote. Monitor, help, and make a note of any 
misuse of narrative tenses to focus on at the end.
•	 If there’s time, let each student tell two anecdotes.
•	 Get feedback to find out if there were any unusual / 
interesting stories.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Make one copy per pair. Put Sts in 
pairs and give them some time to read through the cards. 
Tell them to choose two anecdotes each to tell each other. 
Then continue as above.
 EXTRA IDEA   Play Truth or Lie. For each anecdote, Sts first 
decide if they are going to tell the truth or lie. They then tell 
their anecdotes and the group decides whether it’s the truth 
or a lie.
9	 Usain Bolt (1986– ) is a Jamaican former sprinter who won 
several Olympic gold medals.
 10	 Damien Hirst (1965– ) is an English artist, entrepreneur 
and art collector.
•	 Focus on c and tell Sts they are going to read some 
information about how to interpret signatures. Check 
Sts know the meaning of legibility /ledʒəˈbɪləti/ (and 
its derivatives legible and illegible). Model and drill its 
pronunciation.
•	 In their pairs, Sts read the information and use it to 
interpret each of the famous people’s signatures. Do 
their interpretations match what they previously thought 
about these famous people?
•	 Get some feedback on each signature.
•	 Now focus on d and get Sts to look at the pieces of paper 
with their partner’s signature. Tell them to interpret their 
partner’s signature according to the information they read.
•	 Get some quick feedback to find out if Sts agree with the 
interpretation of their personality.
 EXTRA IDEA   Before Sts do d, you could sign your name on 
the board and get Sts to tell you what they can find out 
about you from it, according to what they read.
2A	 Ask the doctor
Two pairwork role-play activities
Sts role-play different situations, using the grammar and 
vocabulary of the lesson. Copy one worksheet per pair and 
cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
present perfect, illness and medicine vocabulary
How long have you been feeling like this?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. If 
you have odd numbers, make one pair a three and have 
two Sts A (or take part in the role-play yourself).
 EXTRA SUPPORT   You could pre-teach / check the meaning 
and pronunciation of alternative medicine = non-traditional 
medicine; acupuncture = a way of treating illness or  
stopping pain by inserting thin needles into the body; 
diagnosis = what a doctor thinks is wrong with a patient; 
homeopathy = a system of treating diseases or conditions 
using very small amounts of the substance that causes  
the disease or condition.
•	 Tell Sts they are going to role-play two situations. 
Tell them to read the first situation and prepare the 
information they will need. Encourage the patients and 
doctors to be as imaginative and inventive as possible 
in their questions and answers. Tell the patients they can 
invent a new persona (age, job, etc.). Give Sts time to do 
this and encourage them to write notes if they need to.
•	 Sts then role-play the first situation. Monitor to make sure 
Sts are doing the activity properly.
•	 When they have finished the first role-play, tell them to 
repeat the process for the second situation.
•	 Finally, get feedback from some pairs on the outcome of 
the patient / doctor conversation.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 185@@
185
4A	In 20 years’ time
A group discussion
Sts revise the two new future tenses by discussing predictions. 
Copy one worksheet per group of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
will be + gerund, will have + past participle, will probably / 
definitely happen
It’s already happening
I think it’s very unlikely
•	 Put Sts in small groups of three or four and give out the 
worksheets. Focus on the title of the worksheet and the 
predictions, making sure Sts understand them all. Sts then 
discuss each one in turn and decide if they think it will 
happen, and if they think it will be a good thing. They then 
take a group vote before making a decision and moving 
onto the next prediction.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   Discuss the first prediction with the whole 
class, eliciting opinions and giving your own opinion.
•	 Stop the activity when Sts have discussed all the 
predictions or when you think it has gone on for long 
enough.
•	 Get feedback from various groups, and find out which 
prediction Sts think is the most positive and which is the 
most negative.
4B	Finish the sentences
A group activity
Sts race to complete sentences. Copy and cut up one 
worksheet per group of four or five Sts.
LANGUAGE
future time clauses
•	 Put Sts in groups of four or five and give each group a set 
of cards, either face down or in an envelope. Make one 
person the ‘secretary’.
•	 Each group picks up a card, and together Sts decide on 
a way to correctly finish the sentence. Tell Sts that they 
should use a verb phrase and not just a noun to complete 
the sentences. Then, the ‘secretary’ writes down the 
sentence and takes it to the teacher, who checks if it is 
correct. If it’s correct, their group scores a point. If not, they 
must re-write it.
•	 Set a time limit, e.g. ten minutes. Sts continue until they 
run out of cards or the time is up. The group with the 
most points when you stop the activity wins.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Copy one worksheet per pair. Set a 
time limit for the pair to write continuations of the sentences. 
When the time is up check answers. The pair with the most 
correct continuations wins.
3B	Tell the story
A groupwork activity
Sts describe pictures to each other and then put them in 
the correct order to make a story. Copy and cut up one 
worksheet per group of four.
LANGUAGE
adverbs, narrative tenses revision, linkers
•	 Cut up the worksheet into four strips with two pictures on 
each. Put Sts in small groups of four. Shuffle the strips and 
give Sts one each.
 !   If you have a group of three or a pair, give one or both Sts 
two strips.
•	 Tell Sts that the pictures tell one story, so they have 
to describe their two pictures to the rest of the group 
(without letting them see them), and decide which order 
all the strips go in. Tell Sts not to worry about the adverbs 
on the picture.
•	 Monitor while Sts describe their pictures. When they have 
finished, tell them to look at the four strips and decide if 
their order is correct.
•	 Check Sts have the strips in the correct order. Now tell Sts 
to tell the story using narrative tenses and the adverbs on 
each picture.
•	 Finally, get feedback by getting students from different 
groups to tell the story picture by picture.
1	 She wanted to go on a dream holiday, but she obviously 
didn’t have the money.
2	 She stayed up all night reading about how to make more 
money.
3	 Unfortunately, the bank refused to help her.
4	 It was raining incredibly hard one day when she met a sad 
little dog.
5	 She suddenly had a great idea when she was drying the 
dog.
6	 Two weeks later she’d started a successful (dog-walking) 
business.
7	 She was walking in the park when she met a man with his 
dog. They immediately liked each other.
8	 In the end, she did have her dream holiday.
 EXTRA IDEA   As a follow-up activity, get Sts to write the story 
in pairs.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Make one copy per group. Sts work 
together to tell the story, using all the adverbs and narrative 
tenses. Ask one / two groups to tell their story during 
feedback.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 186@@
186
6A	usually, used to, get used to
A pairwork activity
Sts practise asking and talking about things people usually 
do, used to do, or could / couldn’t get used to doing. Copy 
one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
Do you usually…?
Did you use to…?
Do you think you could get used to…?
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on the instruction for a and on the three question 
forms. Highlight that for each verb phrase from the list 
Sts must use the most appropriate question form. Tell an 
A student to ask the first question: Do you usually read 
everything on a tablet? Then elicit B’s first question: Did you 
use to have a favourite toy?
•	 Remind Sts that after get used to they will need to use the 
gerund and highlight that the get used to questions need 
to be about something their partner doesn’t already do.
 EXTRA SUPPORT   You could elicit all the possible questions 
for each category before moving to the next stage.
•	 In their pairs, Sts take turns to ask and answer the 
questions. Remind them that the ‘questioner’ should show 
interest and ask follow-up questions wherever possible.
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
6B	Gerund or infinitive?
A pairwork activity
Sts complete questions with gerunds or infinitives and then 
ask each other the questions. Copy one worksheet per pair 
and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
verbs + gerund or infinitive (with or without to)
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. 
Focus on a and explain that Sts should write in the VERB 
column on the right (not in the sentences). Give Sts time 
to work individually, and then check answers by eliciting 
the verbs only – first Sts As and then Sts Bs.
A	 1  to live    2  speaking    3  to like    4  doing    5  eating    
6  doing    7  to worry    8  play    9  to do    10  visiting    
11  getting    12  to spend
B	 1  having    2  doing    3  to assemble / assembling    
4  emigrating    5  read    6  doing    7  meeting    8  eating   
9  learn    10  studying    11  seeing    12  watching
•	 Focus on instruction b. Tell Sts to fold their sheet on the 
fold line, so they can’t see the verbs in the VERB column, 
and to try to remember the correct form of the bold verb 
in brackets. Sts A ask Sts B their questions, and then they 
swap roles. Encourage Sts to react to what their partner 
says, and ask for more information when they can.
•	 Monitor and correct any mistakes with gerunds and 
infinitives. 
•	 Finally, get feedback on some of the more interesting 
answers.
5A	Would you survive?
A survival test and free-speaking 
activity
Sts read six extreme situations and discuss how to survive 
each one. Copy one worksheet per student and cut in half.
LANGUAGE
second conditional: What would you do?
•	 Tell Sts that they are going to look at some survival 
questions and at the end of the activity, they’ll find out 
whether they’d survive or not.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four and give out one worksheet to 
each group – only the Would you survive? part, not the 
bottom half with the answers.
•	 Tell Sts to take turns reading one of the situations to their 
group. They should then discuss what would be the best 
thing to do in each situation. Encourage them to give as 
much information as possible.
•	 When Sts have read each situation, give each student 
a copy of the bottom half of the worksheet with the 
answers. Sts read through the answers and see if they 
knew any of the answers.
•	 Get some quick feedback from the groups to find out 
which Sts might have survived in each situation.
5B	Wishes
A pairwork activity
Sts write their wishes in circles. They then swap circles with  
a partner, and ask each other to explain the information.  
This is a two-page activity. Copy one page (A and a B)  
per student.
LANGUAGE
wish for present / future
wish for past regrets
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and instructions 1–10 for the circles. Point 
out that they each have different instructions for what to 
write. Make it clear that Sts should just write words in the 
circles, not sentences with wish, e.g. in A’s circle 1 he / she 
should write a celebrity’s name – not I wish I could meet 
George Clooney.
•	 Give Sts five minutes to write answers in at least seven 
circles. When they have finished, focus on b and c, and 
tell them to fold their worksheet in half (or tear off the 
instructions).
•	 Now get Sts to swap worksheets with their partner. 
Demonstrate the activity by taking a copy from one 
student and asking him / her Why did you write…? 
And elicit: Because I wish…. Ask follow-up questions to 
continue the conversation.
•	 Tell Sts that they can ask about the information in any 
order. Monitor and help where necessary, correcting any 
errors Sts make using wish during feedback. Sts now do 
the activity in pairs.
•	 Get some feedback. Find out if there were any interesting / 
unusual answers.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 187@@
187
7A	Guess my verb
A pairwork activity
Sts practise using past modals by trying to guess their 
partner’s sentences. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut 
into A and B.
LANGUAGE
past modals
He may have got lost, He can’t have seen you, He shouldn’t 
have done it, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.  
If possible, sit Sts face to face, so they can’t see each 
other’s worksheet.
•	 Demonstrate the activity by writing on a piece of paper 
in big letters: JACK DIDN’T COME TO MY PARTY LAST 
NIGHT. HE MUST HAVE FORGOTTEN. Then write the same 
sentences on the board like this: JACK DIDN’T COME TO 
MY PARTY LAST NIGHT. HE MUST HAVE 
 . 
Elicit ways of finishing the sentence. Highlight that there 
are often several possibilities, but Sts have to guess the 
exact ending you have on the piece of paper. If they say 
a correct sentence but not your original ending, say Try 
again. When they guess correctly, say That’s right. Finally, 
show them the sentence you wrote on the piece of paper.
•	 Focus on the instructions for a and tell Sts to look at their 
sentences. Explain that their bold sentences have gaps, 
and that the missing words are a verb phrase. Where Sts 
A have a gapped sentence, Sts B have the completed 
sentence, and vice versa. The aim of the activity is for 
Sts to try and guess the missing verbs. Give Sts time to 
complete the gaps either by writing their answers down 
or by thinking what the missing words might be.
•	 Now focus on b and c, and tell Sts to try guessing until 
they say the exact phrase their partner has. Stress that 
they have a maximum of three guesses. Sts A should 
begin by trying to guess the missing verbs in their first 
sentence. Emphasize that, when Sts make their guesses, 
they should say the whole sentence. When A guesses the 
missing verbs correctly, he / she writes it in the gap.
•	 Then Sts B try to guess their first verbs, and Sts continue 
taking turns.
 EXTRA CHALLENGE   At the end of the activity, you could get  
Sts to turn over the sheets and try to recall the verbs by 
reading out the sentences one by one. Say ‘blank’ or make a 
noise where the missing verbs are, and let the class call  
them out.
7B	Two photos
A pairwork describing activity
Sts describe their photos to each other. Copy one worksheet 
per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
present continuous, verbs describing body language, 
feelings adjectives, describing photos
This photo looks as if it was taken in the family's 
living room.
In the foreground…	
In the centre (of the photo), there is / there are…
In the background…
•	 Before Sts start the activity, you might like to elicit or write 
on the board the phrases from Language.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the worksheets. Make sure Sts can’t see each other’s 
worksheets.
•	 Explain that they both have different photos and have 
to describe them to each other. Tell Sts that they should 
focus on the people and their body language, and say 
who they think they are, what they think they’re doing, 
and how they might be feeling. Demonstrate if you can 
with a photo from the Student’s Book, or one you have 
looked up online. Give Sts a minute to look at their photo 
1 and think about how they are going to describe it. Sts 
A start with their photo 1. Then Sts swap roles and Sts B 
describe their photo 1. Sts then repeat for photos 2.
•	 Monitor and help if necessary.
•	 Sts then look at their partner’s photos to see if they agree 
with each other’s interpretations of the photos. 
•	 Get some feedback from various pairs.
8A	Good laws?
A group speaking activity
Sts read about laws in different countries and discuss 
whether they think they are good or not. They then invent 
some new laws they would like to see introduced in their 
own countries. Copy one worksheet per student or per 
group of three or four Sts.
LANGUAGE
passive (all forms), crime and punishment vocabulary
•	 Put Sts in pairs or small groups of three or four and give 
out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on the instructions and emphasize that all these 
laws are real laws. Tell Sts to look at the Animals section 
and read the two laws. Then set a time limit for Sts to 
discuss them (you can adjust the time limit as necessary 
if Sts have a lot to say). When the time is up, elicit some 
feedback to find out Sts’ opinions. 
•	 Now tell Sts to think of one new law related to animals. 
Monitor while Sts are talking, helping with vocabulary. 
•	 Finally, get each group to explain their new law to the 
class. Get the class to vote if they think it is a good law.
•	 Repeat the process for the other topics.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 188@@
188
8B	TV political debate
A role-play activity
Sts discuss political ideas. Copy one worksheet per group of 
four Sts and cut into A & B and C & D.
LANGUAGE
reporting verbs, media vocabulary
We promise to give free meals to all homeless people.
•	 Put Sts in groups of four and then put them in two pairs. 
Give out the worksheets. Ideally, Sts A and B should sit 
opposite C and D. If you have an odd number, you could 
have two Sts representing one political party and only one 
strong student representing the other. 
•	 Go through the instructions. Highlight that Sts have to first 
decide how to defend their own policies, and then how to 
attack the opposition’s policies. Stress that Sts are playing 
the role of politicians and it doesn’t matter if they don’t 
personally agree with the policies they have to defend.
•	 Set the scene by reminding Sts that it’s a live TV debate 
the day before elections, and it’s the politicians’ last 
chance to convince viewers to vote for them.
•	 Set a time limit for Sts to prepare for the debate. Monitor 
and help with vocabulary if necessary. 
•	 Sts now have their debate. Sts A and B begin by 
introducing their first policy and giving their reasons.  
Sts C and D then try to attack the policy, giving reasons. 
Next, Sts C and D introduce their first policy.
•	 When Sts have debated all the policies, ask Sts which ones 
they think would be a good idea in their country and why.
9A	Tell me about…
A pairwork speaking activity
Sts complete circles and then use the information to explain 
their answers. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
vocabulary: clauses of contrast and purpose, e.g. in spite 
of, in order to, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets. If 
possible, sit Sts face to face, so they can’t see each other’s 
worksheet.
•	 Focus on a and give Sts time to complete at least six 
circles. Point out that they each have different instructions 
for what to write.
•	 Now focus on b and tell Sts to take turns to ask each other 
what they wrote in each circle and why. Encourage Sts to 
ask follow-up questions to get a conversation going. You 
could demonstrate the activity by asking a student about 
circle 1.
•	 When Sts have finished asking about what they have 
written in all the circles get some feedback.
9B	Give your opinion!
A group board game
Sts revise countable and uncountable nouns by moving 
around the board and trying to talk for a minute about their 
opinion on different statements. Copy one worksheet per 
group of three or four Sts. You also need one dice per group 
and one counter per student.
The emphasis of the activity is fluency, but the teacher 
and Sts should also watch out for mistakes with the target 
language.
LANGUAGE
countable and plural nouns
•	 Put Sts in groups of three or four. Give each group the 
worksheet, a dice, and enough counters.
 !   If you don’t have enough dice, give each group a coin. Sts 
toss the coin for their go and move 1 for heads and 2 for tails.
•	 Each player puts a counter on START.
•	 Explain the rules of the game: Sts take turns to throw the 
dice and move their counter. If Sts land on a square with 
a statement, they must then talk for one minute about 
the topic on that square. They should first read out the 
statement, and then say what they think. Ask someone in 
each group to monitor the time. If Sts successfully speak 
for one minute about the subject, they can keep their 
counter where it is. If they ‘dry up’ before the minute is up, 
they must move their counter back to the last square it 
was on. If they land on a blank square, their turn is over 
and the next person plays. 
•	 Before Sts start, remind them that the main emphasis of 
the activity is fluency. 
•	 The first student to reach FINISH wins.
•	 When everyone has finished, highlight any common or 
important errors with the target language and get Sts to 
provide the correct answers.
10A	Science quiz
A quiz about natural sciences
Sts revise quantifiers by doing a true / false science quiz. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
quantifiers, animal vocabulary
each, all, neither, etc.
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and give Sts time, e.g. five minutes, to circle the 
correct quantifier in each sentence. 
•	 Check answers, by eliciting the quantifiers only.
A	 1  Most    2  All the    3  anything    4  either    5  None    
6  all    7  any
B	 1  both    2  no    3  Every    4  Most    5  Both    6  any    7  nor
•	 Tell Sts to read the information again and to remember 
the explanation for each sentence.
•	 Now focus on b and tell Sts A to read all their sentences to 
Sts B, who have to guess whether they are true or false.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 189@@
189
Revision
Questions to revise vocabulary,  
verb forms, and tenses
Sts ask each other questions about key vocabulary areas, 
using a range of tenses and verb forms from the Student’s 
Book. This could either be used as a final ‘pre-test’ revision or 
as an oral exam. Copy and cut up one set of cards per pair.
LANGUAGE
grammar and vocabulary of the book
•	 Put Sts in pairs. Give each pair a set of cards face down. Sts 
take turns to pick up the top card and talk to their partner 
about the topic on the card, using the prompts.
•	 Tell Sts to keep their cards and then if there is time, to swap 
cards with their partner.
•	 Encourage Sts to ask follow-up questions.
•	 Monitor, help, and correct if necessary.
 NON-CUT ALTERNATIVE   Give one worksheet per pair. Give 
Sts time to read through the cards. They take it in turns to 
ask their partner questions on one topic. They continue until 
they have used up all their topics.
•	 Encourage them to try and give an explanation for their 
answers and to use their own words when giving the 
explanation for a wrong answer.
•	 Make sure Sts swap roles.
•	 At the end of the activity, find out who got the most 
answers correct.
10B	General knowledge quiz
A quiz on a range of subjects
Sts revise articles by completing quiz questions and try to 
answer them in pairs. Copy one worksheet per student.
LANGUAGE
definite and indefinite articles
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on a and set a time limit for Sts to complete the 
questions. They can do this individually or in their pairs.
•	 Check answers.
1  	–    2  the, the    3  a    4  the    5  the, the    6  –    7  –    
8  the, the    9  the, –    10  –, –    11  the    12  –, –    13  the    
 14  a    15  a    16  the, the    17  –, the    18  the, the    19  a, –    
 20  the    21  –    22  a, an    23  the, a    24  the    25  –, –
•	 Focus on b and set a time limit, e.g. five minutes, for Sts to 
try to answer as many questions as possible.
•	 When time is up, check answers, making sure Sts use the 
article correctly in their answers. Find out which pair had 
the most correct answers.
1  Peru and Bolivia
2  Buzz Aldrin
3  4
4  The Indian Ocean
5  Mont Blanc
6  25
7  Blue for Caucasian babies, grey or brown for babies of 
African or Asian descent.
8  The Bald Eagle
9  ‘P’ on both ‘QWERTY’ and ‘AZERTY’ keyboards. NB: You may  
	 wish to check the keyboard type used in your country, as  
	 there are sometimes national differences.
 10  Dogs
 11  Neptune
 12  The most common answer amongst researchers in this area 
is that there are slightly more men than women.
 13  4: England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland
 14  Apple
 15  5
 16  Aries
 17  New Zealand
 18  Yuri Gagarin
 19  Switzerland
 20  The Great Wall of China
 21  Potatoes
 22  No, it’s an arachnid
 23  Orange
 24  Russia
 25  light
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 190@@
190
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
COMMUNICATIVE  Tell me about it
 	
Read the instructions and write your answers in the correct place in the chart.
In number 1, write your first name.
In number 2, write the name of a café or bar you often go to.
In number 3, write the name of the last film you really enjoyed.
In number 4, write the place you went to on your last holiday.
In number 5, write the name of an app you use a lot.
In number 6, write the number of years you’ve been living in this town / city.
In number 7, write your favourite day of the week.
In number 8, write a date that is important for you.
In number 9, write the name of the person in your family you get on with best.
In number 10, write two things you like doing in your free time.
	
Swap charts with B. Ask B to explain his / her answers. Ask for more information.
Why did you write ‘4’? 
	
Because I’ve been learning English for 4 years.
Where did you study before?
 	
Now answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
 c
Student A
  Instructions
4
1
10
7
9
6
3
2
5
8
Why did  
you write…?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 191@@
191
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
COMMUNICATIVE  Tell me about it
 	
Read the instructions and write your answers in the correct place in the chart.
In number 1, write your first name.
In number 2, write the number of years you’ve been learning English.
In number 3, write your favourite food or drink.
In number 4, write the name of a website you’ve used to improve your English.
In number 5, write the last gadget you bought.
In number 6, write the name of a TV series you’ve been watching recently.
In number 7, write the name of a game you play a lot, e.g. on your phone.
In number 8, write a number that is important to you in some way.
In number 9, write the name of a sport you like watching or doing.
In number 10, write the name of your oldest friend.
	
Swap charts with A. Answer A’s questions.
 	
Ask A to explain his / her answers. Ask for more information.
Why did you write ‘Starbucks’?
	
Because I often go there for coffee.
Why do you like it?
 a
 b
 c
Student B
  Instructions
4
1
10
7
9
6
3
2
5
8
Why did  
you write…?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 192@@
192
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1A  COMMUNICATIVE  Ask me a question
 	
In pairs, read the questions and think about what the missing words are. Don’t write them in.
 a
	
Choose a topic. Interview your partner. Ask for more information.
 b
Your home	
1	
Where 
 
 live?
2	
How long 
 
 lived there? 
3	
Who 
 
 live 
 ?
4	
What 
 
 like most about your home?
5	
Is 
 anything you 
 like about your neighbourhood? Why not?
Getting around	
1	
How 
 
 usually get 
 work (or school / university)?
2	
How long 
 
 take?
3	
 
 drive? 
 car 
 
 
 ?
4	
 often 
 you 
 public transport?
5	
 the best way 
 get 
 your town / city?
Free time	
1	
What 
 
 enjoy doing in your free time?
2	
 
 of music 
 
 listen 
 ?
3	
How 
 
 
 go out during the week?
4	
 sport(s) 
 
 like doing?
5	
 
 time do you spend on social media every day?
Lifestyle	
1	
How 
 tea or coffee 
 
 drink 
 day?
2	
 
 hours 
 
 sleep at night?
3	
What 
 
 do 
 relax?
4	
What do 
 do 
 keep healthy?
5	
What 
 the last live event you went 
 ?
Travel	
1	
What’s 
 
 beautiful place you 
 
 been to?
2	
Where 
 you going 
 
 for your next holiday?
3	
 
 think it’s better 
 travel alone 
 with other people?
4	
 
 prefer having holidays 
 your country or abroad?
5	
Have 
 
 been 
 an English-speaking country?
Family	
1	
 
 people 
 there in your immediate family?
2	
 in your family 
 
 most like talking 
 ?
3	
 
 
 prefer spending time 
 , family 
 friends?
4	
How much 
 
 know 
 your family tree?
5	
When 
 
 last time all 
 family did something together?
Childhood and school	
1	
Where 
 
 born?
2	
Which secondary school 
 
 go 
 ?
3	
What 
 
 best / worst subject?
4	
 
 ever cheated in an exam? 
 
 get caught?
5	
When you were a child, what 
 
 want 
 be when you grew up?
A male or female relative (e.g. brother, nephew, aunt, grandmother)	
1	
 
 name?
2	
How old 
 
 ?
3	
 
 
 do?
4	
 
 
 look 
 ? (appearance)
5	
 
 
 like? (personality)
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 193@@
193
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
The part of the signature (first name or 
surname) that is bigger is the most important 
part of your personality. So, if it’s the first 
name, for example, you care more about 
your private self. If both are big, you are very 
confident. Capital letters suggest that you 
are arrogant or big-headed. If you have very 
small writing, you may be insecure or have 
low self-esteem.
2
Size
1B  COMMUNICATIVE  What’s in a signature?
 	
On a piece of paper, write Yours sincerely and your signature underneath.
	
Look at the signatures of some famous people. Match the names to the signatures. Do you know 
anything about these people’s personalities?
Leo Tolstoy 
  Barack Obama 
  Paris Hilton 
  Usain Bolt 
  Charles Schultz 
  
Charles Dickens 
  Elijah Wood 
  Damien Hirst 
  Paul McCartney 
  Sean Connery 
 a
 b
3
 	
Read the information about interpreting someone’s personality from their signature. With your 
partner, look at the signatures above again and interpret them.
 c
	
Now look at your partner’s signature and try to interpret it. Do you both agree with the 
interpretation of your signatures?
 d
Your first name represents your private self, 
and your surname represents your public 
self. If you use only initials for your first 
name or surname, it means you are more 
secretive and protective about that part of 
your personality. Is there a space between 
the first name and surname? The bigger the 
space, the more you want to keep those 
two parts of your personality separate.
If the signature goes up, it means you 
work hard to overcome problems. You are 
determined, optimistic, and ambitious. If the 
signature goes down, it means that you get 
depressed when you have problems, and 
you aren’t very self-confident. A horizontal 
signature, one which goes straight, means 
that you are well-balanced, emotionally 
stable, and generally satisfied with life.
1
4
How you write your name
Angle
What your signature says about you
1
2
5
8
3
6
9
4
7
10
If the signature is easy to read, you have 
clear ideas and objectives, but if it’s difficult 
to read, it may mean you’re disorganized or 
indecisive and maybe also quite secretive. 
The more illegible the signature is, the less 
assertive you are.
3
Legibility
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 194@@
194
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2A  COMMUNICATIVE  Ask the doctor
A  Role-play 1
B  Role-play 1
Role-play 2
Role-play 2
You’re a patient. A is your family doctor.
You haven’t been to the doctor’s for about a year, 
so you’re really surprised to see that you have a new 
family doctor. He / she’s very young! What experience 
does he / she have? You’d known your previous doctor 
all your life. He knew all about your fear of flying and 
was very sympathetic to the problem. You’re going on 
holiday next week – by plane. Your old doctor always 
prescribed Calmozone, a tablet which relaxes you 
when you fly.
If you take two before the plane takes off, you don’t 
feel nervous. You know what you want – Calmozone!
If you don’t get it, you can’t go on holiday. You aren’t 
very convinced by alternative remedies, especially 
hypnotherapy and homeopathy!
•	 Answer any questions the doctor asks you. Explain 
the reason for today’s visit.
•	 Ask the doctor to prescribe Calmozone and explain 
why you need it.
•	 Only accept an alternative remedy you feel 
completely happy with.
You start the conversation.
Good morning doctor. You’re new, aren’t you?
You’re a patient. B is your family doctor.
You know your doctor very well because you make an 
appointment to see him / her at least once a week. 
You’re a favourite patient! You think of him / her as 
a friend and that’s why you call him / her by his / her 
first name (Chris) and not Dr Jones.
•	 Today, you’ve made an appointment with the 
doctor because you’ve got some very strange 
symptoms (decide what they are), and you’re 
convinced that you have a problem with your heart. 
You want the doctor to take you seriously and 
agree with what you think is the problem.
•	 Explain all your symptoms to the doctor.
•	 Ask the doctor to check your blood pressure and 
take your pulse.
•	 Tell him / her that you’d like to see a specialist. Be 
prepared to argue with him / her if necessary.
You start the conversation.
Hi Chris. How are you?
You’re a family doctor. A is your patient.
You’re fed up and exhausted! The government 
spending cuts mean that today you’ve worked 
for eight hours on your own in the surgery and 
there’s still paperwork to do. You want to go home! 
Unfortunately, you have one more patient to see and 
he / she is a nightmare! He / She comes to see you at 
least once a week, always with a different problem. 
You think he / she is a hypochondriac.  
For some reason, this patient always calls you by your 
first name. You hate that!
•	 Ask him / her not to call you by your first name.  
Ask him / her to call you Dr Jones.
•	 Ask him / her what his / her symptoms are (this 
week!) and how long he / she has had them.
•	 Give your diagnosis (decide what you think) and 
decide what medication (if any) to prescribe. You 
don’t think he / she needs to see a specialist.
A will start.
You’re a family doctor. B is your patient.
You’ve just finished medical school, and today is your 
first day in this surgery. You feel very enthusiastic! At 
medical school, they taught you to find out as much 
as you can about a patient when you first meet them. 
You’re a great believer in alternative medicine like 
homeopathy and acupuncture. You really believe 
that some conditions can be better treated using 
alternative remedies, e.g. hypnotherapy for people 
with phobias or weight problems.
•	 Find out as much information as you can about the 
patient, e.g. age, job, family life, previous illnesses, 
operations, etc.
•	 Ask the reason for today’s visit. Find out how long 
he / she has had this problem.
•	 You don’t like the medicine the patient usually takes, 
Calmozone. You prefer a natural, homeopathic one 
called Tranquilium.
B will start.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 195@@
195
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
2B  COMMUNICATIVE  You’re only as old as you feel
 	
Read the statements. Put a cross on the line, showing to what extent you agree or disagree  
with each one.
 a
	
Work in small groups. Discuss each of the statements.
 b
1	
The older people become, the less productive they are.
Disagree
Agree
2	
The cultural gap between young and old people has widened considerably, and consequently 
they have much less in common nowadays than in the past.
Disagree
Agree
6	
‘Age and size are only numbers. It’s the attitude you bring to clothes that make the difference.’ 
(Donna Karan, fashion designer)
Disagree
Agree
 
10	
It is a fact that women can wear any clothes that are designed for men, but men can’t wear most 
clothes that are designed for women.
Disagree
Agree
3	
Older people should be paid more than younger people, because they have more experience.
Disagree
Agree
4	
My culture values the young more than the elderly.
Disagree
Agree
5	
Men tend to age better than women.
Disagree
Agree
7	
The older people are, the less adventurous they are about what they wear.
Disagree
Agree
8	
Fashion designers design for the young, but the young often can’t afford them.
Disagree
Agree
9	
Young people don’t care about being warm or comfortable, they only want to look good.
Disagree
Agree
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 196@@
196
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3A  COMMUNICATIVE  Talk about it
something you wanted that 
you recently bought
•	What exactly did you buy?
•	 Why had you wanted it for 
so long?
•	 Did you do any research before 
you bought it? How?
•	 Where did you buy it?
•	 Have you been using it much 
since you bought it?
a time you went for an 
interview for a job or course
•	 What job / course was it for?
•	 Where had you found out about 
the job / course?
•	 How did you feel before the 
interview?
•	 Were there any questions you 
found hard to answer? What 
were they?
•	 Did you get the job / place on 
the course?
a time you had a really bad 
restaurant meal
•	 When / Where did you have it? 
Who with?
•	 Why had you decided to go to 
this particular restaurant?
•	 Why was the meal so bad?
•	 Were you or any of the other 
people ill afterwards?
•	 Did you complain? If not, why 
not?
a time when someone stole 
something from you (or 
someone you know)
•	 What was taken?
•	 What had you been doing just 
before it was stolen?
•	 How did you feel after you 
realized it had been stolen?
•	 Did you call the police? Were 
they helpful?
•	 Did you ever get it back?
a time when you overslept 
and missed something 
important
•	 What important thing were you 
going to do that day?
•	 Had you gone to bed very late 
the night before? Why?
•	 Had you set an alarm?
•	 How late did you wake up?  
What did you do?
•	 What happened in the end?
a time when your parents 
were very angry with you 
about something
•	 How old were you?
•	 Why did they get angry? What 
had you done / been doing?
•	 How did your parents find out?
•	 Did they punish you? How?
•	 Have you parents forgotten 
about it?
a time you met or were very 
close to a celebrity
•	 When did it happen?
•	 Where were you?
•	 What were you doing?
•	 Which celebrity did you see?
•	 What was he / she doing there?
•	 Did you speak to him / her?  
What about?
•	 Did you take a photo of him / 
her?
a time you won something
•	 What was it?
•	 When? Where? How old were 
you?
•	 Were you expecting to win?
•	 How did you feel when you 
realized you’d won?
•	 Did you celebrate? What did you 
do?
a holiday you didn’t enjoy
•	 Where / When was it?
•	 Who went?
•	 Had you been there before?
•	 What did you do there?
•	 Why didn’t you enjoy it? Did you 
ever go there again?
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 197@@
197
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3B  COMMUNICATIVE  Tell the story
Bank Statement
Minus  €200
Income  +€400
Credit Card  –€320
Electricity  –€105
Gas  –€95
Tax  –€80
obviously
HOW 
TO
MAKE
MONEY
all night
able
LOA NS
NS
able
avail
avail
unfortunately
incredibly
suddenly
two weeks later
immediately
in the end
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 198@@
198
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4A  COMMUNICATIVE  In 20 years’ time
 	
Discuss each prediction with your group. Decide:
a	 if you think it will happen.
b	 if you think it will be a good thing.
 
1	 People will be mostly reading 
print books and e-readers will 
have declined in popularity.
4	 We will have established a 
colony on Mars.
7	 An increasing number of jobs 
will have been replaced by 
robots.
10	 We will be seeing much more 
women’s sport on TV as it  
will have greatly increased  
in popularity.
2	 The number of people 
learning foreign languages 
will have fallen because apps 
will translate everything 
simultaneously.
5	 The bicycle will have replaced 
the car as the main form of 
private transport in towns  
and cities.
8	 We will be mainly watching 
films with computer-animated 
actors who will have replaced 
human actors.
11	 Life expectancy will have 
gone down in the developed 
world because of unhealthy 
eating habits.
3	 There will be no retirement 
age. People will be working 
until 70 and even beyond.
6	 People will have stopped 
using social media sites like 
Facebook and Twitter and 
returned to face-to-face 
communication.
9	 Families will be getting smaller 
and the birth rate will have 
dropped even further.
12	 It won’t be necessary for 
anyone to learn to drive 
because we’ll be using  
self-driving cars.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 199@@
199
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4B  COMMUNICATIVE  Finish the sentences
As soon as we’ve arrived  
at the hotel…
Carry on taking the  
antibiotics until…
What are you going  
to do when…
Don’t disturb the  
boss unless…
I’ll give you a call after…
Let’s take the satnav  
in case…
I’ll do the washing up if…
I’m going to buy a motorbike  
as soon as…
I’m sure your husband  
will understand if…
We’ll be having a barbecue 
tomorrow unless…
Shh! Don’t make a noise  
in case…
Unless you hurry up…
We could go for  
a walk after…
If his wife has told  
him to do it…
We must say goodbye  
to Louise before…
We need to book the holiday 
soon in case…
If you’re not feeling  
better tomorrow, …
We’re going to open a bottle  
of champagne when…
You might get an  
electric shock if…
I won’t be able to start  
cooking dinner until…
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 200@@
200
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5A  COMMUNICATIVE  Would you survive?
The answers
1	 The good news is, you can’t sink all the way down 
because, like in water, your body floats. Take 
off anything heavy, though, like a backpack or a 
camera. You need to try and create space between 
your legs and the sand by moving them slowly but 
continuously, and move slowly up until you can 
get out.
2	 Don’t try to put the fire out! Leave the building and 
pull a fire alarm on your way out if you can. Touch 
every door before you open it. If it’s hot, it means 
there’s fire on the other side and you should find a 
different way. If there’s too much smoke, get closer 
to the floor. Once you’re out of the building and in 
a safe place, call the emergency services.
3	 Wash the bite with soap and water as soon as 
you can. Keep the area where the bite is lower 
than your heart. Wrap a bandage tightly around 
your leg above the bite to help slow the poison 
until you can get medical help. Don’t suck out the 
poison and don’t tie the bandage too tight.
4	 Lie still and quiet. An attack by a mother bear 
often ends when the person stops fighting. Don’t 
run or climb a tree as a bear can run much faster 
than you, and is an expert at climbing trees. If you 
lie still and the bear still attacks you, try to scare it 
away by hitting it with anything you can find. Try to 
aim for the eyes or nose if possible.
5	 Get down on the ground and stay there. Lie flat 
on your stomach. If there are cars, lie down behind 
one of the wheels. If there are no cars, lie in the 
road right next to the pavement. Don’t run away 
because that will only draw attention to you and 
you could be shot by mistake.
6	 Your only hope if the shark attacks you is to try to 
hit the shark in the eyes, which is the area most 
sensitive to pain.
You’re walking on a beach on 
your own. You walk on some 
sand and you begin to sink very 
quickly. It’s quicksand! What 
would you do?
You’re camping in a forest, 
and decide to go for a walk. 
Suddenly, you come face-to-
face with a black bear. It looks 
ready to attack you! What 
would you do?
You’re in a tall building. 
Suddenly, you can smell smoke 
and everything feels quite hot. 
The building’s on fire! What 
would you do?
You’re in a city street and 
suddenly shooting starts 
between two rival gangs.  
What would you do?
You’re walking in a forest when 
suddenly you feel a terrible pain 
in your leg. You’ve been bitten 
by a snake that you think is 
poisonous. What would you do?
You’re swimming in the sea 
when you see the dark fin of a 
shark approaching you. What 
would you do?
1
2
3
4
5
6
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 201@@
201
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Wishes
 	
Write something in at least seven of your circles.
Circle 1: a well-known person you wish you could meet or could have met
Circle 2: a new gadget you wish you had
Circle 3: a name you wish your parents had called you (instead of the one they gave you)
Circle 4: something you wish the local government would do to improve your town / city
Circle 5: a concert or sporting event you wish you’d been able to go to
Circle 6: something you wish people wouldn’t do in the cinema
Circle 7: an activity you wish you didn’t have to do every day
Circle 8: a language (other than English) you wish you could speak
Circle 9: something you wish you had learned to do when you were younger
Circle 10: something you wish you hadn’t spent money on
	
Give your sheet to B. He / She will ask you to explain what you have written.
 	
Ask B to explain what he / she has written.
Why did you write ‘Breaking Bad’ in circle 1?
	
Because I wish they had made more series of it. I love it.
 a
 b
 c
5
4
6
7
Student A
  Instructions
1
8
2
9
3
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 202@@
202
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5B  COMMUNICATIVE  Wishes
5
4
6
7
Student B
  Instructions
1
8
2
9
3
10
 	
Write something in at least seven of your circles.
Circle 1: a TV drama or comedy you wish they had made more series of
Circle 2: something you wish drivers or cyclists would or wouldn’t do
Circle 3: somebody you wish you could see more often
Circle 4: somewhere you wish you had a house or flat
Circle 5: a free-time activity you wish you had more time to do
Circle 6: a group or singer you wish would come and play in your city
Circle 7: something you wish hadn’t been invented
Circle 8: something you wish people wouldn’t do on social media
Circle 9: something annoying you wish someone in your family wouldn’t do
Circle 10: something you wish you hadn’t done when you were younger
	
Give your sheet to A. He / She will ask you to explain what you have written.
 	
Ask A to explain what he / she has written.
Why did you write ‘Salvador Dali’ in circle 1?
	
Because I wish I could have met him. He was a great artist.
 a
 b
 c
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 203@@
203
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6A  COMMUNICATIVE  usually, used to, get used to
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the questions with an appropriate 
verb phrase from the box in the correct form. 
You don’t need to use all the phrases.
Do you usually	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
Did you use to	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
Do you think you  
could get used to	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
	
Ask B your questions.
 	
Answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
 c
 	
Complete the questions with an appropriate 
verb phrase from the box in the correct form. 
You don’t need to use all the phrases.
Do you usually	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
Did you use to	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
Do you think you  
could get used to	
 ?
	
 ?
	
 ?
	
Answer A’s questions.
 	
Ask A your questions.
 a
 b
 c
(read) everything on a tablet
(study) in the evenings or at night
(share) a bedroom with  
a brother or sister
(eat) a lot of sweets when 
you were a child
(cook) for yourself
(watch) cartoons on TV 
when you were young
(buy) books and music online
(live) in the UK or the USA
(cheat) in exams at school
(go) to bed before midnight
(not eat) meat
(have) only two weeks holiday a year
(have) a favourite toy
(cycle) to work or school
(get up) at 5.30 every morning
(listen) to music in the car
(celebrate) your birthday
(live) on your own
(read) a lot when you 
were a child
(drive) on the left
(live) without having access  
to the internet
(watch) TV in the morning
(hate) a particular food or drink 
when you were a child
(go) to the hairdresser’s more 
than twice a month
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 204@@
204
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
6B  COMMUNICATIVE  Gerund or infinitive?
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the VERB column with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
	
	
VERB
1	 Could you manage 
 for a week without your phone? (live)	
2	 Do you ever get the chance to practise 
 English outside class? (speak)	
3	 If you really hated your friend’s partner, would you pretend 
 him / her? (like)	
4	 Is there any kind of housework you can’t stand 
 ? (do)	
5	 Would you ever risk 
 something which was past its sell-by date? (eat)	
6	 Is there anything that you think you ought to give up 
 ? (do)	
7	 What kind of things do you tend 
 about? (worry)	
8	 Did your parents let you 
 in the street when you were a child? (play)	
9	 Do you have a good memory, or do you sometimes forget 
 things? (do)	
 
10	 Is there a city or country that you really fancy 
 ? (visit)	
 
11	 Are there any apps you’d recommend 
 ? (get)	
 
12	 Would you prefer 
 a week on the beach or a week in the country? (spend)	
	
Ask your partner the questions in a.
 	
Answer B’s questions.
 a
 b
 c
 	
Complete the VERB column with the correct form of the verbs in brackets.
	
	
VERB
1	 Do you think it’s worth 
 a medical check-up every year? (have)	
2	 Is there anything that really needs 
 to your house or flat? (do)	
3	 Have you ever tried 
 flat pack furniture? (assemble)	
4	 Can you imagine 
 to another country? (emigrate)	
5	 Would you rather 
 an e-book or a printed book? (read)	
6	 Are there any jobs in the house that you don’t mind 
 ? (do)	
7	 Do you remember 
 your best friend for the first time? (meet)	
8	 Have you ever had to stop 
 a type of food because you were allergic to it? (eat)	
9	 Did your parents ever make you 
 something you really didn’t enjoy? (learn)	
 
10	 Do you think that you’ll carry on 
 English next year? (study)	
 
11	 Is there a film you’re looking forward to 
 at the cinema? (see)	
 
12	 Is there a TV programme you can’t help 
 even though you don’t think it’s very
	
good? (watch)	
	
Answer A’s questions.
 	
Ask your partner the questions in a.
 a
 b
 c
FOLD
FOLD
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 205@@
205
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7A  COMMUNICATIVE  Guess my verb
Student A
Student B
 	
Complete the bold sentences in a natural way using a verb phrase.
1	 Greg’s really late. He may have 
 .
2	 You can’t have finished that book. You only started it yesterday and it’s got over 600 pages!
3	 Maria looks so tired. She can’t have 
 last night.
4	 You should have come with us last night. We had a great time!
5	 Ellie usually rings me on my birthday, but this year she didn’t. She must have 
 .
6	 I don’t have my wallet with me! I must have left it at home.
7	 My neighbour’s just bought a really expensive new car. She might have 
 !
8	 It’s your own fault you got sunburnt! You ought to have put on sunscreen.
9	 Have you seen Kathy’s huge engagement ring? It must have 
 !
 
10	 They can’t have gone out. Their car’s outside.
 
11	 I’ve got a stomach ache. I shouldn’t have 
 .
 
12	 Michelle isn’t in her office. She may have gone home. She wasn’t feeling very well.
	
Read sentence 1 to B, who has the completed sentence. If you say what B has, he / she will say 
‘That’s right’, if not, he / she will say ‘Try again’. You can have another two tries. If none of your 
endings are what B has, B will tell you his / her ending.
 	
Now listen to B invent an ending for sentence 2. If it is the same as what you have, say ‘That’s right’, 
if not, say ‘Try again’. B can have another two tries. If none of B’s endings are what you have, tell B 
your ending.
 a
 b
 c
 	
Complete the bold sentences in a natural way using a verb phrase.
1	 Greg’s really late. He may have got lost.
2	 You can’t have 
 . You only started it yesterday and it’s got over 600 pages!
3	 Maria looks so tired. She can’t have slept very well last night.
4	 You should have 
 last night. We had a great time!
5	 Ellie usually rings me on my birthday, but this year she didn’t. She must have forgotten.
6	 I don’t have my wallet with me! I must have 
 .
7	 My neighbour’s just bought a really expensive new car. She might have won the lottery!
8	 It’s your own fault you got sunburnt! You ought to have 
 .
9	 Have you seen Kathy’s huge engagement ring? It must have cost a fortune!
 
10	 They can’t have 
 . Their car’s outside.
 
11	 I’ve got a stomach ache. I shouldn’t have eaten so much.
 
12	 Michelle isn’t in her office. She may have 
 . She wasn’t feeling very well.
	
Now listen to A invent an ending for sentence 1. If it is the same as what you have, say ‘That’s right’, 
if not, say ‘Try again’. A can have another two tries. If none of A’s endings are what you have, tell A 
your ending.
 	
Read sentence 2 to A, who has the completed sentence. If you say what A has, he / she will say 
‘That’s right’, if not, he / she will say ‘Try again’. You can have another two tries. If none of your 
endings are what A has, A will tell you his / her ending.
 a
 b
 c
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 206@@
206
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
 	
Look carefully at your photo 
1. Then describe it in detail 
to B, focusing on the people 
and their body language. Say 
who you think they are, what 
you think they’re doing, and 
how they might be feeling.
	
Listen to B describe his / her 
photo. Try to visualize it.
 	
Repeat with your second 
photos.
	
Show your photos to B and 
see if he / she agrees with 
your interpretation of the 
photos.
 a
 b
 c
 d
 	
Listen to A describe his / her 
photo 1. Try to visualize it.
	
Now describe your photo 1 
in detail to A, focusing on 
the people and their body 
language. Say who you think 
they are, what you think 
they’re doing, and how they 
might be feeling.
 	
Repeat with your second 
photos.
	
Show your photos to A and 
see if he / she agrees with 
your interpretation of the 
photos.
 a
 b
 c
 d
7B  COMMUNICATIVE  Two photos
Student A
Student B
1
1
2
2
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 207@@
207
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8A  COMMUNICATIVE  Good laws?
 	
Read about some existing laws in different countries. In pairs or small groups, discuss whether  
you think each law is a good one, and whether you would like to have it in your country.
	
For each section write one new law that you would like to see introduced in your country.
 a
 b
Animals
1	 Poland
If you have a dog, it must 
always wear a muzzle and 
be kept on a lead when you 
take it for walks.
2	 Sweden
All animals which are kept inside a house / flat 
must have access to natural light.
3	 New law
 
 .
On the road
1	 Germany
People who want to get a 
driving licence have to do 
a first-aid training course. 
They must also carry a 
first-aid kit in their cars.
2	 Spain
Car drivers are not allowed to wear flip-flops  
while driving.
3	 New law
 
 .
The environment
1	 Norway
When you buy a bottle or a 
can of drink you have to pay 
a deposit. When the bottle or 
can is empty, you take it back 
to a recycling centre where 
your deposit is refunded.
2	 Mexico
There is a complete ban on free plastic bags in 
Mexico City. Customers are charged if they want 
them, and the bags must be biodegradable.
3	 New law
 
 .
Food and health
1	 Brazil
All Brazilian state-school 
children are given one free 
meal at school every day. 
70% of this food has to  
be fresh, and the other  
30% must come from local 
family farmers.
2	 Japan
There is a special tax on food or drink which the 
government considers to be unhealthy. People 
who want to buy these things have to pay a lot 
more than they would for healthier options.
3	 New law
 
 .
In the street
1	 Iceland
Teenagers aged between 13 and 
16 are not allowed to be outdoors 
after 10.00 at night unless they 
are on their way home from a 
recognized event organized by 
a school, sports organization, or 
youth club. During the summer 
months, they can be outdoors for 
two hours longer.
2	 Italy
In Genoa, people are not allowed to walk  
around with a bottle of wine or a can of beer  
in their hand.
3	 New law
 
 .
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 208@@
208
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8B  COMMUNICATIVE  TV political debate
You’re the leader and deputy leader of a local political party. Tonight, you’re going to appear ‘live’ on 
TV in a face-to-face debate with the leader and deputy leader of the opposition party.
 	
Prepare some ideas to defend your party’s five policies before the interview. Think of reasons why 
your policies are good ideas. Make notes. Add one new policy of your own.
	
Now prepare some other ideas to attack your opponent’s policies. Think of reasons which explain 
why the other party’s policies aren’t good ideas. Make notes.
 	
Sit opposite C & D and take turns to present and debate your policies.
 a
 b
 c
You’re the leader and deputy leader of a local political party. Tonight, you’re going to appear ‘live’ on 
TV in a face-to-face debate with the leader and deputy leader of the opposition party.
 	
Prepare some ideas to defend your party’s five policies before the interview. Think of reasons why 
your policies are good ideas. Make notes. Add a new policy of your own.
	
Now prepare some other ideas to attack your opponent’s policies. Think of reasons which explain 
why the other party’s policies aren’t good ideas. Make notes.
 	
Sit opposite A & B and take turns to present and debate your policies.
 a
 b
 c
Your party’s policies
	 To ban all dogs from the town centre
	 To close the town centre to traffic on 
Saturday mornings from 9.00 a.m. – 1.00 p.m.
	 To promote tourism in the town by organizing 
a big sporting event (decide what)
	 To introduce strict fines for people who 
download music or films from the internet 
without paying
	 To ban fast food restaurants near all schools 
and universities
	
Your opponent’s policies
	 To ban cyclists from using all main roads 
	 To make it compulsory for everyone to 
vote in local elections
	 To make tourists pay a tax when they 
come into the country
	 To make bars and restaurants in the 
town centre close before 11 p.m. during 
the week
	 To give free internet access to all homes 
and mobile devices 
	
Your party’s policies
	 To ban cyclists from using all main roads
	 To make it compulsory for everyone to vote 
in local elections
	 To make tourists pay a tax when they come 
into the country
	 To make bars and restaurants in the town 
centre close before 11.00 p.m. during the 
week
	 To give free internet access to all homes and 
mobile devices
	
Your opponent’s policies
	 To ban all dogs from the town centre 
	 To close the town centre to traffic on 
Saturday mornings from 9.00 a.m. –  
1.00 p.m.
	 To promote tourism in the town by 
organizing a big sporting event
	 To introduce large fines for people 
who download music or films from the 
internet without paying
	 To ban fast food restaurants near all 
schools and universities
	
Students A & B
Students C & D
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 209@@
209
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
9A  COMMUNICATIVE  Tell me about…
Student A
Student B
 	
Look at the circles. Try and write something in at least six of them.
 a
 	
Look at the circles. Try and write something in at least six of them.
 a
	
Ask B what he / she wrote in circle 1, and why. Continue with the other circles.
 b
	
Ask A what he / she wrote in circle 1, and why. Continue with the other circles.
 b
a country  
you’d like to visit  
in order to try  
the local food 
a place where 
you had a great 
holiday in spite of 
having bad weather  
(or other problems) 
something you  
do to relax  
at weekends 
a restaurant  
you’d recommend  
for a great night 
out with friends 
something you 
never do although 
you know it would  
be good for you 
a ‘white lie’  
you’ve told  
so as not to  
offend a friend 
something you 
would like to buy 
even though you 
don’t really need it 
something you 
used to do when you 
were younger so that 
you would look older 
an app or  
YouTube channel you 
use for practising  
your English 
something you 
do to improve your 
understanding of  
spoken English 
something (apart 
from English) that 
you’d like to study  
so that you can get  
a good job 
things you do to  
keep reasonably fit  
and healthy 
something you 
aren’t very good at  
in spite of trying hard 
to get better at it 
a job you 
wouldn’t mind 
having even though 
the pay isn’t  
very good 
a technique  
you use  
so as to remember 
vocabulary in English 
something you 
wear from time to 
time although it’s 
not very comfortable 
1
1
5
5
3
3
7
7
4
4
8
8
2
2
6
6
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 210@@
210
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
9B  COMMUNICATIVE  Give your opinion
29
28
19
18
9
8
26
21
16
11
6
25
22
15
12
5
2
24
23
14
13
4
3
27
20
17
10
7
GO FORWARD 
SEVEN SPACES
Friends are better  
at giving advice  
than family.
GO FORWARD 
THREE SPACES
The weather is a 
major influence on a 
country’s economy 
and lifestyle.
Children’s 
behaviour today is 
much worse than  
it was in the past.
The best place to 
go for a holiday is 
somewhere with 
beautiful scenery.
You should never 
travel abroad 
without booking 
accommodation  
in advance.
GO FORWARD 
TWO SPACES
The clothes people 
wear can tell you a 
lot about them.
Children nowadays 
have too much 
homework.
The best way of 
testing students’ 
progress is  
through exams.
The most useful 
subjects to study 
at university are 
economics and 
business studies.
GO FORWARD  
TWO SPACES
The most important 
thing to consider if 
you are buying or 
renting a flat is the 
amount of light  
and space.
The police should 
not be allowed to 
carry arms.
Most of the news 
on TV is not worth 
watching.
GO FORWARD 
SIX SPACES
Parents should 
teach their children 
good manners.  
It’s not the 
teacher’s job.
GO FORWARD  
TWO SPACES
If you want to get 
information about 
an illness, the  
worst place to  
look is online.
Hotel and 
restaurant staff 
in my country are 
usually friendly  
and efficient.
GO FORWARD  
ONE SPACE
Modern furniture 
is usually less 
comfortable than 
old-fashioned 
furniture.
All uniforms should 
be unisex, with 
shorts or trousers 
for both men  
and women.
GO FORWARD  
FOUR SPACES
FINISH
30
FINISH
START
START
1
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 211@@
211
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
10A  COMMUNICATIVE  Science quiz
 	
Read the sentences. Circle the correct quantifier, and read the answers so that you can re-tell them 
from memory.
 a
 	
Read the sentences. Circle the correct quantifier, and read the answers so that you can re-tell them 
from memory.
 a
	
Read your sentences to B, and ask if they are True or False. If B is wrong, tell him / her the answer, 
and give the explanation.
 	
Listen to B’s sentences and say whether they are True or False. If you can, say why.
 b
 c
Student A
Student B
1	 Most / Most of thunderstorms happen at night.
	 (False. Most happen late afternoon, as the ground and 
air are warmest at that time of day. This heat fuels the 
storms. But thunderstorms can happen any time of the 
day if the conditions are right.)
2	 All the / All bones in our body continue to grow until we 
are 16 and then they stop growing.
	 (False. Our bones continue growing until we are 
around 20.)
3	 A snake can’t see anything / nothing if both its eyes  
are closed.
	 (False. It can see through its eyelids.)
4	 A new-born shark doesn’t swim close to either / neither 
of its parents.
	 (True. As soon as it’s born it swims away so that the 
mother doesn’t eat it.)
1	 If a child’s parents the both / both have blue eyes, it is  
impossible for the child to have brown eyes.
	 (False. It is not common, but it is possible for the child to 
have brown eyes if both parents carry the brown-eye gene.)
2	 Almost no / none wild birds sing during the summer.
	 (True. Birds usually sing during spring and early summer 
to establish a territory and attract a mate. By the middle 
of summer most birds have already mated, so there is no 
need for them to sing.)
3	 Every / All the time we sneeze, our heart stops for one  
second.
	 (False. Although it feels as if our heart stops for a very 
short period, it doesn’t, it’s just a change in pressure  
in our chests.)
4	 Most / Most of fruit and vegetables (but not all) contain  
vitamin C.
	 (False. All fruit and vegetables contain some vitamin C. 
Among those containing the highest amounts are citrus 
fruits, kiwi fruit, broccoli, and green and red peppers.)
5	 No / None of the footprints or tyre marks made on the 
moon are still visible today.
	 (False. Footprints from the astronauts who landed on the 
moon in 1969 could be there forever as there is no wind to 
blow them away.)
6	 Twelve per cent of every / all humans that have ever 
been born are alive at this very moment.
	 (True. The total human population today is around 7 
billion. Scientist estimate that 57 billion people have 
existed since humans first evolved 200,000 years ago.)
7	 Whales don’t have any / no teeth.
	 (False. The whole family is divided into two types: toothed 
whales such as dolphins, and baleen whales which have a 
‘filter feeder’ instead of teeth, e.g. blue whales.)
5	 Both / Both of men and women who are left-handed live 
longer than people who are right-handed.
	 (False. Although some studies showed that right-
handed people live for longer, the figures were in fact 
misinterpreted. There is no connection between being 
right- or left-handed and life span.)
6	 Children grow more quickly in the summer than in any / 
no other season. 
	 (False. In most children, there will be weeks or months of 
slow growth. This will alternate with mini ‘growth spurts’ 
when they grow more quickly and suddenly. Children tend 
to grow a bit faster in the spring than during other times 
of the year.)
7	 Neither dogs or /nor cats should be given cow’s milk  
to drink.
	 (True. Neither of them have systems that can break down 
lactose, a chemical found in some types of milk. They 
should only be given water to drink.)
	
Listen to A’s sentences and say whether they are True or False. If you can, say why.
 	
Read your sentences to A, and ask if they are True or False. If A is wrong, tell him / her the answer 
and give the explanation.
 b
 c
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 212@@
212
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
10B  COMMUNICATIVE  General knowledge quiz
 	
Complete the questions with a, an, the, or – (nothing) where necessary.
1	 What two countries is 
 Lake Titicaca between?
2	 Who was 
 second person to walk on 
 moon?
3	 How many strings does 
 bass guitar have?
4	 In which ocean can you find 
 Seychelles?
5	 What’s 
 highest mountain in 
 Alps?
6	 What is 
 50% of 50?
7	 What colour are 
 babies’ eyes at birth?
8	 Which bird is 
 symbol of 
 USA?
9	 What letter is on 
 right of 
 ‘O’ on a 
keyboard?
 
10	 Which animals were domesticated first: 
 cats or 
 dogs?
 
11	 Which planet in our solar system is furthest from 
 sun?
 
12	 Who are more numerous in the world, 
 men or 
 women?
 
13	 How many countries are there in 
 UK?
 
14	 What type of fruit is 
 Granny Smith?
 
15	 How many players can be on court in 
 
basketball team?
 
16	 What is 
 first sign of 
 zodiac?
 
17	 Which nation first gave 
 women 
 
right to vote?
 
18	 What was 
 name of 
 first man to be 
sent into space?
 
19	 Which European country hasn’t fought in 
 war 
since 
 1815?
 
20	 What is 
 largest man-made structure on Earth?
 
21	 What vegetable is 
 vodka often made from?
 
22	 Is 
 spider 
 insect?
 
23	 What colour is 
 ‘black box’ flight recorder on 
 plane?
 
24	 What country does 
 Volga river flow through?
 
25	 Which travels faster: 
 light or 
 
sound?
	
In pairs, see how many questions you can answer.
 a
 b
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 213@@
213
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
COMMUNICATIVE  Revision
	
Personalities
Tell your partner about somebody you know who is…
•	 very bad-tempered.
•	 incredibly absent-minded.
•	 extremely big-headed.
•	 rather tight-fisted.
•	 a bit two-faced.
2	 Your style
•	 Do you have a lot of clothes that you never wear?
•	 Do you prefer wearing plain or patterned clothes?
•	 Do you consider yourself to be quite trendy?
•	 What’s your favourite item of clothing?
•	 Where do you tend to buy most of your clothes?
•	 Do you ever buy clothes online?
	
Your town
•	 In which part of your town / city do you live? (in the 
centre, on the outskirts, etc.)
•	 What do you like best / least about your 
neighbourhood?
•	 Are there any famous landmarks or sights in your 
town?
•	 Are there any problems with...?
	
a homelessness    b pollution    c crime
•	 If you had to choose one adjective to describe your 
town, what would it be?
•	 Are you happy living in your town, or would you like to 
move?
4	 Your health
Tell your partner about a time when you, or someone 
you know, ...
•	 needed stitches.
•	 fainted.
•	 had food poisoning.
•	 choked on something.
•	 had an allergic reaction to something.
•	 twisted their ankle.
	
Music
•	 When and where do you normally listen to music?
•	 What kind of music do you listen to?
•	 Did your parents listen to a lot of music when you 
were growing up? What kind?
•	 Is your taste in music similar in any way to your 
parents’?
•	 Do you tend to have friends who share your musical 
tastes?
•	 If you could be a world-class musician, what 
instrument would you choose to play?
6	 The media
•	 How up-to-date are you with what’s going on in the 
world?
•	 Where do you usually get the news from?
•	 Do you think news reporting in your country is 
objective or biased?
•	 What’s the biggest story in the news at the moment?
•	 What kind of reviews do you usually read? Are you 
influenced by them?
	
Feelings
Tell your partner about a time you felt...
•	 really disappointed about something.
•	 a bit homesick.
•	 very grateful for something someone did for you.
•	 proud because of something a friend or family 
member did.
•	 scared stiff before you had to do something.
8	 The weather
Tell your partner about...
•	 the kind of weather you enjoy.
•	 the kind of weather you hate.
•	 the most extreme weather you have ever 
experienced.
•	 a holiday, trip, or excursion that was a disaster 
because of the weather.
	
Crime and punishment
•	 What are common crimes in your town / city?
•	 Have you, or someone you know, ever been the 
victim of a crime?
•	 What would you do to reduce crime?
•	 Have you or someone you know ever been on a jury?
•	 Do you enjoy...? 
a  reading detective novels  
b  watching TV crime series
10	Advertising
Talk about...
•	 an advert (or TV commercial) you love.
•	 an advert which really irritates you.
•	 a brand that has a memorable logo or slogan.
•	 an advert which made you buy something.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 214@@
214
2A	Illnesses and injuries
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts race to think of answers to questions. Copy one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
illnesses and injuries
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets. Tell Sts that 
they have to read the questions or definitions and write 
down as many answers as they can in three minutes. You 
could give Sts more time if you see that they need it. 
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. The first pair to 
complete all the answers correctly wins, or the pair with 
the most correct answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  blood pressure    3  sunburn    4  painkillers    5  get over    
6  sniff / sneeze, cough    7  allergic reaction    8  lie down    
9  faint, pass out, come round    10  flu    11  bleed    
 12  sprained    13  burn    14  plaster    15  food poisoning    
 16  choke    17  swollen    18  vomit, throw up
•	 Now focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
discuss the questions.
•	 Get feedback.
2B	Clothes and fashion
	 	
A crossword puzzle activity
Sts read clues and complete the crossword. Copy one 
worksheet per student or one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
clothes and fashion
•	 Explain to Sts that they are going to complete a 
crossword. Make sure they understand the difference 
between across and down.
•	 Either give each student a worksheet or put Sts in pairs 
and give each pair a worksheet. Tell Sts to write the words 
in the crossword. Set a time limit, e.g. five minutes.
•	 If Sts worked individually, get them to compare with a 
partner, and then check answers. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
ACROSS
8  scruffy    9  sleeveless    10  loose    13  classic    15  go with   
16  denim    17  get changed    18  fit
DOWN
1  old fashioned    2  checked    3  spotted    5  hooded    
6  dress up    7  casual    11  suede    12  plain    14  smart
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. Sts 
A read a clue from the worksheet and Sts B (not looking at 
the worksheet) guess the word. Make sure they swap roles.
3A	Air travel
	 	
An alphabet race
Sts race to complete sentences with the correct word. Copy 
one worksheet per student or one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
air travel
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets to individual 
Sts or pairs. Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that they 
have to complete as many answers as they can in five 
minutes. Highlight that each word begins with a different 
letter of the alphabet. Point out that not all letters of the 
alphabet are used here. You may want to give Sts a bit 
longer than five minutes, or stop the activity when one 
pair has finished.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. The first pair to 
complete all the answers correctly wins, or the pair with 
the most correct answers at the end of the time limit wins.
B  boarding pass    C  check-in desk    D  domestic    E  excess    
F  fill in    G  gate    H  hand    I  illegal    J  jet lag    L  long-haul   
M  metal    N  noisy / naughty    O  online    P  pick up    
Q  queue    R  runway    S  Security    T  turbulence    U  unpack  
V  visa    W  wait
•	 Now focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and tell them to 
turn the worksheet over. Sts test themselves by trying to 
go through the alphabet in order and remembering the 
words. They should add extra ones for as many letters as 
they can, e.g. B boarding pass, Baggage reclaim, etc.
3B	Adverbs and adverbial phrases
	 	
A vocabulary completion and 
discrimination activity
Sts complete the sentences with the correct adverb / 
adverbial phrase. Copy one worksheet per student or one 
worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
adverbs and adverbial phrases
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets to individual 
Sts or pairs. Tell Sts to circle the correct adverbs / adverbial 
phrases. Set Sts a time limit, e.g. five minutes.
•	 If Sts worked individually, get them to compare with a 
partner, and then check answers. Model and drill the 
pronunciation of any words your Sts find difficult to 
pronounce.
2  at the moment    3  late    4  hardly    5  in the end    
6  specially    7  even    8  still    9  nearly    10  lately    11  Ideally  
 12  at the end    13  ever    14  near    15  hard    16  in fact    
 17  yet    18  actually    19  apparently    20  obviously    
 21  basically    22  eventually    23  gradually    24  certainly
Vocabulary activity instructions
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 215@@
215
•	 Now focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get  
them to discuss each topic, giving as much information  
as possible.
•	 Get some feedback.
4A	Weather
	 	
An information gap activity
Sts define words / phrases to help their partner complete  
a crossword. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
weather
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the crosswords. Make sure that Sts can’t see each 
other’s worksheets. Explain that A and B have the same 
crossword, but with different words missing. They have  
to describe / define words to each other to complete  
their crosswords.
•	 Give Sts a minute to read their instructions. If they don’t 
know what a word means, they can refer to Vocabulary 
Bank Weather p.156.
•	 Sts take turns to ask each other for their missing words 
(e.g. What’s 1 down? What’s 3 across?). Their partner must 
define / describe the word until the other student is able 
to write it in his / her crossword. Sts should help each 
other with other clues if necessary.
•	 Monitor and make sure Sts are pronouncing the words 
and phrases correctly.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare their 
crosswords to make sure they have the same words and 
have spelled them correctly.
5A	Feelings
	 	
A vocabulary discrimination activity
Sts read sentences and guess the correct feeling adjective. 
Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into A and B.
LANGUAGE
adjectives of feeling
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give out 
the worksheets.
•	 Focus on the instructions in a and b, and give Sts time  
to read the sentences to each other and complete  
the words.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
adjectives your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
Student A
1  miserable    2  bewildered    3  stunned    4  devastated    
5  fed up    6  gutted    7  desperate    8  offended    9  thrilled   
 10  homesick
Student B
1  down    2  upset    3  delighted    4  shattered    5  lonely    
6  scared stiff    7  overwhelmed    8  terrified    9  proud    
 10  relieved
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs. Get  
them to test each other by acting out the feelings that 
they completed.
 EXTRA IDEA   If you think your Sts won’t enjoy the miming / 
acting activity, you could tell them to do the activity again, 
but this time Sts A read the sentences in random order, Sts 
B should cover their worksheet and try to complete the 
adjectives from memory. Sts then swap roles.
7A	Verbs often confused
	 	
A vocabulary discrimination activity
Sts circle the correct verb. Copy one worksheet per student 
or one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
verbs which are often confused
•	 Either give each student a worksheet or put Sts in pairs 
and give each pair a worksheet. Give Sts time to circle  
the verbs.
•	 If Sts did the activity individually, get them to compare 
with a partner, and then check answers. Model and drill 
the pronunciation of any verbs your Sts find difficult  
to pronounce.
2  advise    3  refuses    4  discuss    5  warned    6  wait    
7  denied    8  lying    9  reminded    10  preventing    
 11  robbed    12  lent    13  avoid    14  realizes    15  laid    
 16  beat    17  matter    18  notice    19  mind    20  stole    
 21  win    22  rises    23  remember    24  arguing    25  expect    
 26  raising    27  hope    28  borrow
7B	The body
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts race to read a series of clues and write the words. Copy 
one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
the body
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheet pairs. Focus on 
the instructions and tell Sts that they have to complete as 
many answers as they can in five minutes. Highlight that 
each word begins with a different letter of the alphabet. 
You may want to give Sts a bit longer than five minutes, or 
stop the activity when one pair has finished.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. The first pair to 
complete all the answers correctly wins, or the pair with 
the most correct answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  brush your teeth    3  thigh    4  touch your toes    5  lungs    
6  waist    7  heel    8  bite your nails    9  wink    
 10  blow your nose    11  raise your eyebrows    12  yawn    
 13  hug    14  wave    15  shake hands    16  nod your head    
 17  elbow    18  stare    19  stretch    20  frown
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. 
Sts A read clues 1–10 from the worksheet and Sts B (not 
looking at the worksheet) guess the words. Then they 
swap roles and Sts B read clues 11–20 for Sts A to guess.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 216@@
216
8A	Crime and punishment
	 	
An alphabet quiz
Sts read the sentences and complete them with the correct 
word. Copy one worksheet per student or one worksheet 
per pair.
LANGUAGE
crime and punishment
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets to individual 
Sts or pairs. Focus on the instructions and tell Sts that they 
have to complete as many answers as they can in five 
minutes. Highlight that each word begins with a different 
letter of the alphabet. You may want to give Sts a bit 
longer than five minutes, or stop the activity when one 
pair has finished.
•	 If Sts did the activity individually, get them to compare 
with a partner, and then check answers. Model and drill 
the pronunciation of any words your Sts find difficult  
to pronounce.
B  burglar    C  committed    D  dealer    E  evidence    F  fraud   
G  guilty    H  hacker    I  innocent    J  judge    K  kidnapped    
M  mugger    P  proof    Q  question    R  robberies    S  stalker   
T  theft    V  verdict    W  witnesses
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. 
Sts A read clues A–J from the worksheet and Sts B (not 
looking at the worksheet) guess the words. Then they 
swap roles and Sts B read clues K–W for Sts A to guess.
8B	The media
	 	
A pairwork vocabulary race
Sts race to read definitions and write the answers into the 
spaces. Copy one worksheet per pair.
LANGUAGE
the media
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give out the worksheets.
•	 Focus on the instructions and point out that the missing 
letters are all consonants. Set a time limit for Sts to 
complete as many words as they can in the time limit.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce. The first pair to 
complete all the answers correctly wins, or the pair with 
the most correct answers at the end of the time limit wins.
2  headline    3  objective    4  journalist    5  paparazzi    
6  sensational    7  freelance    8  censored    9  agony aunt    
 10  accurate    11  row    12  clash    13  critic    14  commentator  
 15  presenter    16  editor
•	 Now focus on Activation and put Sts in pairs, A and B. 
Sts A read clues 1–8 from the worksheet and Sts B (not 
looking at the worksheet) guess the words. Then they 
swap roles and Sts B read clues 9–16 for Sts A to guess.
9A	Business
	 	
An information gap activity
Sts define words / phrases to help their partner complete  
a crossword. Copy one worksheet per pair and cut into  
A and B.
LANGUAGE
business
•	 Put Sts in pairs, A and B, ideally face to face, and give 
out the crosswords. Make sure that Sts can’t see each 
other’s worksheets. Explain that A and B have the same 
crossword, but with different words missing. They have  
to describe / define words to each other to complete  
their crosswords.
•	 Give Sts a minute to read their instructions. If they 
don’t know what a word means, they can look it up in 
Vocabulary Bank Business p.162.
•	 Sts take turns to ask each other for their missing words 
(e.g. What’s 1 down? What’s 3 across?). Their partner must 
define / describe the word until the other student is able 
to write it in his / her crossword. Sts should help each 
other with other clues if necessary.
•	 Monitor and make sure Sts are pronouncing the words 
and phrases correctly.
•	 When Sts have finished, get them to compare their 
crosswords to make sure they have the same words and 
have spelled them correctly.
9B	Word-building
	 	
A gap-fill activity
Sts complete sentences by adding suffixes / prefixes to a 
given word or writing new nouns. Copy one worksheet  
per student.
LANGUAGE
prefixes, suffixes, irregular nouns
•	 Give out the worksheets. Focus on the instructions and on 
the three sections. Set a time limit. Tell Sts that they have 
to complete the sentences with the correct form of the 
words in brackets. They must write as many words as they 
can in the column on the right in the time limit.
•	 Check answers. Model and drill the pronunciation of any 
words your Sts find difficult to pronounce.
Prefix:
2  underpaid    3  multimillionaire    4  subtitled    
5  monolingual    6  autobiographies    7  antivirus    
8  misread    9  post-war    10  megabyte
Suffix:
1  comfortable    2  sleepless    3  cheerful    4  recognizable    
5  terrorism    6  improvement    7  inflation    8  weakness    
9  elegance    10  childproof
Irregular:
1  heat    2  loss    3  height    4  death    5  Hunger    6  success  
7  strength    8  width    9  thought    10  belief
•	 Now focus on Activation. Put Sts in pairs and get them to 
cover the column on the right. Sts test themselves or each 
other by trying to complete the sentences.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 217@@
217
Revision
	 	
A pairwork card game
Sts define words / phrases for their partner to guess. Copy 
and cut up one set of cards per pair.
LANGUAGE
revision from Files 1–10
•	 Put Sts in pairs and give them a set of cards face down,  
or in an envelope. 
•	 Demonstrate the activity. Take a card, tell Sts what the 
word group is, and define the first word for the class  
to guess.
•	 Sts continue in pairs, picking a card, saying the topic, 
and describing the words and expressions on it for their 
partner to guess. Remind Sts that they mustn’t use the 
word itself in the definition. They should try to take no 
longer than two minutes per card.
 EXTRA IDEA   Put Sts in pairs. Copy one worksheet per pair 
and cut it down the middle. Give each student half the 
worksheet, and continue as above.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 218@@
218
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
 	
Work with a partner. Complete the words as quickly as you can.
1	 Three parts of the body that we use with ‘ache’. 
earache, stomach ache, toothache
2	 Something that can be high, often because of stress or bad diet. 
bl
 pr
3	 Something you could get on the beach if you’re not careful. 
s
4	 What you should take if you have a headache, e.g. aspirin or paracetamol. 
p
s
5	 A phrasal verb that means to recover from an illness. 
g
 o
 an illness
6	 When you have a cold you 
sn
 and c
 .
7	 A condition when something you eat can make you feel ill. You should  
take antihistamine tablets. an a
 r
8	 You should do this when you feel unwell or tired. 
l
 d
 (on a sofa)
9	 A verb and a phrasal verb that mean to become unconscious, and  
a phrasal verb that means to become conscious again. 
f
 , p
 o
 , c
 r
 
10	 An infectious illness like a very bad cold that causes fever, pain, and 
weakness. fl
 
11	 If you cut your finger with a sharp object, 
it will bl
 .
 
12	 An injury to your leg which means you can’t walk. 
a spr
 ankle
 
13	 This can happen if you drop very hot liquid on yourself. 
b
 yourself
 
14	 Something you should put on a small cut. 
a pl
 
15	 You might get this if you eat food which is past its sell-by date. 
f
 p
 
16	 This can happen to you if a piece of food gets stuck in your throat. 
You might ch
 
17	 Adjective to describe a part of your body that has got bigger  
because of an injury. (a) sw
 (finger)
 
18	 Two verbs that mean to be sick. 
v
 , thr
 u
 
2A  VOCABULARY  Illnesses and injuries
ACTIVATION
Work with a partner. Have you had any of the following illnesses or injuries recently? How long were you 
unwell for? Did you have any treatment?
•	 a temperature
•	 a rash
•	 sunburn
•	 a sore throat
•	 a blister on your foot
•	 an allergic reaction
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 219@@
219
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
W
O
O
L
2B  VOCABULARY  Clothes and fashion
Across 
4	 the material that comes from a sheep or goat
8	 a word to describe a person whose hair / clothes / appearance is untidy or dirty
9	 an adjective which describes a top without arms
 
10	 an adjective which is the opposite of tight
 
13	 simple and traditional in style or design
 
15	 a phrasal verb which means to combine well with something
 
16	 a type of material that is usually blue and often used for making jeans
 
17	 a verb which means to take off one set of clothes and put on another
 
18	 a verb which means to be the right shape and size for somebody
Down 
1	 an adjective which means not modern
2	 a pattern of squares, usually in two colours
3	 an adjective that describes a regular pattern of round dots
5	 an adjective describing e.g. a jacket or sweatshirt which has a part which covers the head
6	 a phrasal verb that means to put on clothes which are more formal and elegant than those you  
usually wear
7	 an adjective which means not formal
 
11	 a type of soft leather with a surface like velvet on one side
 
12	 no pattern, simple
 
14	 an adjective which means well dressed in fashionable and/or formal clothes
ACTIVATION
Cover the crossword. In pairs, take turns reading out a clue. Try to remember the answers.
 	
Look at the clues and fill in the crossword.
 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 220@@
220
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
3A  VOCABULARY  Air travel
D
You take a 
 
flight if you’re flying  
in your country.
H
You can usually only take 
one item of 
-luggage with you onto 
the plane.
M
You have to go through 
a 
  
detector to check  
that you aren’t carrying 
a weapon.
Q
You often have  
to 
 to  
get through  
passport control.
A
The aisle is the 
‘passage’ in the  
middle of a plane.
U
When you get back 
home, you have to 
 your 
suitcase and put your 
clothes away.
E
If you have 
 
baggage, it means that it 
weighs more than what 
the airline permits.
I
It’s 
 to  
bring plants or fresh 
fruit and vegetables 
into some countries.
N
Sitting next to 
 children  
on a long flight can  
be very annoying.
R
The 
 is 
where the planes  
take off and land.
B
You need to show your 
 
 
before you can get  
on the plane.
V
You need a 
 
to get into some 
countries if you’re not 
from there, e.g.  
Russia and the USA.
F
You sometimes have to 
 
 
a landing card before 
you go through 
passport control.
J
You can get 
 
 when  
you travel between 
several time zones and 
feel very tired.
O
Most people book 
their flights and hotels 
 nowadays, 
although some still go  
to a travel agent’s.
S
Everybody has to go 
through 
 
before getting into the 
departure lounge to make 
sure they’re not carrying 
prohibited items.
C
The 
 -
 
 
is where your bags  
are weighed and your  
ID is checked.
W
You sometimes have  
to 
 for  
a long time if your  
flight’s delayed.
G
The departures board 
will tell you which 
 your flight 
is leaving from.
L
A flight which goes 
across continents 
is usually called a 
-
 
flight.
P
When you arrive at your 
destination, you need to 
 
 
your bags at  
Baggage reclaim.
T
During a flight, there 
might be some 
 , when the 
plane can move up and 
down quite violently.
ACTIVATION
In pairs, go through the alphabet and remember the words about air travel.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 221@@
221
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
 	
Circle  the correct adverb or adverbial phrase.
1	 I love chocolate, especially / specially dark 
chocolate.
2	 I’m working part-time at the moment / actually, 
but I think they’ll offer me a full-time job soon.
3	 I stayed up late / lately last night, so I’m really tired 
today.
4	 Ben is really busy, so we hard / hardly see him now.
5	 It was raining on the day of the picnic, so we didn’t 
go in the end / at the end.
6	 This dress has been especially / specially designed 
for her, so no one else will have one like it.
7	 I love unusual foods. I’ve even / ever tried fried 
insects!
8	 We yet / still haven’t decided where to go on 
holiday this summer. We’ve been talking about it 
for weeks!
9	 I can’t believe that I’ve been a teacher for  
nearly / near 25 years now!
 
10	 Sally hasn’t been feeling very well lately / late, so 
she’s going to make an appointment to see her doctor.
 
11	 Ideally / Gradually, you should wash wool by hand, as that way there’s less chance it will shrink.
 
12	 I’ll pay you back in the end / at the end of the month.
 
13	 Have you even / ever been camping in the mountains?
 
14	 They’re building a motorway nearly / near my house. The noise is terrible.
 
15	 Sara works really hard / hardly, but her boss won’t give her a promotion.
 
16	 Rosie’s looking absolutely fantastic, but ideally / in fact, she’s been ill for the last three months.
 
17	 Oh, don’t go yet / still! Stay for a bit longer.
 
18	 Her dress looks really expensive, but at the moment / actually, it was quite cheap.
 
19	 I thought my boss was retiring next year, but apparently / eventually, she wants to carry on working 
until she’s 70!
 
20	 Mark’s unemployed, so gradually / obviously, he doesn’t have much money to spend on going out.
 
21	 I won’t give you the details now, but ideally / basically, the plan’s very simple.
 
22	 After looking for his mobile all morning, my son eventually / obviously found it under the sofa!
 
23	 I’ve been learning French for ages, and ideally / gradually, I’m starting to feel more confident.
 
24	 It’s a pity you couldn’t come to the concert with us. You would have certainly / eventually enjoyed it.
 
3B  VOCABULARY  Adverbs and adverbial phrases
ACTIVATION
In pairs, say something you…
•	 find really hard to do.
•	 you’ll probably do tonight.
•	 would ideally never do again.
•	 you’ve started doing lately.
•	 you nearly bought (but didn’t).
•	 you’re excited about at the moment.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 222@@
222
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
4A  VOCABULARY  Weather
Student A
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the meaning of all the words you have.
 	
Ask B to define a word for you. Ask, for example, What’s 3 down? What’s 5 across?  
Write the word in.
 	
Now B will ask you to define a word.
 a
 b
 c
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the meaning of all the words you have.
 	
A will ask you to define a word.
 	
Now ask A to define a word for you. Ask, for example, What’s 1 down? What’s 8 across?  
Write the word in.
 a
 b
 c
Student B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
D
S
A
C
B
M
O
B
E
P
R
L
L
C
I
O
B
R
I
G
H
T
Z
W
I
C
Y
I
Z
Z
N
A
E
T
H
I
C
K
G
R
R
F
L
O
O
D
D
O
D
R
I
Z
Z
L
I
N
G
H
E
A
T
W A
V
E
C
H
M
O
N
S
O
O
N
B
R
E
E
Z
E
I
L
L
L
I
C
Y
G
O
C
H
A
N
G
E
A
B
L
E
O
H
T
L
D
B
U
N
R
L
R
I
O
I
R
N
U
Z
I
C
G
G
Z
C
L
H
A
A
E
T
R
N
A
D
E
R
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 223@@
223
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
5A  VOCABULARY  Feelings
Student A
 	
Read the sentences to your partner. Do not say the words in brackets.
1	 Is everything OK? You look a bit 
 . (down)
2	 Marta’s lied to me, several times. I just found out. I’m really 
 . (upset)
3	 This is such good news! I can’t stop smiling. I’m 
 . (delighted)
4	 It’s been a really long day and I haven’t had any time to sit down. I’m absolutely 
 ! (shattered)
5	 I haven’t seen anyone all week. I’m feeling quite 
 ! (lonely)
6	 Oh, I think can hear something downstairs! No, don’t leave me, I’m 
 
 ! (scared stiff)
7	 Thanks so much for coming, everyone. It means such a lot to me, I’m a bit 
 . (overwhelmed)
8	 There’s a s-s-spider? I can’t go in. They scare me! I’m 
 ! (terrified)
9	 My wife just got a promotion! She’s brilliant and I’m really 
 ! (proud)
 
10	 We thought we would never see our cat again, but we found him! We’re so 
 . (relieved)
 	
Now listen to your partner. Complete the words.
1	 m 
	 2  b 
	 3  st 
	 4  d 
	 5  f 
 u 
 
6	 g 
	
7  d 
	 8  o 
	
9  th 
	 10  h 
 
 a
 b
 	
Listen to your partner and complete the words.
1	 d 
	
2  u 
	
3  d 
	
4  sh 
	 5  l 
 
6	 sc 
 st 
	
7  o
	
8  t 
	
9  pr
	 10  r
 
 	
Now read your sentences to your partner. Do not say the words in brackets.
1	 The holiday was awful. It rained every day. I was so 
 ! (miserable)
2	 I just…I can’t understand this! What does it mean? I’m 
 . (bewildered)
3	 It’s such a surprise. I don’t know what to say! I’m 
 . (stunned)
4	 She’s the love of my life and now she’s gone. I’m just 
 . (devastated)
5	 Matt has been complaining for hours! I can’t listen to it anymore, I’m 
 
 . (fed up)
6	 It’s a shame I couldn’t go to Helen’s party. I heard it was amazing. I’m 
 . (gutted)
7	 I’ve been trying to find a job for months. I need the money for rent. I’m getting 
 . (desperate)
8	 Well! It’s really late. He accepted the invitation and he clearly isn’t coming. I’m quite 
 ! (offended)
9	 We won the cup! We won! Yes! We need to celebrate! I’m so happy. I’m really 
 ! (thrilled)
 
10	 I’ve been living in India for six months now. I really miss my country; I feel 
 (homesick)
 a
 b
Student B
ACTIVATION
Test your partner. Choose one of the adjectives or expressions that you completed in b. Act it out for 
your partner to guess.
ACTIVATION
Test your partner. Choose one of the adjectives or expressions that you completed in a. Act it out for 
your partner to guess.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 224@@
224
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7A  VOCABULARY  Verbs often confused
 	
Circle  the correct word.
 
1	 I hope / wish I knew the answer to this question.
2	 The chemist can warn / advise you which is the best medicine to take.
3	 When I ask my son what the problem is, he just denies / refuses to talk about it.
4	 Don’t you think we need to argue / discuss this before we make a decision?
5	 Emily’s boss warned / advised her that if she was late for work again, she’d lose her job.
6	 Hurry up! I can’t expect / wait forever.
7	 When the police accused Jim of the crime, he denied / refused being there that night.
8	 I love laying / lying on the beach with a good book in summer.
9	 I remembered / reminded him that the meeting was at 2 p.m.
 
10	 What’s preventing / avoiding you from applying for the job? You’ve got all the right qualifications.
 
11	 I was robbed / stolen when I took the train home last night.
 
12	 Has she returned the jacket you borrowed / lent her?
 
13	 If we leave at about 6.30 p.m., we’ll be able to prevent / avoid the rush hour.
 
14	 I don’t think Marcus notices / realizes how important it is for me to have my own income.
 
15	 The vet picked up the dog carefully and lay / laid it on the bed.
 
15	 Miriam is really good at table tennis. I don’t think you will be able to win / beat her.
 
17	 It doesn’t mind / matter if you can’t pay me back until next week. I don’t need the money right now.
 
18	 Did you notice / realize how many times Ella checked her phone over dinner?
 
19	 Does Catherine mind / matter that you can’t go to her wedding?
 
20	 Somebody robbed / stole my wallet when I was taking a photo of Big Ben in London.
 
21	 Who do you think is going to win / beat the Champion’s League this year?
 
22	 When it rains heavily, the river level rises / raises by several centimetres.
 
23	 Did you remember / remind to set the alarm?
 
24	 My two sisters don’t get on. They’re always arguing / discussing.
 
25	 You can’t expect / wait me to believe you.
 
26	 Have you heard? The government is rising / raising taxes by 2% next month.
 
27	 Do you think it will snow tonight? I hope / wish not.
 
28	 I had to borrow / lend some money from my parents to pay the bills.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 225@@
225
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
7B  VOCABULARY  The body
ACTIVATION
Test your partner. Student A read clues 1–10 and Student B (page face down) try to remember the words. 
Then change roles for 11–20.
1	 When you do a lot of exercise, you can feel this 
organ beating very fast.
2	 If you don’t do this, you might have to go to the 
dentist’s.
3	 The top part of your leg.
4	 If you do yoga or you’re very flexible, you can 
probably do this easily.
5	 Without them, you can’t breathe.
6	 A belt usually goes around this.
7	 It’s the back part of your foot, below the ankle.
8	 If someone looks at your fingers, they can tell if you 
have this nervous habit.
9	 You can do this with one eye to show you’re not 
being serious.
 
10	 You do this with a tissue when you have a cold.
 
11	 A way of showing surprise using the top part of  
your face.
 
12	 When you’re bored or tired, you open your mouth  
and do this.
 
13	 Put your arms around someone to show that you  
like them.
 
14	 Say goodbye using your hand.
 
15	 What two people often do when they meet for the  
first time.
 
16	 You can do this instead of saying yes.
 
17	 The part of your body between your upper and  
lower arm.
 
18	 When you look at something for a long time.
 
19	 You should do this after doing exercise.
 
20	 Move your forehead and eyebrows to show you  
aren’t pleased.
  h
e
a
r
t
br
 y
 t
th
  t
 y
 t
    l
 w
  h
  b
 y
 n
 w
bl
 y
 n
  r
 y
 e
  y
  h
 w
sh
  h
  n
 y
 h
  e
st
str
fr
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 226@@
226
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8A  VOCABULARY  Crime and punishment
ACTIVATION
Test your partner. Student A read clues A–J and Student B (page face down) guess the words.  
Then change roles for K–W.
A	 The police stopped me and a   c   c   u   s   e   d me of dangerous driving.
B	 When we got home last night, we discovered that a b  
 
 
 
 
 
 had broken 
into our house and stolen our laptops.
C	 The police still don’t know who c  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the crime.
D	 The name for a person who sells illegal drugs is a drug d  
 
 
 
 
 .
E	 There wasn’t enough e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 to prove that he was guilty.
F	 The banker tried to commit f  
 
 
 
 by changing real notes for fake ones.
G	 The jury found the accused not g  
 
 
 
 
 of the crime.
H	 I was furious when a h  
 
 
 
 
 used my identity on Twitter.
I	
He’s i  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ! On the day of the crime, he was with me all day!
J	
The j  
 
 
 
 sentenced him to 12 years in prison.
K	 The gang k  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the businessman and then demanded money  
for his return.
M	 A m  
 
 
 
 
 is somebody who attacks or threatens you in the street and tries  
to steal something from you.
P	 There wasn’t any p  
 
 
 
 that the gun belonged to him.
Q	 The police wanted to q  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the suspect about his alibi.
R	 There have been several r  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 at this bank. They’ve taken 
thousands of pounds and the police haven’t caught them yet!
S	 A s  
 
 
 
 
 
 is somebody who watches and follows another person in a 
frightening way.
T	 A common crime on the internet is identity t  
 
 
 
 .
V	 Depending on the v  
 
 
 
 
 
 , the accused will either be sentenced or  
be released.
W	 Neither of the two w  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 were particularly reliable. They both 
told completely different stories!
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 227@@
227
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
8B  VOCABULARY  The media
ACTIVATION
Test your partner. Student A read clues 1–8 and Student B (page face down) guess the words.  
Then change roles for 9–16.
 	
Read the definitions. Complete the column on the right.
1	 A word which means when, e.g. a newspaper shows favour  
towards a certain group or opinion.	
B I A S E D
2	 The title of a newspaper article, usually printed in big letters.	
 E A 
 
 I 
 E
3	 Not influenced by personal opinions or feeling.	
O 
 
 E 
 
 I 
 E
4	 Somebody who writes for a newspaper or magazine.	
 O U 
 
 A 
 I 
 
5	 Photographers who follow celebrities and sell the photos  
they’ve taken of them.	
 A 
 A 
 A 
 
 I
6	 An adjective used to describe an article that tries to get your  
interest by presenting facts or events as worse or more  
shocking than they really are.	
S 
 
 S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7	 A type of journalist who sells work to different newspapers,  
but doesn’t work for any particular one.	
 
 E E 
 A 
 
 E
8	 If a newspaper article is considered offensive or immoral it  
might get 
 .	
 E 
 
 O 
 E 
9	 This kind of journalist can help you with your problems if you  
write to her.	
A 
  O 
 
  A U 
 
 
10	 An adjective used to describe a story which has the facts right.	
A 
 
 U 
  A 
 E
 
11	 A word used in headlines which means the same as an  
argument.	
 O 
 
12	 A word used in headlines which means the same as disagree.	
c 
 
 
 
 
13	 A journalist who expresses opinions about music, books,  
films, etc.	
 
 I 
 I 
 
14	 A person who works on the radio and describes, e.g. a sporting  
event while it’s happening.	
 O 
 
 E 
 
 A 
 O 
 
15	 A person who works on TV and introduces a programme.	
 
 E 
 E 
 
 E 
 
16	 This person decides what goes into a newspaper and  
what shouldn’t.	
E 
 I 
 O 
 
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 228@@
228
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
9A  VOCABULARY  Business
Student A
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the meaning of all the words you have.
 	
Ask B to define a word for you. Ask for example, What’s 3 across?  
Write the word in.
 	
Now B will ask you to define a word.
 a
 b
 c
 	
Look at your crossword and make sure you know the meaning of all the words you have.
 	
A will ask you to define a word.
 	
Now ask A to define a word for you. Ask for example, What’s 1 down?  
Write the word in.
 a
 b
 c
Student B
I
H
M
E
P
D
A
O
L
E
R
R
D
R
A
A
E
E
O
T
U
L
D
M
C
F
N
M
U
A
E
F
C
E
N
R
S
I
B
H
R
D
K
S
C
O
G
A
E
I
E
O
E
N
T
O
M
T
L
N
E
A
E
D
X
E
P
R
A
N
D
S
E
T
U
P
T
A
K
E
O
V
E
R
P
R
O
F
I
T
F
L
C
L
O
S
E
D
O W N
B
R
A
N
C
H
P
M
A
R
K
E
T
R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H
H
A
M
A
N
U
F
A
C
T
U
R
E
I
N
E
X
P
O
R
T
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 229@@
229
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
9B  VOCABULARY  Word-building
 	
Complete the column on the right with the correct form of the word in brackets.
Add a prefix
1	 The bill should have been less than this. I think the waiter has 
 us. (charged)	
overcharged
2	 Teachers don’t earn enough. They’re definitely 
 . (paid)	
3	 My cousin won a fortune on the lottery. She’s a 
 now! (millionaire)	
4	 Do you prefer watching a dubbed film or one which is 
 ? (titled)	
5	 Is that dictionary 
 or is it French–English? (lingual)	
6	 Famous people often write their 
 when they are still quite young. (biographies)	
7	 You should always install good 
 software to protect your computer. (virus)	
8	 Sorry, I must have 
 the number. I thought it was a ‘3’ and not an ‘8’. (read)	
9	 Much of London was rebuilt in the 
 era. (war)	
 
10	 My first computer only had half a 
 of memory. (byte)	
Add a suffix
1	 I like to wear 
 clothes when I’m at home. (comfort)	
2	 We had a 
 night last night. The baby just wouldn’t stop crying! (sleep)	
3	 My mum’s one of the most 
 people I know. She’s always happy! (cheer)	
4	 One of the most easily 
 symptoms of an allergic reaction is a rash. (recognize)	
5	 One of the main problems facing governments today is 
 . (terror)	
6	 Since Jane’s been going to the gym, she’s noticed a definite 
 in the way she  
looks and feels. (improve)	
7	 The rate of 
 has been very low in my country this year. (inflate)	
8	 Martin’s biggest 
 is that he can’t concentrate for very long. (weak)	
9	 Kathy always dresses with such 
 . (elegant)	
 
10	 Medicine bottles have to be 
 so that young children can’t open them. (child)	
	
Irregular nouns
1	 Although there’s a sauna at my gym, I never use it because I can’t stand extreme 
 . (hot)	
2	 There are hundreds of weight 
 books on the market at the moment.   
Do you think any of them actually work? (lose)	
3	 Did you know that the average 
 of a European male is 1.77 metres? (high)	
4	 My mother inherited a lot of money after my grandmother’s 
 . (die)	
5	
 is still a big problem in several African countries. (hungry)	
6	 The band’s recent tour was a great 
 . (succeed)	
7	 Could you tell me what your greatest 
 is? (strong)	
8	 It’s about 5 metres in 
 . (wide)	
9	 The 
 of going to the dentist makes me feel ill. (think)	
 
10	 Contrary to popular 
 , drinking coffee can be good for your health. (believe)	
	
 
ACTIVATION
Cover the column on the right. In pairs, read the sentences and try to remember the words.
© Copyright Oxford University Press
@@PAGE 230@@
230
English File fourth edition Teacher’s Guide Upper-intermediate  Photocopiable © Oxford University Press 2020
VOCABULARY  Revision
Illness and injuries
Clothes and fashion
swollen
food poisoning
to bleed
a blister
flu
an allergic reaction
scruffy
silk
loose
patterned
go with
to dress up
Air travel
Weather
customs
to take off
long-haul flight
jet lag
runway
gate
a drought
changeable
a heatwave
smog
damp
to pour
Feelings
Verbs often confused
devastated
relieved
thrilled
shocked
shattered
scared stiff
to expect
to discuss
to deny
to warn
to beat
to remind
The body
Crime and punishment
an ankle
hips
to wave
to shake hands
to stare
to scratch
to burgle
a witness
to bribe
jury
blackmail
hacking
The media
Word-building
a newsreader
biased
censored
a presenter
paparazzi
a critic
overcrowded
homeless
multicultural
bulletproof
neighbourhood
bilingual
Business
Sleep
a recession
a profit
a branch
to do market research
to set up a company
to go out of business
to yawn
to snore
to oversleep
insomnia
pillow
blanket
© Copyright Oxford University Press
